STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS STATE OF CALIFORNIA CALIFORNIA STATE TRANSPORTATION AGENCY DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION PUBLISHED BY DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION Copies of this book may be obtained from STATE OF CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION PUBLICATION DISTRIBUTION UNIT ROYAL OAKS DRIVE SACRAMENTO CALIFORNIA Telephone Fax Publication Unit Web site httpcaltransopac.ca.govpublicat.htm Copyright California Department of Transportation .
All rights reserved .
TABLE OF CONTENTS i DIVISION I GENERAL PROVISIONS GENERAL BIDDING CONTRACT AWARD AND EXECUTION SCOPE OF WORK CONTROL OF WORK CONTROL OF MATERIALS LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS PAYMENT DIVISION II GENERAL CONSTRUCTION GENERAL WELDING TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP EXISTING FACILITIES TEMPORARY FACILITIES DIVISION III EARTHWORK AND LANDSCAPE GENERAL DUST PALLIATIVES EARTHWORK LANDSCAPE EROSION CONTROL FINISHING ROADWAY DIVISION IV SUBBASES AND BASES GENERAL STABILIZED SOILS AGGREGATE SUBBASES AGGREGATE BASES CEMENT TREATED BASES CONCRETE BASES TREATED PERMEABLE BASES RECLAIMED PAVEMENT RESERVED TABLE OF CONTENTS ii DIVISION V SURFACINGS AND PAVEMENTS GENERAL BITUMINOUS SEALS RESERVED ASPHALT CONCRETE CONCRETE PAVEMENT EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT GROOVE AND GRIND CONCRETE RESERVED DIVISION VI STRUCTURES GENERAL GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS TEMPORARY STRUCTURES PILING PRESTRESSING CONCRETE CONCRETE STRUCTURES REINFORCEMENT SHOTCRETE WATERPROOFING STEEL STRUCTURES OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES SOUND WALLS STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS EXISTING STRUCTURES DIVISION VII DRAINAGE FACILITIES GENERAL RESERVED PLASTIC PIPE CONCRETE PIPE CORRUGATED METAL PIPE STRUCTURAL PLATE CULVERTS SUBSURFACE DRAINS OVERSIDE DRAINS TABLE OF CONTENTS iii MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES DIVISION VIII MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION SLOPE PROTECTION CONCRETE CURBS AND SIDEWALKS PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS MISCELLANEOUS METAL WELLS LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION RESERVED FENCES DIVISION IX TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES SIGNS AND MARKERS RAILINGS AND BARRIERS MARKINGS RESERVED DIVISION X ELECTRICAL WORK RESERVED DIVISION XI MATERIALS AGGREGATE CONCRETE PAINT ASPHALT BINDERS RESERVED ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS EPOXY GEOSYNTHETICS RESERVED DIVISION XII BUILDING CONSTRUCTION BUILDING CONSTRUCTION DIVISION I GENERAL PROVISIONS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to the interpretation of the contract .
The specifications are divided into divisions .
Division I includes general specifications applicable to every contract unless specified as applicable only under certain conditions .
Division II includes specifications for general construction applicable to every contract unless specified as applicable only under certain conditions .
Divisions III through X include construction specifications for specific bid items .
Division XI includes specifications for common materials .
For a material specified in this division that material specified in any section must comply with the specifications in division XI .
Division XII includes construction specifications for buildings .
The bid items set forth the construction specifications that apply .
The first digits of a bid item code correspond to the specification section number with the same first digits except for bid item code that corresponds to section and unless shown otherwise in the table titled Bid Items and Applicable Sections in the special provisions .
The specifications are written to the Bidder before award and the Contractor after .
Before award interpret sentences written in the imperative mood as starting with The Bidder must and interpret you as the Bidder and your as the Bidders .
After award interpret sentences written in the imperative mood as starting with The Contractor must and interpret you as the Contractor and your as the Contractors .
After Contract approval submit documents and direct questions to the Engineer .
Orders authorizations and requests to the Contractor are by the Engineer .
The following items from the Department are in writing .
Approvals .
Authorizations .
Decisions .
Notifications .
Orders .
Responses The following items from the Contractor must be in writing .
Assignments .
Notifications .
Proposals .
Reports .
Requests including RFIs sequentially numbered .
Subcontracts .
Test results Where a location is not specified with the words shown specified or described interpret .
Shown as shown on the plans . .
Specified as specified in the specifications . .
Described as described in the Contract .
Described means shown specified or both .
Headings are included for the purposes of organization and referencing .
Inclusion of a heading with no related content Not Used or Reserved does not indicate that no specification exists for that subject applicable specifications may be covered in a general or referenced specification .
SECTION GENERAL Specifications in a section titled General apply to all subordinate sections within the section .
Specifications in the general section of a division apply to all sections within the division .
Sections are reserved in the Standard Specifications for correlation of special provisions and revised standard specifications with the Standard Specifications and for future expansion of the Standard Specifications .
The specifications are expressed in US customary units except where a referenced document uses the International System of Units as the standard .
Unless an object or activity is specified to be less than the total the quantity or amount is all of the object or activity .
All items in a list apply unless the items are specified as choices . .
STYLE VARIATIONS The Department is gradually standardizing the style of the specifications .
The use of the new style does not change the meaning of a Contract part not using this style .
The new style includes .
Use of ..
Imperative mood ..
Introductory modifiers ..
Conditional clauses .. Industrystandard terms .
Elimination of ..
Language variations .. Definitions for industrystandard terms .. Redundant specifications .. Needless crossreferences Because of the transition some terms or clauses used in Division I are different from those used in other divisions and in other Contract parts .
Interpret the equivalent term or clause shown in the following table as having the same meaning as the corresponding term or clause in Division I Terms Equivalencies Term or clause in Division I Equivalent term or phrase that may be in other divisions and in other Contract parts Conditions Authorize Approve Except in a Change Order Authorized Material List PreQualified Products List Department Engineer Where referring to anyone other than the Resident Engineer or the Resident Engineers authorized representatives Department furnished material Statefurnished material work description is change order work work description will be paid for as extra work with or without a reference to a section ..
RESERVED .
REFERENCES A reference within parentheses to a law or regulation is included in the Contract for convenience only and is not a comprehensive listing of related laws and regulations .
Lack of a reference does not indicate no related laws or regulations exist .
SECTION GENERAL Where the version of a referenced document is not specified use the most recent version in effect on the date of the Notice to Bidders .
A reference to a section includes specifications in sections titled General that apply to the section .
Where a section number is referenced without a reference to a document the reference is to a section of the Standard Specifications as revised by any revised standard specification special provision or both .
Any reference directly to a revised standard specification section is for convenience only .
Lack of a direct reference to a revised standard specification section does not indicate a revised standard specification for the section does not exist .
A code not specified as a federal code is a California code .
An agency or a department not specified as a federal or local agency or department is a California agency or department. . ABBREVIATIONS Unless context indicates otherwise interpret the meaning of an abbreviation used in the specifications and the Bid Item List as shown in the following tables SECTION GENERAL Abbreviations Abbreviation Meaning AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AB aggregate base ACI American Concrete Institute ADL aerially deposited lead AISC American Institute of Steel Construction AISI American Iron and Steel Institute AMA archaeological monitoring area ANSI American National Standards Institute API American Petroleum Institute AREMA American Railway Engineering and MaintenanceofWay Association AS aggregate subbase ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASQ American Society for Quality ATPB asphalt treated permeable base ATS active treatment system AWG American Wire Gauge AWPA American Wood Protection Association AWSa American Welding Society AWWA American Water Works Association AWIS automated work zone information system BBS battery backup system BNSF Burlington Northern Santa Fe CalOSHA California Division of Occupational Safety and Health Administration CBC California Building Code CDPH California Department of Public Health CIDH castindrilledhole CIH Certified Industrial Hygienist CIP cast in place CJP complete joint penetration CMU concrete masonry unit CPM critical path method CPL composite plastic lumber CRCP continuously reinforced concrete pavement CRM crumb rubber modifier CTB cement treated base CTPB cement treated permeable base CVN Charpy Vnotch CWI AWS Certified Welding Inspector DBE disadvantaged business enterprise DRA Dispute Resolution Advisor DRB Dispute Resolution Board DTSC Department of Toxic Substances Control DVBE disabled veteran business enterprise ECTC Erosion Control Technology Council EIAECIA Electronic Industries AllianceElectronic Components Industry Association ELAP Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program ESA environmentally sensitive area ETL Electrical Testing Laboratories fc extreme fiber compressive stress in concrete at service loads fc compressive strength of concrete FHWA Federal Highway Administration FDR full depth reclamation GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GGBFS ground granulated blast furnace slag slag cement SECTION GENERAL GSP galvanized steel pipe HMA hot mix asphalt HMAO hot mix asphalt open graded HS high strength ICC International Code Council ICEA Insulated Cable Engineers Association ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers JMF job mix formula JPCP jointed plain concrete pavement ksf kips per square foot ksi kips per square inch LCB lean concrete base LCS Departments lane closure system LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design LTDS long term design strength MC medium curing METS Departments Materials Engineering and Testing Services MPI Master Painters Institute MPQP Material Plant Quality Program published by the Department MR movement rating MSDSb material safety data sheet MT magnetic particle testing MUTCD Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices NAL numeric action level NDT nondestructive testing NEL numeric effluent limitation NETA International Electrical Testing Association NEC National Electrical Code NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association NFPA National Fire Protection Association NMAS nominal maximum aggregate size NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NPT National Pipe Thread Taper NRTL Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory NTU nephelometric turbidity unit OBC optimum binder content OGFC open graded friction course OSD Offices of Structure Design PLAC permit license agreement certification or any combination of these PC precast PCC portland cement concrete pcf pounds per cubic foot PCMS portable changeable message sign PG performance grade PJP partial joint penetration POC pedestrian overcrossing PQR procedure qualification record PS prestressed PSF pedestrian signal face PV programmed visibility QSD qualified SWPPP developer QSP qualified SWPPP practitioner RAP reclaimed asphalt pavement RCSC Research Council on Structural Connections RECP rolled erosion control product SECTION GENERAL RFI request for information RHMA rubberized hot mix asphalt RHMAG rubberized hot mix asphalt gap graded RHMAO rubberized hot mix asphalt open graded RHMAOHB rubberized hot mix asphalt open graded high binder RPL recycled plastic lumber RSC rapid strength concrete RSP rock slope protection RSS revised standard specifications RT radiographic testing RWQCB regional water quality control board SMSA Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area SC slow curing SCC selfconsolidating concrete SCM supplementary cementitious material SDS safety data sheet SSPC The Society for Protective Coatings SWPPP stormwater pollution prevention plan SWRCB State Water Resources Control Board TEES Transportation Electrical Equipment Specifications TIA Telecommunications Industry Association time impact analysis TRO timerelated overhead TV target value UFFA ultra fine fly ash UL Underwriters Laboratories Inc USC United States Code USLE Universal Soil Loss Equation USM unidentified stock material UT ultrasonic testing VECP value engineering change proposal VFD variablefrequency drive VPM volts per mil WMA warm mix asphalt WPC water pollution control WPCP water pollution control program WPS welding procedure specification WQO water quality objective aInterpret a reference to AWS as a reference to AWS ANSIAWS or AASHTOAWS bInterpret a reference to MSDS as a reference to SDS under CFR .
SECTION GENERAL Bid Item List Abbreviations Abbreviation Meaning ACRE acre CF cubic foot CY cubic yard EA each F final pay item GAL gallon HR hour LB pound LF linear foot LS lump sum LNMI lane mile MFBM thousand foot board measure STA station feet SQFT square foot SQYD square yard TON pounds WDAY working day .
DEFINITIONS .A General Interpret terms as defined in the Contract documents .
.B Glossary abandon Render unserviceable in place .
acts of God Acts of God as defined in Pub Cont Code .
activity Task event or other project element on a schedule that contributes to completing the project .
An activity has a description start date finish date duration and one or more logic ties .
adjust Raise or lower a facility to match a new grade line .
aerially deposited lead Lead primarily from vehicle emissions deposited within unpaved areas or formerly unpaved areas .
authorized laboratory Independent testing laboratory not employed or compensated by any subcontractor or subcontractors affiliate providing other services for the Contract and authorized by the Department .
base Layer of specified material of planned thickness placed immediately below the pavement or surfacing .
basement material Material in an excavation or embankment under the lowest layer to be placed .
bid item Work unit for which the Bidder provides a price .
Bid Item List List of bid items units of measure and the associated quantities .
The verified Bid Item List is the Bid Item List with verified prices .
The Contract Proposal of Low Bidder at the Departments website is the verified Bid Item List .
After contract award interpret a reference to the Bid Item List as a reference to the verified Bid Item List .
borrow Fill acquired from an excavation source outside the described cut area. . local borrow Material obtained by widening cuts or excavating from sources outside the planned or authorized cross section on the job site .
The location of the local borrow is described or designated by the Engineer. . imported borrow Borrow that is not local borrow .
SECTION GENERAL bridge Structure that .
Has a bridge number .
Carries a utility railroad or vehicle pedestrian or other traffic over under or around obstructions or waterways buildingconstruction contract Contract that has Building Construction on the cover of the Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions .
California Test Departmentdeveloped test for determining work quality .
For California Tests go to the METS website .
certificate of compliance Certificate stating the material complies with the Contract .
Certified Industrial Hygienist Industrial hygienist certified in comprehensive practice by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene .
change order work Work described in a Change Order including extra work and work described in the Contract as change order work .
closure Closure of a traffic lane or lanes including shoulder ramp or connector lanes within a single traffic control system .
commercial quality Quality meeting the best general practices .
commercial source Established business operating as a material source for the general public .
Contract Written and executed contract between the Department and the Contractor .
Contract acceptance Directors written acceptance of a completed Contract .
Contract time Number of original working days as adjusted by any time adjustment .
Contractor Person or business or its legal representative entering into a Contract with the Department for performance of the work .
controlling activity Construction activity that will extend the scheduled completion date if delayed .
critical path Longest continuous chain of activities for the project that has the least amount of total float of all chains .
In general a delay on the critical path extends the scheduled completion date .
critical path method Networkbased planning technique using activity durations and relationships between activities to calculate a schedule for the entire project .
culvert Structure other than a bridge that provides an opening under a roadway .
data date Day after the date through which a schedule is current .
Everything occurring earlier than the data date is asbuilt and everything on or after the data date is planned .
day consecutive hours running from midnight to midnight calendar day. . business day Day on the calendar except a Saturday and a holiday. . working day Time measure unit for work progress .
A working day is any consecutivehour period except .. Saturday and a holiday .
.. Day during which you can not perform work on the controlling activity for at least percent of the scheduled work shift with at least percent of the scheduled labor and equipment due to any of the following Adverse weatherrelated conditions .
Traffic maintenance under the Contract .
Suspension of a controlling activity that you and the Engineer agree benefits both parties .
Unanticipated event not caused by either party such as Act of God Act of a public enemy .
SECTION GENERAL Epidemic .
Fire .
Flood .
Governordeclared state of emergency .
Landslide .
Quarantine restriction .
Issue involving a third party including Industry or areawide labor strike .
Material shortage .
Freight embargo .
Jurisdictional requirement of a law enforcement agency .
Workforce labor dispute of a utility or nonhighway facility owner resulting in a nonhighway facility rearrangement not described and not solely for the Contractors convenience .
Rearrangement of a nonhighway facility includes installation relocation alteration or removal of the facility .
.. Day during a concurrent delay. . original working days ..
Working days to complete the work shown on the Notice to Bidders for a noncostplustime based bid ..
Working days bid to complete the work for a costplustimebased bid Where working days is specified without the modifier original in the context of the number of working days to complete the work interpret the number as the number of original working days as adjusted by any time adjustment .
deduction Money permanently taken from a progress payment or the final payment .
Deductions are cumulative and are not retentions under Pub Cont Code .
delay Event that extends the completion of an activity. . excusable delay Delay caused by the Department and not reasonably foreseeable when the work began such as .. Change in the work .. Department action that is not part of the Contract ..
Presence of an underground utility main not described in the Contract or in a location substantially different from that specified ..
Described facility rearrangement not rearranged as described by the utility owner by the date specified unless the rearrangement is solely for the Contractors convenience ..
Departments failure to obtain timely access to the rightofway ..
Departments failure to review a submittal or provide notification in the time specified .
critical delay Excusable delay that extends the scheduled completion date .
concurrent delay Occurrence of at least of the following events in the same period of time either partially or entirely .. Critical delay .. Delay to a controlling activity caused by you .. Nonworking day Department Department of Transportation as defined in St Hwy Code and authorized in St Hwy Code its authorized representatives .
detour Temporary route for traffic around a closed road part .
A passageway through a job site is not a detour .
Director Departments Director .
disabled veteran business enterprise Business certified as a DVBE by the Department of General Services Office of Small Business and DVBE Services .
disadvantaged business enterprise Disadvantaged business enterprise as defined in CFR .. dispose of Remove from the job site .
SECTION GENERAL divided highway Highway with separated traveled ways for traffic generally in opposite directions .
Engineer Resident Engineer responsible for the Contracts administration Resident Engineers authorized representatives .
early completion time Difference in time between an early scheduled completion date and the work completion date .
environmentally sensitive area Area within or near construction limits where access is prohibited or limited to protect environmental resources .
estimated cost Estimated cost of the project as shown on the Notice to Bidders .
extra work Any work desired or performed but not included in the original Contract .
federalaid contract Contract that has a federalaid project number on the cover of the Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions .
final pay item Bid item whose quantity shown on the Bid Item List is the quantity paid .
finished grade Final surface of the completed facility .
If the work under the Contract includes stage construction the relation between the finished grade and the work under the Contract is shown .
fixed cost Labor material or equipment cost directly incurred by the Contractor as a result of performing or supplying a particular bid item that remains constant regardless of the items quantity .
float Difference between the earliest and latest allowable start or finish times for an activity. . Departmentowned float Time saved on the critical path by actions of the Department .
It is the last activity shown on the schedule before the scheduled completion date .
force account work Work ordered on a construction project without an existing agreement on its cost and performed with the understanding that the contractor will bill the owner according to the cost of labor materials and equipment plus a certain percentage for overhead and profit .
grading plane Basement material surface on which the lowest layer of subbase base pavement surfacing or other specified layer is placed .
highway Whole rightofway or area reserved for use in constructing the roadway and its appurtenances .
holiday Holiday shown in the following table Holidays Holiday Date observed Every Sunday Every Sunday New Years Day January st Birthday of Martin Luther King Jr. rd Monday in January Lincolns Birthday February th Washingtons Birthday rd Monday in February Cesar Chavez Day March st Memorial Day Last Monday in May Independence Day July th Labor Day st Monday in September Columbus Day nd Monday in October Veterans Day November th Thanksgiving Day th Thursday in November Day after Thanksgiving Day Day after Thanksgiving Day Christmas Day December th If January st February th March st July th November th or December th falls on a Sunday the Monday following is a holiday .
If November th falls on a Saturday the preceding Friday is a holiday .
SECTION GENERAL hours of darkness Hours of darkness as defined in Veh Code .
idle equipment Equipment .
On the job site at the start of a delay .
Idled because of the delay .
Not operated during the delay informalbid contract Contract that has Informal Bid Authorized by Pub Cont Code on the cover of the Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions .
job site Area within the defined boundaries of a project .
Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates Department publication that lists labor surcharge and equipment rental rates .
landscaping Practice of a landscaping contractor under CA Code of Regs .. material Any product or substance specified for use in the construction of a project .
material shortage .
Shortage of raw or produced material that is areawide and caused by an unusual market condition except if any of the following occurs .. Shortage relates to a produced nonstandard material ..
Suppliers and the Contractors priority for filling an order differs ..
Event outside the United States for a material produced outside the United States .
Unavailability of water that delays a controlling activity material source facility audit Selfaudit and a Department audit evaluating a facilitys capability to consistently produce materials that comply with Department standards .
median Portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways including inside shoulders .
milestone Event activity that has zero duration and is typically used to represent the start or end of a certain stage of the project .
mobilization Preparatory work that must be performed or costs incurred before starting work on the various items on the job site Pub Cont Code .
modify Add to or subtract from an appurtenant part .
narrative report Document submitted with each schedule that discusses topics related to project progress and scheduling .
near critical path Chain of activities with total float exceeding that of the critical path but having not more than working days of total float .
obliterate Place an earth cover over or root plow pulverize or scarify .
pavement Uppermost layer of material placed on a traveled way or shoulder .
plans Standard plans revised standard plans and project plans. . standard plans Drawings standard to Department construction projects. . revised standard plans New or revised standard plans. . project plans Drawings specific to the project including authorized shop drawings .
plant establishment period Number of days shown on the Notice to Bidders for plant establishment .
quality characteristic Characteristic of a material that is measured to determine conformance with a given requirement .
quality control plan Contractors plan to ensure QC .
SECTION GENERAL reconstruct Remove and disassemble and construct again at an existing or new location .
relocate Remove and install or place in a new location .
remove Remove and dispose of .
reset Remove and install or place laterally at the same station location .
roadbed Roadway portion extending from the curb line to curb line or the shoulder line to shoulder line .
A divided highway has roadbeds .
roadside Area between the outside shoulder edge and the rightofway limits .
roadway Portion of the highway within the outside lines of curbs sidewalks slopes ditches channels or waterways .
A roadway includes the structures and features necessary for safety protection of facilities and drainage .
salvage Remove clean and haul to a specified location .
schedule .
baseline schedule Initial schedule showing the original work plan starting on the date of Contract approval .
This schedule shows no completed work to date and no negative float or negative lag to any activity. . revised schedule Schedule that incorporates a proposed or past change to logic or activity durations. . updated schedule Current schedule developed from the accepted baseline and any subsequent accepted updated or revised schedules through regular monthly review to incorporate actual past progress .
scheduled completion date Planned work completion date shown on the current schedule .
shoulder Roadway portion contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of a stopped vehicle emergency use and lateral support of base and surface courses .
small tool Tool or piece of equipment not listed in Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates that has a replacement value of or less .
specifications Standard specifications revised standard specifications and special provisions. . standard specifications Specifications standard to Department construction projects .
These specifications are in a book titled Standard Specifications. . revised standard specifications New or revised standard specifications .
These specifications are in a section titled Revised Standard Specifications of a book titled Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions. . special provisions Specifications specific to the project .
These specifications are in a section titled Special Provisions of a book titled Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions .
State State of California including its agencies departments or divisions whose conduct or action is related to the work .
Structure Design Offices of Structure Design of the Department of Transportation .
subbase Layer of material between a base and the basement material .
subgrade Roadbed portion on which pavement surfacing base subbase or a layer of any other material is placed .
submittal .
action submittal Written and graphic information and samples that require the Departments response. . informational submittal Written information that does not require the Departments response .
SECTION GENERAL substantial defects Defects plainly seen as damaged displaced or missing parts or improper functioning of materials parts equipment or systems .
substructure Bridge parts below the bridge seats pier tops and haunches for rigidframed bridges or spring lines for arched bridges includes abutment backwalls abutment parapets and wingwalls .
superstructure Bridge parts except the substructure .
supplemental project information Information relevant to the project specified as supplemental project information and made available to bidders .
surfacing Uppermost layer of material placed on a traveled way or shoulders pavement .
time impact analysis Analysis using a CPM schedule developed specifically to demonstrate the effect a proposed or past change or delay has on the current scheduled completion date .
timescaled network diagram Graphic depiction of a CPM schedule comprised of activity bars with relationships for each activity represented by arrows .
The tail of each arrow connects to the activity bar for the predecessor and points to the successor .
total bid Sum of the item totals as verified by the Department original Contract price .
total float Amount of time that an activity or chain of activities can be delayed before extending the scheduled completion date .
traffic Pedestrians bicyclists ridden or herded animals vehicles streetcars and other conveyances either singularly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel .
traffic lane Portion of traveled way used for the movement of a single line of vehicles .
traveled way Portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of the shoulders berms sidewalks and parking lanes .
tunnel Tunnel as defined in CA Code of Regs et seq .
unauthorized work Work performed beyond the lines and grades described in the Contract or established by the Engineer or extra work performed without Department authorization .
unsuitable material Material encountered below the natural ground surface in embankment areas or below the grading plane in excavation areas that the Engineer determines to be in any of the following conditions .
Of such unstable nature that it can not be compacted to the specified density using ordinary methods at optimum moisture content. . Too wet to be properly compacted and can not be dried before incorporating it into the work .
Excessive moisture alone is not sufficient cause for determining that the material is unsuitable. . Inappropriate for the planned use .
withhold Money temporarily or permanently taken from a progress payment .
work Resources and activities required for Contract acceptance including labor materials equipment and the created product .
work plan Detailed formulation of a program of action .
work zone Area of a highway with construction maintenance or utility work activities . .
DISTRICTS The Departments district composition and office addresses are as shown in the following table SECTION GENERAL District Composition and Office Addresses District Counties Street address Mailing address Del Norte DN Humboldt Hum Lake Lak Mendocino Men UNION ST EUREKA CA PO BOX EUREKA CA Lassen Las Modoc Mod Plumas Plu Shasta Sha Siskiyou Sis Tehama Teh Trinity Tri RIVERSIDE DR REDDING CA PO BOX REDDING CA Butte But Colusa Col El Dorado ED Glenn Gle Nevada Nev Placer Pla Sacramento Sac Sierra Sie Sutter Sut Yolo Yol Yuba Yub B ST MARYSVILLE CA B ST MARYSVILLE CA Alameda Ala Contra Costa CC Marin Mrn Napa Nap San Francisco SF San Mateo SM Santa Clara SCl Solano Sol Sonoma Son GRAND AVE OAKLAND CA PO BOX OAKLAND CA Monterey Mon San Benito SBt San Luis Obispo SLO Santa Barbara SB Santa Cruz SCr HIGUERA ST SAN LUIS OBISPO CA HIGUERA ST SAN LUIS OBISPO CA Fresno Fre Kern Ker Kings Kin Madera Mad Tulare Tul W. OLIVE AVE FRESNO CA PO BOX FRESNO CA Los Angeles LA Ventura Ven S. MAIN ST LOS ANGELES CA S MAIN ST LOS ANGELES CA Riverside Riv San Bernardino SBd W TH ST SAN BERNARDINO CA W TH ST SAN BERNARDINO CA Inyo Iny Mono Mno S MAIN ST BISHOP CA S MAIN ST BISHOP CA Alpine Alp Amador Ama Calaveras Cal Mariposa Mpa Merced Mer San Joaquin SJ Stanislaus Sta Tuolumne Tuo E CHARTER WAY STOCKTON CA PO BOX STOCKTON CA Imperial Imp San Diego SD TAYLOR ST SAN DIEGO CA TAYLOR ST SAN DIEGO CA Orange Ora MICHELSON DR STE IRVINE CA MICHELSON DR STE IRVINE CA A project with work in District or is a North Region project .
For Districts and interpret each reference to the district office as the North Region office .
The North Regions office address is the District address. . FREEZETHAW AREAS Freezethaw areas are areas of the State where freezethaw cycles and heavy salting frequently occur .
A project is in a freezethaw area if the project is specified in the special provisions to be in a freezethaw area. . PAVEMENT CLIMATE REGIONS To help account for the effects of various climatic conditions on pavement performance the State has been divided into climate regions .
The projects pavement climate region is shown on the project plans .
SECTION GENERAL .
WEBSITES ADDRESSES AND TELEPHONE NUMBERS SECTION GENERAL Websites Addresses and Telephone Numbers Reference or agency or department unit Website Address Telephone no .
Authorized Material Lists Authorized Material Source Lists httpwww.dot.ca.govhq escapproved_products_li st Bidders Exchange httpwww.dot.ca.govhq escoebidex MSC BIDDERS EXCHANGE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION TH ST SACRAMENTO CA CA Unified Certification Programs list of certified DBEs httpwww.dot.ca.govhq bepfind_certified.htm California MUTCD httpwww.dot.ca.gov Department httpwww.dot.ca.gov Department of Conservation Office of Mine Reclamation httpwww.conservation.c a.govomr Department of General Services Office of Small Business and DVBE Services httpwww.dgs.ca.govdg sProgramsServicesBus Services.aspx OFFICE OF SMALL BUSINESS AND DVBE SERVICES DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES RD ST WEST SACRAMENTO CA Department of Industrial Relations httpwww.dir.ca.gov GOLDEN GATE AVE SAN FRANCISCO CA Division of Accounting Office of External Accounts Payable httpwww.dot.ca.govhq ascoappaymentscontac t.htmconpets MAJOR CONSTRUCTION PAYMENT AND INFORMATION UNIT OFFICE OF EXTERNAL ACCOUNTS PAYABLE DIVISION OF ACCOUNTING DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION P.O .
BOX SACRAMENTO CA Division of Construction httpwww.dot.ca.govhq construc Geotechnical Services httpwww.dot.ca.govhq escgeotech GEOTECHNICAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION FOLSOM BLVD SACRAMENTO CA METS httpwww.dot.ca.govhq escTranslab MATERIALS ENGINEERING AND TESTING SERVICES DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION FOLSOM BLVD SACRAMENTO CA SECTION GENERAL MPQP httpwww.dot.ca.govma nuals.htm Office Engineer MSC OFFICE ENGINEER DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION TH ST SACRAMENTO CA Offices of Structure Design Documents Unit MSC I DOCUMENTS UNIT OFFICES OF STRUCTURE DESIGN DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION TH ST SACRAMENTO CA Publication Distribution Unit PUBLICATION UNIT DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION ROYAL OAKS DR SACRAMENTO CA South Coast Air Quality Management District www.aqmd.gov .
MISCELLANY Make checks and bonds payable to the Department of Transportation .
..
RESERVED BIDDING .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to bid eligibility and the bidding process .
The electronic bid specifications in section apply if Electronic Bidding Contract is shown on the cover of the Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions. . BID INELIGIBILITY A firm that has provided architectural or engineering services to the Department for this contract before bid submittal for this contract is prohibited from any of the following .
Submitting a bid .
Subcontracting for a part of the work .
Supplying materials .
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION No contractor or subcontractor may be listed on a bid proposal for a public works project submitted on or after March unless registered with the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to Labor Code section .
with limited exceptions from this requirement for bid purposes only under Labor Code section .a .
..
RESERVED .
BID DOCUMENTS .A General The Bid book includes bid forms and certifications .
For an electronic bid the Bid book includes forms not available through the electronic bidding service .
The Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions includes the Notice to Bidders revised standard specifications and special provisions .
The Bid book including Bid book forms not available through the electronic bidding service Notice to Bidders and Special Provisions project plans and any addenda to these documents may be accessed at the Bidders Exchange website .
The Standard Specifications and Standard Plans may be viewed at the Bidders Exchange website and may be purchased at the Publication Distribution Unit .
.B Supplemental Project Information The Department makes supplemental information available as specified in the special provisions .
Logs of test borings are supplemental project information .
If an Information Handout or cross sections are available you may view them at the Contract Plans and Special Provisions link at the Bidders Exchange website If rock cores are available you may view them by sending a request to Coreroomdot.ca.gov .
If other supplemental project information is available for inspection you may view it by phoning in a request .
Make your request at least days before viewing .
Include in your request .
DistrictCountyRoute .
Contract number .
Viewing date .
Contact information including telephone number For rock cores also include the bridge number in your request .
If bridge asbuilt drawings are available SECTION BIDDING .
For a project in District through or you may request them from the Office of Structure Maintenance and Investigations fax .
For a project in District or you may request them from the Office of Structure Maintenance and Investigations fax and they are available at the Office of Structure Maintenance and Investigations Los Angeles CA telephone Asbuilt drawings may not show existing dimensions and conditions .
Where new construction dimensions are dependent on existing bridge dimensions verify the field dimensions and adjust the dimensions of the work to fit the existing conditions .
.C.D Reserved .
JOB SITE AND DOCUMENT EXAMINATION Examine the job site and bid documents .
Notify the Department of apparent errors and patent ambiguities in the plans specifications and Bid Item List .
Failure to do so may result in rejection of a bid or rescission of an award .
Bid submission is your acknowledgment that you have examined the job site and bid documents and are satisfied with .
General and local conditions to be encountered .
Character quality and scope of work to be performed .
Quantities of materials to be furnished .
Character quality and quantity of surface and subsurface materials or obstacles .
Requirements of the contract .
RESERVED .
BID ITEM LIST Submit a bid based on the bid item quantities the Department shows on the Bid Item List. . SUBCONTRACTOR LIST On the Subcontractor List form list each subcontractor to perform work in an amount in excess of of percent of the total bid or whichever is greater Pub Cont Code et seq .. For each subcontractor listed the Subcontractor List form must show .
Business name and the location of its place of business. . California contractor license number for a nonfederalaid contract. . Public works contractor registration number . .
Portion of work it will perform .
Show the portion of the work by .. Bid item numbers for the subcontracted work ..
Percentage of the subcontracted work for each bid item listed ..
Description of the subcontracted work if the percentage of the bid item listed is less than percent .
RESERVED .
DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES .A General Section .
applies to a federalaid contract .
Under CFR .b The contractor sub recipient or subcontractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this contract .
The contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of CFR part in the award and administration of DOTassisted contracts .
Failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the recipient deems appropriate which may include but is not limited to Withholding monthly progress payments SECTION BIDDING Assessing sanctions Liquidated damages andor Disqualifying the contractor from future bidding as nonresponsible .
Include this assurance in each subcontract you sign with a subcontractor .
.B Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Goal .B General Section .B applies if a DBE goal is shown on the Notice to Bidders .
The Department shows a goal for DBEs to comply with the DBE program objectives provided in CFR .. Make work available to DBEs and select work parts consistent with the available DBEs including subcontractors suppliers service providers and truckers .
Meet the DBE goal shown on the Notice to Bidders or demonstrate that you made adequate good faith efforts to meet this goal .
You are responsible to verify at bid opening the DBE firm is certified as a DBE by the California Unified Certification Program and possess the work codes applicable to the type of work the firm will perform on the Contract .
Determine that selected DBEs perform a commercially useful function for the type of work the DBE will perform on the Contract as provided in CFR .c .
Under CFR .c the DBE must be responsible for the execution of a distinct element of work and must carry out its responsibility by actually performing managing and supervising the work .
All DBE participation will count toward the Departments federally mandated statewide overall DBE goal .
Credit for materials or supplies you purchase from DBEs will be evaluated on a contractbycontract basis and counts toward the goal in the following manner .
percent if the materials or supplies are obtained from a DBE manufacturer. . percent if the materials or supplies are obtained from a DBE regular dealer. . Only fees commissions and charges for assistance in the procurement and delivery of materials or supplies if they are obtained from a DBE that is neither a manufacturer nor a regular dealer .
CFR .
defines manufacturer and regular dealer .
You receive credit toward the goal if you employ a DBE trucking company that is performing a commercially useful function .
The Department uses the following factors in determining whether a DBE trucking company is performing a commercially useful function The DBE must be responsible for the management and supervision of the entire trucking operation for which it is responsible on a particular contract and there can not be a contrived arrangement for the purpose of meeting DBE goals .
The DBE must itself own and operate at least one fully licensed insured and operational truck used on the contract .
The DBE receives credit for the total value of the transportation services it provides on the Contract using trucks it owns insures and operates using drivers it employs .
The DBE may lease trucks from another DBE firm including an owneroperator who is certified as a DBE .
The DBE who leases trucks from another DBE receives credit for the total value of the transportation services the lessee DBE provides on the Contract .
The DBE may lease trucks without drivers from a nonDBE truck leasing company .
If the DBE leases trucks from a nonDBE truck leasing company and uses its own employees as drivers it is entitled to credit for the total value of these hauling services .
A lease must indicate that the DBE has exclusive use of and control over the truck .
This does not preclude the leased truck from working for others during the term of the lease with the consent of the DBE so long as the lease gives the DBE absolute priority for use of the leased truck .
Leased trucks must display the name and identification number of the DBE .
CFR .d SECTION BIDDING .B DBE Commitment Submittal Submit DBE information under section ..
Submit a copy of the quote from each DBE shown on the DBE Commitment form that describes the type and dollar amount of work shown on the form .
Submit a DBE Confirmation form for each DBE shown on the DBE Commitment form to establish that it will be participating in the Contract in the type and dollar amount of work shown on the form .
If a DBE is participating as a joint venture partner submit a copy of the joint venture agreement .
.B DBE Good Faith Efforts Submittal You can meet the DBE requirements by either documenting commitments to DBEs to meet the Contract goal or by documenting adequate good faith efforts to meet the Contract goal .
An adequate good faith effort means that the bidder must show that it took all necessary and reasonable steps to achieve a DBE goal that by their scope intensity and appropriateness to the objective could reasonably be expected to meet the DBE goal .
If you have not met the DBE goal complete and submit the DBE Good Faith Efforts Documentation form under section .
showing that you made adequate good faith efforts to meet the goal .
Only good faith efforts directed toward obtaining participation by DBEs are considered .
Submit good faith efforts documentation within the specified time to protect your eligibility for award of the contract in the event the Department finds that the DBE goal has not been met .
Refer to CFR app A for guidance regarding evaluation of good faith efforts to meet the DBE goal .
The Department considers DBE commitments of other bidders in determining whether the low bidder made good faith efforts to meet the DBE goal .
..
RESERVED .
DISABLED VETERAN BUSINESS ENTERPRISES .A General Section .
applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
Take necessary and reasonable steps to ensure that DVBEs have the opportunity to participate in the Contract .
Comply with Mil Vet Code et seq .
.B Projects Million or Less Section .B applies to a project with an estimated cost of million or less .
Make work available to DVBEs and select work parts consistent with the available DVBE subcontractors and suppliers .
Meet the goal shown on the Notice to Bidders .
Complete and submit the Certified DVBE Summary form under section ..
List all DVBE participation on this form .
If a DVBE joint venture is used submit the joint venture agreement with the Certified DVBE Summary form .
List each sttier DVBE subcontractor on the Subcontractor List form regardless of its percentage of the total bid .
.C Projects More Than Million .C General Section .C applies to a project with an estimated cost of more than million .
The Department encourages bidders to obtain DVBE participation to ensure the Department achieves its Statemandated overall DVBE goal .
SECTION BIDDING If you obtain DVBE participation .
Complete and submit the Certified DVBE Summary form under section ..
List all DVBE participation on this form . .
List each st tier DVBE subcontractor in the Subcontractor List form regardless of percentage of the total bid .
If a DVBE joint venture is used submit the joint venture agreement with the Certified DVBE Summary form .
.C DVBE Incentive The Department grants a DVBE incentive to each bidder who achieves a DVBE participation of percent or greater Mil Vet Code .
and Code of Regs .
et seq .. To receive this incentive submit the Certified DVBE Summary form under section ..
Bidders other than the apparent low bidder the nd low bidder and the rd low bidder may be required to submit the Certified DVBE Summary form if the bid ranking changes .
If the Department requests a Certified DVBE Summary form from you submit the completed form within business days of the request .
.C Incentive Evaluation The Department applies the small business and nonsmall business preference during bid verification and proceeds with the evaluation specified below for the DVBE incentive .
The DVBE incentive is a reduction for bid comparison only in the total bid submitted by the lesser of the following amounts .
Percentage of the DVBE achievement rounded to decimal places of the verified total bid of the low bidder .
percent of the verified total bid of the low bidder .
The Department applies DVBE incentive and determines whether bid ranking changes .
A nonsmall business bidder can not displace a small business bidder .
However a small business bidder with a higher DVBE achievement can displace another small business bidder .
The Department proceeds with awarding the contract to the new low bidder and posts the new verified bid results at the Departments website .
..
RESERVED .
SMALL BUSINESS AND NONSMALL BUSINESS SUBCONTRACTOR PREFERENCES .A General Section .
applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
The Department applies small business preferences and nonsmall business preferences under Govt Code et seq .
and CA Code of Regs et seq .
Any contractor subcontractor supplier or service provider who qualifies as a small business is encouraged to apply for certification as a small business by submitting its application to the Department of General Services Office of Small Business and DVBE Services .
Contract award is based on the total bid not the reduced bid .
.B Small Business Preference The Department allows a bidder certified as a small business by the Department of General Services Office of Small Business and DVBE Services a preference if .
Bidder submitted a completed Request for Small Business Preference or NonSmall Business Preference form with its bid .
Low bidder did not request the preference or is not certified as a small business SECTION BIDDING The Bidders signature on the Request for Small Business Preference or NonSmall Business Preference form certifies that the Bidder is certified as a small business at the date and time of bid or has submitted a complete application to the Department of General Services .
The complete application and any required substantiating documentation must be received by the Department of General Services by p.m. on the bid opening date .
The Department of General Services determines whether a bidder was certified on the bid opening date .
The Department of Transportation confirms the Bidders status as a small business before applying the small business preference .
The small business preference is a reduction for bid comparison in the total bid submitted by the small business contractor by the lesser of the following amounts .
percent of the verified total bid of the low bidder .
If the Department determines that a certified small business bidder is the low bidder after the application of the small business preference the Department does not consider a request for nonsmall business preference .
.C NonSmall Business Subcontractor Preference The Department allows a bidder not certified as a small business by the Department of General Services Office of Small Business and DVBE Services a preference if .
Bidder submitted a completed Request for Small Business Preference or NonSmall Business Preference form with its bid .
Certified Small Business Listing for the NonSmall Business Preference form shows that you are subcontracting at least percent to certified small businesses Each listed subcontractor and supplier must be certified as a small business at the date and time of bid or must have submitted a complete application to the Department of General Services .
The complete application and any required substantiating documentation must be received by the Department of General Services by p.m. on the bid opening date .
The nonsmall business subcontractor preference is a reduction for bid comparison in the total bid submitted by the nonsmall business contractor requesting the preference by the lesser of the following amounts .
percent of the verified total bid of the low bidder .
..
RESERVED .
CALIFORNIA COMPANIES Section .
applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
Under Pub Cont Code the Department gives preference to a California company as defined for bid comparison purposes over a nonresident contractor from any state that gives or requires a preference to be given to contractors from that state on its public entity construction contracts .
Complete a California Company Preference form .
The California company reciprocal preference amount is equal to the preference amount applied by the state of the nonresident contractor with the lowest responsive bid unless the California company is eligible for a small business preference or a nonsmall business subcontractor preference in which case the preference amount is the greater of the two but not both .
If the low bidder is not a California company and a California companys bid with reciprocal preference is equal to or less than the lowest bid the Department awards the contract to the California company on the basis of its total bid .
SECTION BIDDING ..
RESERVED .
OPT OUT OF PAYMENT ADJUSTMENTS FOR PRICE INDEX FLUCTUATIONS You may opt out of the payment adjustments for price index fluctuations specified in section .. To opt out submit a completed Opt Out of Payment Adjustments for Price Index Fluctuations form under section .. .
RESERVED .
BID DOCUMENT COMPLETION AND SUBMITTAL .A General Complete the forms in the Bid book .
Use the forms provided by the Department except as otherwise specified for a bidders bond .
Do not fax forms except for the copies of forms with the public works contractor registration number submitted after the time of bid .
Fax these copies to .
Submit the forms and copies of the forms to the Office Engineer .
Failure to submit the forms and information as specified may result in a nonresponsive bid .
If an agent other than the authorized corporate officer or a partnership member signs the bid file a Power of Attorney with the Department either before opening bids or with the bid .
Otherwise the bid may be nonresponsive .
.B Electronic Bids Section .B applies to electronic bids .
Complete and submit the electronic portion of the Bid book under the Electronic Bidding Guide at the Bidders Exchange website and submit the paper forms as specified for a paper bid .
Your authorized digital signature is your confirmation of and agreement to all certifications and statements contained in the Bid book .
On forms and certifications that you submit through the electronic bidding service you agree that each form and certification where a signature is required is deemed as having your signature .
.C Paper Bids Section .C applies to paper bids .
Submit your bid and any Bid book forms after you submit your bid .
Under sealed cover .
Marked as a bid .
Identifying the contract number and the bid opening date .D Bid Form Submittal Schedules .D General The Bid book includes forms specific to the contract .
The deadlines for the submittal of the forms vary depending on the requirements of each contract .
Determine the requirements of the contract and submit the forms based on the applicable schedule specified in section .D .
Bid forms and information on the form that are due after the time of bid may be submitted at the time of bid .
.D FederalAid Contracts .Da General Section .D applies to a federalaid contract .
.Db Contracts with a DBE Goal Section .Db applies if a DBE goal is shown on the Notice to Bidders SECTION BIDDING Submit the bid forms according to the schedule shown in the following table Bid Form Submittal Schedule for a FederalAid Contract with a DBE Goal Form Submittal deadline Bid to the Department of Transportation Time of bid except for the public works contractor registration number Copy of the Bid to the Department of Transportation as submitted at the time of bid with the public works contractor registration number days after bid opening Subcontractor List Time of bid except for the public works contractor registration number Copy of the Subcontractor List as submitted at the time of bid with the public works contractor registration number days after bid opening Small Business Status Time of bid Opt Out of Payment Adjustments for Price Index Fluctuationsa Time of bid DBE Commitment No later than p.m. on the th business day after bid opening DBE Confirmation No later than p.m. on the th business day after bid opening DBE Good Faith Efforts Documentation No later than p.m. on the th business day after bid opening aSubmit only if you choose the option .
.Dc Contracts without a DBE Goal Reserved .Dd.Dh Reserved .D NonFederalAid Contracts .Da General Section .D applies to nonfederalaid contracts .
.Db Contracts with a DVBE Goal Section .Db applies if a DVBE goal is shown on the Notice to Bidders .
Submit the bid forms according to the schedule shown in the following table SECTION BIDDING Bid Form Submittal Schedule for a NonFederalAid Contract with a DVBE Goal Form Submittal deadline Bid to the Department of Transportation Time of bid except for the public works contractor registration number for a jointventure contract For a jointventure contract copy of the Bid to the Department of Transportation as submitted at the time of bid with the public works contractor registration number days after bid opening Subcontractor List Time of bid Opt Out of Payment Adjustments for Price Index Fluctuationsa Time of bid Certified DVBE Summary No later than p.m. on the th business day after bid opening California Company Preference Time of bid Request for Small Business Preference or Non Small Business Preferencea Time of bid Certified Small Business Listing for the Non Small Business Preferencea No later than p.m. on the nd business day after bid opening aSubmit only if you choose the option or preference .
.Dc Contracts without a DVBE Goal Reserved .Dd.Dh Reserved .D.D Reserved .
BIDDERS SECURITY Submit one of the following forms of bidders security equal to at least percent of the bid .
Cash .
Cashiers check .
Certified check .
Signed bidders bond by an admitted surety insurer .
For an electronic bid electronic bidders bond by an admitted surety insurer submitted using an electronic registry service approved by the Department .
Submit cash cashiers check certified check or bidders bond to the Department at the Bidders Exchange before the bid opening time .
Submit electronic bidders bond with the electronic bid .
If using a bidders bond you may use the form in the Bid book .
If you do not use the form in the Bid book use a form containing the same information .
..
RESERVED .
BID WITHDRAWAL For a paper bid .
An authorized agent may withdraw a bid before the bid opening date and time by submitting a written bid withdrawal request at the location where the bid was submitted .
Withdrawing a bid does not prevent you from submitting a new bid. . After the bid opening time you can not withdraw a bid .
For an electronic bid .
Bids are not filed with the Department until the date and time of bid opening. . A bidder may withdraw or revise a bid after it has been submitted to the electronic bidding service if this is done before the bid opening date and time .
SECTION BIDDING ..
RESERVED .
BID OPENING The Department publicly opens and reads bids at the time and place shown on the Notice to Bidders .
..
RESERVED .
DEPARTMENTS DECISION ON BID The Departments decision on the bid amount is final .
The Department may reject .
All bids .
A nonresponsive bid .
BID RELIEF The Department may grant bid relief under Pub Cont Code et seq .
Submit any request for bid relief to the Office Engineer .
The Relief of Bid Request form is available at the Departments website . .
RESERVED .
SUBMITTAL FAILURE HISTORY The Department considers a bidders past failure to submit documents required after bid opening in determining a bidders responsibility. . BID RIGGING Section .
applies to a federalaid contract .
The US Department of Transportation DOT provides a tollfree hotline to report bid rigging activities .
Use the hotline to report bid rigging bidder collusion and other fraudulent activities .
The hotline number is .
The service is available hours days a week and is confidential and anonymous ..
The hotline is part of the DOTs effort to identify and investigate highway construction contract fraud and abuse and is operated under the direction of the DOT Inspector General .
CONTRACT AWARD AND EXECUTION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to contract award and execution . .
CONSIDERATION OF BIDS .A General For a lumpsumbased bid the Department compares bids based on the total price .
For a unitpricebased bid the Department compares bids based on the sum of the item totals .
For a costplustimebased bid the Department compares bids based on the sum of the item totals and the total bid for time .
.B Tied Bids The Department breaks a tied bid with a coin toss except .
If a small business bidder and a nonsmall business bidder request preferences and the reductions result in a tied bid the Department awards the contract to the small business bidder . .
If a DVBE small business bidder and a nonDVBE small business bidder request preferences and the reduction results in a tied bid the Department awards the contract to the DVBE small business bidder . .
CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION No contractor or subcontractor may be awarded a contract for public work on a public works project awarded on or after April unless registered with the Department of Industrial Relations pursuant to Labor Code section .. . CONTRACT AWARD Submit any bid protest to the Office Engineer .
If the Department awards the contract the award is made to the lowest responsible bidder within the number of days shown in the following table Contract Award Period Days after bid opening Project estimated cost shown on the Notice to Bidders million million The Department may extend the specified award period if the Bidder agrees .
You may request to extend the award period by faxing a request to before p.m. on the last day of the award period .
If you do not make this request after the specified award period .
Your bid becomes invalid .
You are not eligible for the award of the contract .
CONTRACT BONDS PUB CONT CODE AND The successful bidder must furnish bonds .
Payment bond to secure the claim payments of laborers workers mechanics or materialmen providing goods labor or services under the Contract .
This bond must be equal to at least percent of the total bid . .
Performance bond to guarantee the faithful performance of the Contract .
This bond must be equal to at least percent of the total bid .
The Department provides bond forms to the successful bidder .
SECTION CONTRACT AWARD AND EXECUTION .
CONTRACTOR LICENSE For a federalaid contract the Contractor must be properly licensed as a contractor from contract award through Contract acceptance Pub Cont Code .
For a nonfederalaid contract .
Contractor must be properly licensed as a contractor from bid opening through Contract acceptance Bus Prof Code . . Joint venture bidders must obtain a joint venture license before contract award Bus Prof Code . . INSURANCE POLICIES The successful bidder must submit .
Copy of its commercial general liability policy and its excess policy or binder until such time as a policy is available including the declarations page applicable endorsements riders and other modifications in effect at the time of contract execution .
Standard ISO form no .
CG or similar exclusions are allowed if not inconsistent with section ..
The allowance of additional exclusions is at the discretion of the Department . .
Certificate of insurance showing all other required coverages .
Certificates of insurance as evidence of required insurance for the auto liability and any other required policy must set forth deductible amounts applicable to each policy and all exclusions that are added by endorsement to each policy .
The evidence of insurance must provide that no cancellation lapse or reduction of coverage will occur without days prior written notice to the Department . .
Declaration under the penalty of perjury by a CPA certifying the accountant has applied GAAP guidelines confirming the successful bidder has enough funds and resources to cover any self insured retentions if the selfinsured retention is over .
If the successful bidder uses any form of selfinsurance for workers compensation in lieu of an insurance policy the Bidder must submit a certificate of consent to selfinsure under Labor Code . . SMALL BUSINESS PARTICIPATION REPORT The Department has established an overall percent small business participation goal .
The Department is tracking small business participation on all contracts to determine whether the goal is achieved .
Complete and sign the Small Business SB Participation Report form included in the contract documents whether or not no small business participation is reported .
..
RESERVED .
PAYEE DATA RECORD Complete and deliver to the Office Engineer a Payee Data Record form when requested by the Department . .
RESERVED .
FORM FHWA For a federalaid contract form FHWA is included with the Contract form in the documents sent to the successful bidder for execution .
Comply with its provisions .
Interpret the training and promotion section as specified in section .A .
..
RESERVED .
CONTRACT EXECUTION The successful bidder must sign the Contract form .
Deliver to the Office Engineer .
Signed Contract form including the attached form FHWA .
Contract bonds .
Documents identified in section . . Small Business SB Participation Report form SECTION CONTRACT AWARD AND EXECUTION The Office Engineer must receive these documents before the th business day after the Bidder receives the contract .
The Bidders security may be forfeited for failure to execute the contract within the time specified Pub Cont Code and .
The following is a copy of the Contract form SECTION CONTRACT AWARD AND EXECUTION .
BIDDERS SECURITIES The Department keeps the securities of the st nd and rd low bidders until the contract has been executed .
The other bidders securities other than bidders bonds are returned upon determination of the st nd and rd low bidders and their bidders bonds are of no further effect Pub Cont Code .
SCOPE OF WORK .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to the scope of work . .
INTENT The Contract intent is to provide for work completion using the best general practices .
Nothing in the specifications voids the Contractors public safety responsibilities. . WORK DESCRIPTION Construct the work described on the Notice to Bidders and as described in the Contract. . USE OF MATERIALS FOUND ON THE JOB SITE You may use aggregate or other materials found in excavation that comply with the specifications .
The Department pays for the material excavated at the excavation item Contract price .
Replace the quantity of material removed and used with an equal quantity of material .
The material must have been designated for use in the work .
Except for material used as structure backfill the Department does not pay for replacing the material .
The Department pays for replacing excavated material used for structure backfill at the Contract price for structure backfill .
Do not excavate material from outside the excavations slope and grade lines without authorization. . CHANGES AND EXTRA WORK .A General The Department may make changes within the scope of work and add extra work .
The Engineer describes the changes and extra work the payment basis and any time adjustment in a Change Order .
A Change Order is approved when the Department signs the Change Order .
Until the Department approves a Change Order continue to perform the work under the Contract unless the Engineer orders you to start the work described in the Change Order before its approval .
Submit detailed cost data for a unit price adjustment for a bid item if the Engineer requests the data or you request a unit price adjustment resulting from a change of more than percent in the bid items quantity .
.B WorkCharacter Changes The Department adjusts the unit price for an item if .
Ordered plan or specification change materially changes the character of a work item from that on which the bid item price was based .
Unit cost of the changed item differs from the unit cost of that item under the original plans and specifications .
No approved Change Order addresses the payment .
DIFFERING SITE CONDITIONS CFR .
.A General Reserved .B Contractors Notification Promptly notify the Engineer if you find either of the following conditions .
Physical conditions differing materially from either of the following .. Contract documents .. Job site examination .
Physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the Contract Include details explaining the information you relied on and the material differences you discovered .
SECTION SCOPE OF WORK If you fail to promptly notify the Engineer you waive your claim of a differing site condition for the period between your discovery of the differing site condition and your notification to the Engineer .
If you disturb the site after discovery and before the Engineers investigation you waive the differingsite condition claim .
.C Engineers Investigation and Decision Upon your notification the Engineer investigates job site conditions and .
Notifies you whether to resume affected work .
Decides whether the condition differs materially and is cause for an adjustment of time payment or both .
VALUE ENGINEERING .A General Reserved .B Value Engineering Change Proposal You may submit a VECP to reduce any of the following .
Total cost of construction .
Construction activity duration .
Traffic congestion Before preparing a VECP meet with the Engineer to discuss .
Proposal concept .
Permit issues .
Impact on other projects .
Project impacts including traffic schedule and later stages .
Peer reviews .
Overall proposal merits .
Review times required by the Department and other agencies The VECP must not impair the projects essential functions or characteristics including .
Service life .
Operation economy .
Maintenance ease .
Desired appearance .
Design and safety The VECP must include .
Description of the Contract specifications and drawing details for performing the work and the proposed changes. . Itemization of Contract specifications and plan details that would be changed . .
Detailed cost estimate for performing the work under the existing Contract and under the proposed change .
Determine the estimates under section .. .
Deadline for the Engineer to decide on the changes. . Bid items affected and resulting quantity changes .
The Department is not required to consider a VECP .
If a VECP is similar to a change in the plans or specifications being considered by the Department at the time the proposal is submitted or if the proposal is based on or similar to plans or specifications adopted by the Department before Contract award the Department does not accept the VECP and may make these changes without VECP payments .
If the Department does not approve a Change Order before the deadline stated in the VECP or other date you subsequently stated in writing the VECP is rejected .
The Department does not adjust time or payment for a rejected VECP .
SECTION SCOPE OF WORK The Department decides whether to accept a VECP and the estimated net constructioncost savings from adopting the VECP or parts of it .
The Department may require you to accept a share of the investigation cost as a condition of reviewing a VECP .
After written acceptance the Department considers the VECP and deducts the agreed cost .
If the Department accepts the VECP or parts of it the Department issues a Change Order that .
Incorporates changes in the Contract necessary to implement the VECP or the parts adopted .
Includes the Departments acceptance conditions .
States the estimated net constructioncost savings resulting from the VECP .
Obligates the Department to pay you percent of the estimated net savings In determining the estimated net constructioncost savings the Department excludes your VECP preparation cost and the Departments VECP investigation cost including parts paid by you .
If a VECP providing for a reduction in working days is accepted by the Department percent of the reduction is deducted from the Contract time .
If a VECP providing for a reduction in traffic congestion or avoiding traffic congestion is accepted by the Department the Department pays percent of the estimated net savings in construction costs attributable to the VECP .
Submit detailed traffic handling comparisons between the existing Contract and the proposed change including estimates of the traffic volumes and congestion .
The Department may apply an accepted VECP for general use on other contracts .
If an accepted VECP is adopted for general use the Department pays only the contractor who first submitted the VECP and only for the contracts awarded to that contractor before the submission of the accepted VECP .
If the Department does not adopt a generaluse VECP an identical or similar submitted proposal is eligible for acceptance .
.C Value Analysis Workshop Section .C applies to a nonbuildingconstruction contract with a total bid of over million .
You may request a value analysis workshop by submitting a request after Contract approval .
The Department offers a value analysis workshop to .
Identify valueenhancing opportunities .
Consider changes to the Contract that will reduce the total cost of construction construction activity duration or traffic congestion without impairing the essential functions specified for a VECP in section .B If the request is authorized you and the Engineer .
Schedule a value analysis workshop .
Select a facilitator and workshop site .
Agree to other workshop administrative details The workshop must be conducted under the methods described in the Departments Value Analysis Team Guide .
For the guide go to the Departments Division of Design website .
The facilitator must be a certified value specialist as recognized by the Society of American Value Engineers .
The Department reimburses you for of the workshop cost .
The workshop cost is the sum of the workshopfacilitator cost and the workshopsite cost .
The Engineer determines the workshop cost based on the facilitator and workshopsite invoice prices minus any available or offered discounts .
The Department does not reimburse you for any other associated costs .
SECTION SCOPE OF WORK ..
RESERVED .
CLEANUP Before final inspection leave the job site neat and presentable and dispose of .
Rubbish .
Excess materials .
Falsework .
Temporary structures .
Equipment The Department does not require you to remove warning regulatory or guide signs before Contract acceptance .
CONTROL OF WORK .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to the Contract parties relations and Contract acceptance .
Furnish the resources except Departmentfurnished materials required to complete the work as described in the Contract .
Provide QC .
Work is subject to the Departments inspection sampling and testing .
The Departments inspection sampling and testing do not relieve you of your responsibility to provide QC .
Ensure the Departments safe and unrestricted access to the work .
Furnish facilities necessary for the Departments inspection .
Where the means and methods to complete the work are not described in the Contract choose the means and methods to complete the work .
Where the Contract describes more than construction method or more than type of material or equipment the Department does not assure that each construction method or type of material or equipment can be used successfully throughout all or any part of the project .
You are responsible to use the alternative or alternatives that will accomplish the work under the conditions encountered .
Failure to comply with any Contract part is a waiver of your right to an adjustment of time and payment related to that part .
Use contract administration forms available at the Departments website. . CONTRACT COMPONENTS A component in one Contract part applies as if appearing in each .
The parts are complementary and describe and provide for a complete work .
If a discrepancy exists .
Governing ranking of Contract parts in descending order is .. Special provisions .. Project plans .. Revised standard specifications .. Standard specifications .. Revised standard plans .. Standard plans ..
Supplemental project information .
Written numbers and notes on a drawing govern over graphics .
Detail drawing governs over a general drawing .
Specific specification governs over a general specification .
Specification in a section governs over a specification referenced by that section If a discrepancy is found or confusion arises submit an RFI . .
ENGINEERS AUTHORITY The Engineer makes the final decision on questions regarding the Contract including .
Work quality and acceptability .
Manner of performance of the work .
Drawing and specification interpretation .
Contract fulfillment .
Time and progress rate .
Measurement and payment The Engineer has the authority to enforce or fulfill an order that you fail to fulfill promptly .
Failure to enforce a Contract part does not waive enforcement of any Contract provision .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK The Engineer may reject work that does not comply with the Contract at any time including after a payment has been made .
..
RESERVED .
PROTESTS You may protest an Engineers decision by submitting an RFI .
..
RESERVED .
PARTNERING .A General The Department strives to work cooperatively with all contractors partnering is our way of doing business .
The Department encourages project partnering among the project team made up of significant contributors from the Department and the Contractor and their invited stakeholders .
For a contract with a total bid over million professionally facilitated project partnering is encouraged .
For a contract with a total bid over million and or more working days professionally facilitated project partnering is required .
In implementing project partnering you and the Engineer manage the Contract by .
Using early and regular communication with involved parties .
Establishing and maintaining a relationship of shared trust equity and commitment .
Identifying quantifying and supporting the attainment of mutual goals .
Developing strategies for using risk management concepts .
Implementing timely communication and decision making .
Resolving potential problems at the lowest possible level to avoid negative impacts .
Holding periodic partnering meetings and workshops as appropriate to maintain partnering relationships and benefits throughout the life of the project .
Establishing periodic joint evaluations of the partnering process and attainment of mutual goals .
Evaluating potential VECPs with stakeholders Partnering does not void any Contract part .
The Departments Field Guide to Partnering on Caltrans Construction Projects is available to the project team as a reference .
This guide provides structure context and clarity to the partnering process requirements .
For the guide go to the Departments Division of Construction website .
In implementing project partnering the project team must .
Create a partnering charter that includes .. Mutual goals including core project goals and may also include projectspecific goals and mutually supported individual goals including VECPs .. Partnering maintenance and closeout plan .. Dispute resolution plan that includes a dispute resolution ladder and may also include use of facilitated disputeresolution sessions ..
Team commitment statement and signatures .
Participate in monthly partneringevaluation surveys to measure progress on mutual goals and may also measure shortterm key issues as they arise . .
Evaluate the partnering facilitator on the Partnering Facilitator Evaluation forms .
The Engineer provides the evaluation forms to the project team and collects the results .
The Department makes evaluation results available upon your request .
Facilitator evaluations must be completed at the end of ..
Initial partnering workshop .. Project closeout partnering workshop .
Conduct a project closeout partnering workshop . .
Document lessons learned before Contract acceptance .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .B Partnering Facilitator Workshops and Monthly Evaluation Surveys The Engineer sends you a written invitation to enter into a partnering relationship after Contract approval .
Respond within days to accept the invitation and request the initial and additional partnering workshops .
After the Engineer receives the request you and the Engineer cooperatively .
Select a partnering facilitator that offers the service of a monthly partneringevaluation survey with a point rating and agrees to follow the Departments Partnering Facilitator Standards and Expectations available at the Departments Division of Construction website .
Schedule the initial partnering workshop .
Determine the initial workshop site and duration .
Agree to other workshop administrative details Additional partnering workshops and sessions are recommended quarterly and encouraged throughout the life of the project as determined necessary by you and the Engineer .
.C Training in Partnering Skills Development For a contract with a total bid over million and or more working days training in partnering skills development is required .
You and the Engineer cooperatively schedule the training session and select a professional trainer training site and to topics from the following list to be covered in the training .
Active listening .
Ethics .
Building teams .
Facilitation skills .
Change management .
Leadership .
Communication .
Partnering process and concepts .
Conflict resolution .
Project management .
Cultural diversity .
Project organization .
Dealing with difficult people .
Problem solving .
Decision making .
Running effective meetings .
Effective escalation ladders .
Time management .
Emotional intelligence .
Winwin negotiation .
Empathy Before the initial partnering workshop the trainer conducts a day training session in partnering skills development for the Contractors and the Engineers representatives .
This training session must be a separate session from the initial partnering workshop and must be conducted locally .
The training session must be consistent with the partnering principles under the Departments Field Guide to Partnering on Caltrans Construction Projects .
Send field supervisory personnel to the training session .
One of these must be your assigned representative specified in section .. .D Payment The Department pays for .
of partnering workshops and sessions based on facilitator and workshop site costs .
of the monthly service cost for partneringevaluation surveys .
Cost of the trainer and training site for partnering skills development The Engineer determines the costs based on invoice prices minus any available or offered discounts .
The Department does not pay markups on these costs .
The Department does not pay for your employees wages travel expenses or other costs associated with attending the partnering workshops and sessions completing monthly partneringevaluation surveys or attending training in partnering skills development .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK ..
RESERVED .
ASSIGNMENT No thirdparty agreement relieves you or your surety of the responsibility to complete the work .
Do not sell transfer or otherwise dispose of any Contract part without prior written consent from the Department .
If you assign the right to receive Contract payments the Department accepts the assignment upon the Engineers receipt of a notice .
Assigned payments remain subject to deductions and withholds described in the Contract .
The Department may use withheld payments for work completion whether payments are assigned or not. . SUBCONTRACTING .A General No subcontract releases you from the Contract or relieves you of your responsibility for a subcontractors work .
Before subcontracted work starts submit a Subcontracting Request form .
Do not use a debarred contractor .
For a list of debarred contractors go to the Department of Industrial Relations website .
If you violate Pub Cont Code et seq .
the Department may exercise the remedies provided in Pub Cont Code .
The Department may refer the violation to the Contractors State License Board as provided under Pub Cont Code .
Except for a buildingconstruction nonfederalaid contract perform work equaling at least percent of the value of the original total bid with your employees and with equipment you own or rent with or without operators .
Each subcontract must comply with the Contract .
The Department encourages you to include a dispute resolution process in each subcontract .
Each subcontractor must have an active and valid .
State contractor license with a classification appropriate for the work to be performed Bus Prof Code et seq. . Public works contractor registration number with the Department of Industrial Relations Submit copies of subcontracts upon request .
Upon request immediately remove and do not again use a subcontractor who fails to satisfactorily prosecute the work .
.B Disadvantaged Business Enterprises .B General Section .B applies to a federalaid contract .
Use each DBE as listed on the DBE Commitment form unless you receive authorization for a substitution .
Ensure that all subcontracts and agreements with DBEs to supply labor or materials are performed under CFR .
Maintain records including .
Name and business address of each sttier subcontractor .
Name and business address of each DBE subcontractor DBE vendor and DBE trucking company regardless of tier .
Date of payment and total amount paid to each business If you are a DBE contractor include the date of work performed by your own forces and the corresponding value of the work .
Before the th day of each month for the previous months work submit SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .
Monthly DBE Trucking Verification form .
Monthly DBE Payment form If a DBE is decertified before completing its work the DBE must notify you in writing of the decertification date .
If a business becomes a certified DBE before completing its work the business must notify you in writing of the certification date .
Submit the notifications .
Upon work completion complete a Disadvantaged Business Enterprises DBE Certification Status Change form .
Submit the form within days of Contract acceptance .
Upon work completion complete a Final Report Utilization of Disadvantaged Business Enterprises DBE FirstTier Subcontractors form .
Submit it within days of Contract acceptance .
The Department withholds until the form is submitted .
The Department releases the withhold upon submission of the completed form .
.B Disadvantaged Business Enterprises Section .B applies if a DBE goal is shown on the Notice to Bidders .
DBEs must perform work or supply materials as listed on the DBE Commitment form .
Do not terminate or substitute a listed DBE for convenience and perform the work with your own forces or those of an affiliate a nonDBE firm or another DBE firm or obtain materials from other sources without authorization from the Department .
The Department authorizes a request to use other forces or sources of materials if it shows any of the following justifications .
Listed DBE fails or refuses to execute a written contract based on the plans and specifications for the project. . You stipulated that a bond is a condition of executing the subcontract and the listed DBE fails to meet your bond requirements. . Work requires a contractor license and the listed DBE does not have a valid license under the Contractors License Law . .
Listed DBE fails or refuses to perform the work or furnish the listed materials . .
Listed DBEs work is unsatisfactory and not in compliance with the Contract . .
Listed DBE is ineligible to work on the project because of suspension or debarment . .
Listed DBE becomes bankrupt or insolvent . .
Listed DBE voluntarily withdraws with written notice from the Contract . .
Listed DBE is ineligible to receive credit for the type of work required . .
Listed DBE owner dies or becomes disabled resulting in the inability to perform the work on the Contract. . Department determines other documented good cause under CFR ..
Notify the original DBE of your intent to use other forces or material sources and provide the reasons .
Provide the DBE with business days to respond to your notice and advise you and the Department of the reasons why the use of other forces or sources of materials should not occur .
Your request to use other forces or material sources must include .
or more of the reasons listed in the preceding paragraph .
Notices from you to the DBE regarding the request .
Notices from the DBE to you regarding the request If the Department authorizes the termination or substitution of a listed DBE make good faith efforts to find another DBE .
The substitute DBE must perform at least the same dollar amount of work as the original DBE under the Contract to the extent needed to meet the DBE goal and be certified as a DBE with the work code applicable to the type of work the DBE will perform on the Contract at the time of your request for substitution .
Submit your documentation of good faith efforts within days of your request for authorization of the substitution .
The Department may authorize a day extension of this submittal period at your request .
Refer to CFR app A for guidance regarding evaluation of good faith efforts to meet the DBE goal .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK Unless the Department authorizes a request to terminate or substitute a listed DBE the Department does not pay for work unless it is performed or supplied by the DBE listed on the DBE Commitment form .
You may be subject to other sanctions under CFR .
.C Disabled Veteran Business Enterprises Section .C applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
Use each DVBE as shown on the Certified DVBE Summary form unless you receive authorization from the Department for a substitution .
The substitute must be another DVBE unless DVBEs are not available in which case you must substitute with a small business .
Any authorization for a substitute is contingent upon the Department of General Services approval of the substitute .
The requirement that DVBEs be certified by the bid opening date does not apply to DVBE substitutions after Contract award .
The Department authorizes substitutions for any of the reasons provided in CA Code of Regs ..
Include in your substitution request .
Copy of the written notice issued to the DVBE with proof of delivery .
Copy of the DVBEs response to the notice .
Name and certification number of the listed DVBE and the proposed substitute Requests for substitutions of a listed DVBE with a small business must include documentation of the unavailability of DVBEs including .
Contact with the small businessDVBE advocate from the Department and the Department of Veterans Affairs .
Search results from the Department of General Services website of available DVBEs .
Communication with a DVBE community organization nearest the job site if applicable .
Documented communication with the DVBE and small businesses describing the work to be performed the percentage of the total bid the corresponding dollar amount and the responses to the communication The Department forwards your substitution request to the Department of General Services .
The Department of General Services issues a notice of approval or denial .
The Department provides you this notice .
If you fail to use a listed DVBE without an authorized substitution request the Department issues a penalty of up to percent of the dollar amount of the work of the listed DVBE .
Maintain records of subcontracts made with DVBEs .
Include in the records .
Name and business address of each business .
Total amount paid to each business For the purpose of determining compliance with Pub Cont Code et seq . .
Upon work completion complete and submit Final Report Utilization of Disabled Veteran Business Enterprises DVBE State Funded Projects Only form . .
Upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours permit access to its premises for the purposes of ..
Interviewing employees .
.. Inspecting and copying books records accounts and other material that may be relevant to a matter under investigation .
.D NonSmall Businesses Section .D applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
Use each subcontractor as shown on the Certified Small Business Listing for the NonSmall Business Preference form unless you receive authorization for a substitution .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK The requirement that small businesses be certified by the bid opening date does not apply to small business substitutions after contract award .
Maintain records of subcontracts made with small business subcontractors and records of materials purchased from certified small business suppliers .
Include in the records .
Name and business address of each business .
Total amount paid to each business For the purpose of determining compliance with CA Code of Regs et seq . .
Provide the Department relevant information requested .
Upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours permit access to its premises for the purposes of ..
Interviewing employees .. Inspecting and copying books records accounts and other material that may be relevant to a matter under investigation .E.I Reserved ..
RESERVED .
REPRESENTATIVE Before starting work assign a representative to .
Receive the Engineers orders .
Prosecute the Engineers orders .
Supervise the workers .
Coordinate the subcontractors work The representative must be present at the job site while work is in progress .
Submit the representatives name and telephone number so the representative can be easily contacted to perform emergency work while work is not in progress . .
CHARACTER OF WORKERS If a worker appears to the Engineer to be incompetent or acts disorderly or improperly discharge the worker immediately upon request .
Do not employ that worker again on the work .
..
RESERVED .
COORDINATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES .A General Other entities may perform work at or near the job site and material sources at any time .
Coordinate activities to avoid delays .
Each contractor or other entity performing work at or near the job or material site is responsible to the other for damage to work persons or property and for costs due to unnecessary delays .
.B Permits Licenses Agreements and Certifications .B General Comply with PLACs .
The Department makes PLAC changes under section ..
Maintain a copy of each PLAC at the job site .
.B Before Award To make a change to a PLAC made available to you before award submit the proposed change .
The Department sends the proposed change to the appropriate authority for consideration .
.B After Award Confirm with the Engineer which afteraward PLACs are obtained by the Department and which are obtained by the Contractor .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK To make a change to an afteraward PLAC obtained by the Department submit the proposed change .
The Department sends the proposed change to the appropriate authority for consideration .
Obtain those PLACs to be issued to you and pay the fees and costs associated with obtaining them .
Submit copies of Contractorobtained afteraward PLACs .
.B ContractorProperty Owner Agreement Before procuring material from or disposing of material on nonhighway property .
Submit a written agreement from the property owner .. For the use of the property .. Absolving the Department from responsibility in connection with the property .
Obtain authorization to start Before Contract acceptance submit a document signed by the owner of the material source or disposal site stating that the Contractor has complied with the Contractorowner agreement .
.C Railroad Relations If the Contract includes an agreement with a railroad company the Department makes the provisions of the agreement available in the Information Handout in the document titled Railroad Relations and Insurance Requirements .
Comply with the requirements in the document .
.D Occupied Improvements within the RightofWay Reserved .E Water Meter Charges Section .E applies if a bid item for water meter charges is shown on the Bid Item List .
The charges are specified in a special provision for section .E .
The local water authority will install the water meters .
The local water authority charges for .
Furnishing and installing each water meter .
Connecting to the local water authoritys main water line including any required hot tap or tee .
Furnishing and installing an extension pipe from the main water line to the water meter .
Sterilizing the extension pipe Make arrangements and pay the charges for the installation of the water meters .
If the charge is changed at the time of installation the Department adjusts the lump sum price based on the difference between the specified charges and the changed charges .
.F Irrigation Water Service Charges Reserved .G.J Reserved ..
RESERVED .
SUBMITTALS .A General Section .
includes specifications for action and informational submittals .
Any submittal not specified as an informational submittal is an action submittal .
Submit action and informational submittals to the Engineer .
Each sheet of a submittal must include .
Contract number .
DistrictCountyRoutePost Mile .
Structure name and number if any SECTION CONTROL OF WORK The Department rejects a submittal if it has any error or omission .
If the last day for submitting a document falls on a Saturday or holiday it may be submitted on the next business day with the same effect as if it had been submitted on the day specified .
Convert foreign language documents to English and US customary units .
.B Action Submittals .B General Maintain a sequential list of action submittals except for samples test samples and material sources .
With each individual submittal submit a copy of the updated list .
Submit an action submittal before the start of the affected work to allow for review and corrections without work delays .
Except for test samples obtain the Departments authorization for action submittals before you perform work based on them .
Except for shop drawings and test samples allow days for review .
For a revised action submittal allow the same number of days for review as for the original submittal .
The time allowed for the review of an action submittal starts when the Department receives the submittal .
Do not change the scope of work on revised submittals .
The Departments authorization of an action submittal does not void any Contract part .
.B Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings as specified and as otherwise required to control the work .
Each drawing and calculation sheet must be in black ink and sequentially numbered .
Each drawing sheet must .
Be by inches .
Be on a minimum of lb paper .
Have text of a minimum nominal height of inch Each calculation sheet must .
Be by inches .
Have text of a minimum point font Text and graphics must be legible for photocopying and reduction .
Calculations must demonstrate the design adequacy .
Calculations specified as independently checked must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State and who did not seal and sign the drawings .
Allow days for the review .
If multiple sets are submitted simultaneously or an additional set is submitted before the review of a previously submitted set is complete designate the sequence that the sets are to be reviewed .
Allow the review time specified plus days for each additional set .
A set consists of or fewer sheets .
If drawings require corrections the Department .
Describes the deficiencies .
Stamps the drawings with the date that the review stopped .
Returns the drawings Show the set revision number .
Uniquely number each revised detail .
Show the number in an inverted triangle near the revised portion of the detail .
In a legend describe and date the revision .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK Upon review completion the Department returns copy that shows the authorized date .
To make a change to an authorized drawing submit it as specified for a new submittal .
Note the changes .
After the work shown on the drawings is complete submit electronic copies of asbuilt drawings .
Include an index of the sheet numbers and titles on the st sheet for each structure .
Arrange the drawings in the drawingnumber order shown in the index .
.B.B Reserved .C Informational Submittals Informational submittals include .
Assignments .
Certificates of compliance .
Manufacturers instructions not associated with drawing submittals .
Notifications .
PLACs .
Subcontracts .
QC test data QC test results and QC evaluation reports ..
RESERVED .
CONSTRUCTION SURVEYS The Department places stakes and marks under Chapter Construction Surveys of the Departments Surveys Manual .
Submit your request for Departmentfurnished stakes .
Once the staking area is ready for stakes .
On a Request for Construction Staking form After your submittal the Department starts staking within business days .
Preserve stakes and marks placed by the Department .
If the stakes or marks are destroyed the Department replaces them at the Departments earliest convenience and deducts the cost. . RECORDS .A General Reserved .B Record Retention Retain project records from bid preparation through .
Final payment .
Resolution of claims if any For at least years after the later of these retain cost records including records of .
Bid preparation .
Overhead .
Payrolls .
Payments to subcontractors and suppliers .
Cost accounting Maintain the records in an organized way in the original format electronic and hard copy conducive to professional review and audit .
.C Record Inspection Copying and Auditing Make your records available for inspection copying and auditing by State representatives for the same time frame specified under section .B .
The records of subcontractors and suppliers must be made available for inspection copying and auditing by State representatives for the same period .
Before SECTION CONTROL OF WORK Contract acceptance the State representative notifies the Contractor subcontractor or supplier business days before inspection copying or auditing .
If an audit is to start more than days after Contract acceptance the State representative notifies the Contractor subcontractor or supplier of the date when the audit is to start .
.D Cost Accounting Records Maintain cost accounting records for the project distinguishing between the following work cost categories .
Work performed based on bid item prices .
Change order work other than extra work .
Distinguish this work by .. Bid item prices .. Force account ..
Agreed price .
Extra work .
Distinguish extra work by .. Bid item prices .. Force account ..
Agreed price ..
Specialist billing .
Work performed under potential claim records .
Overhead .
Work performed by subcontractors suppliers owneroperators and professional services Cost accounting records must include .
Final cost code lists and definitions .
Itemization of the materials used and copies of the corresponding vendors invoices .
Direct cost of labor .
Equipment rental charges .
Workers certified payrolls .
Equipment ..
Size ..
Type ..
Identification number ..
Hours operated .E Change Order Bills Maintain separate records for change order work costs .
Submit change order bills using the Departments Internet change order billing system .
The Contractor submitting and the Engineer authorizing a changeorder bill using the Internet change order billing system is the same as each party signing the bill .
The Department provides billing system .
Training within days of your request .
Accounts and user identification to your assigned representatives after a representative has received training Each representative must maintain a unique password .
..
RESERVED .
NONCOMPLIANT AND UNAUTHORIZED WORK Correct or remove and replace work that does not comply with the Contract is unauthorized or both .
The Department does not pay for any of the following .
Corrective removal or replacement work .
Unauthorized work SECTION CONTROL OF WORK If ordered submit a work plan for the corrective removal or replacement work .
If you fail to comply promptly with an order under section .
the Department may correct remove or replace noncompliant or unauthorized work .
The Department deducts the cost of this work. . JOB SITE APPEARANCE Keep the job site neat .
In areas visible to the public .
If practicable dispose of debris removed during clearing and grubbing concurrently with its removal .
If stockpiling is necessary dispose of debris weekly. . Furnish trash bins for construction debris .
Place the debris in trash bins daily. . For falsework to be reused stack the forms neatly and concurrently with their removal. . AREAS FOR USE Occupy the highway only for purposes necessary to perform the work .
If no Stateowned area is designated for the Contractors use you may arrange for temporary storage with the Department .
Defend indemnify and hold the State harmless to the same extent as under section ..
The Department does not allow temporary residences within the highway. . EQUIPMENT Legibly stencil or stamp at a clearly visible location on each piece of equipment except hand tools an identifying number and .
On compacting equipment its make model number and empty gross weight that is either the manufacturers rated weight or the scale weight .
On meters and on the loadreceiving element and indicators of each scale the make model serial number and manufacturers rated capacity Submit a list describing each piece of equipment and its identifying number .
Upon request submit the manufacturers information that designates portable vehicle scale capacities .
For proportioning materials use measuring devices material plant controllers and undersupports complying with section .B .
Measuring devices must be tested and approved under California Test in the Departments presence by any of the following .
County Sealer of Weights and Measures .
Scale Service Agency .
Official of the Division of Measurement Standards The indicator overtravel must be at least of the loading travel .
The indicators must be enclosed against moisture and dust .
Group the measuring system dials such that the smallest increment for each indicator can be read from the location at which proportioning is controlled .
..
RESERVED .
PROPERTY AND FACILITY PRESERVATION .A General Preserve and protect .
Highway improvements and facilities Adjacent property .
Waterways .
ESAs .
Lands administered by other agencies SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .
Roadside vegetation not to be removed .
Railroads and railroad equipment .
Nonhighway facilities including utilities .
Survey monuments .
Departments instrumentation Temporary work Immediately report damage to the Engineer .
If you cause damage you are responsible .
The Department may make a temporary repair to restore service to a damaged facility .
Install suitable safeguards to preserve and protect facilities from damage .
Install temporary facilities such as sheet piling cribbing bulkheads shores or other supports necessary to support existing facilities or support material carrying the facilities .
.B Landscape If you damage plants not to be removed .
Dispose of them unless the Engineer authorizes you to reduce them to chips and spread the chips within the highway at locations designated by the Engineer .
Replace them Replace plants with plants of the same species .
Replace trees with inchbox trees .
Replace shrubs with no .
container shrubs .
Replace ground cover plants with plants from flats .
Replace Carpobrotus ground cover plants with plants from cuttings .
Plant ground cover plants foot on center .
If a plant establishment period is specified replace plants before the start of the plant establishment period otherwise replace plants at least days before Contract acceptance .
Water each plant immediately after planting and saturate the backfill soil around and below the roots or the ball of earth around the roots of each plant .
Water as necessary to maintain plants in a healthy condition until Contract acceptance .
.C Railroad Property If working on or adjacent to railroad property do not interfere with railroad operations .
For an excavation on or affecting railroad property submit work plans showing the system to be used to protect the railroad facilities .
Instead of the days specified in section .B allow days for the review of the plans .
If the Contract does not include an agreement with a railroad company do not allow personnel or equipment on railroad property .
Prevent material equipment and debris from falling onto railroad property .
.D Nonhighway Facilities The Department may rearrange a nonhighway facility during the Contract .
Rearrangement of a nonhighway facility includes installation relocation alteration or removal of the facility .
The Department may authorize facility owners and their agents to enter the highway to perform rearrangement work for their facilities or to make connections or repairs to their property .
Coordinate activities to avoid delays .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before you contact the regional notification center under Govt Code et seq .
Failure to contact the notification center prohibits excavation .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK Before starting work that could damage or interfere with underground infrastructure locate the infrastructure described in the Contract including laterals and other appurtenances and determine the presence of other underground infrastructure inferred from visible facilities such as buildings meters and junction boxes .
Notify the Engineer if the infrastructure described in the Contract can not be found .
If after giving the notice you find the infrastructure in a substantially different location from that described finding the infrastructure is change order work .
Underground infrastructure described in the Contract may be in different locations from those described and additional infrastructure may exist .
Upon discovering an underground main or trunk line not described in the Contract immediately notify the Engineer and the infrastructure owner .
The Engineer orders the locating and protecting of the infrastructure .
The locating and protecting is change order work .
If ordered repair infrastructure damage .
If the damage is not due to your negligence the repair is change order work .
If necessary underground infrastructure rearrangement is not described in the Contract the Engineer may order you to perform the work .
The rearrangement is change order work .
If you want infrastructure rearrangement different from that described in the Contract .
Notify the Engineer .
Make an arrangement with the infrastructure owner .
Obtain authorization for the rearrangement .
Pay the infrastructure owner any additional cost The Department does not adjust time or payment for a rearrangement different from that described the Contract .
Immediately notify the Engineer of a delay due to .
Presence of main line underground infrastructure not described in the Contract or in a substantially different location .
Rearrangement different from that described in the Contract .E Survey Monuments Protect survey monuments on and off the highway .
Upon discovery of a survey monument not identified and located by the Department immediately .
Stop work near the monument .
Notify the Engineer Do not resume work near the monument until authorized . .
MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION .A General Maintain and protect work until the Department has granted relief from maintenance or accepted the Contract .
Do not remove any padlock used to secure a portion of the work until the Engineer is present to replace it .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before removing the lock .
Prevent construction equipment that exceeds the maximum weight limits in Veh Code Div from operating on completed or existing treated base pavement or structures .
.B Load Limits .B General For areas within the project limits and subject to the Contractor providing protective measures and repairing related damage construction equipment exceeding the size or weight limits in Veh Code Div may move over SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .
Public roads within the highway .
Treated base or pavement under construction or completed .
Culverts and pipes .
Structures not open to traffic that are designed for AASHTO HS live loading except culverts and pipes .
Before crossing one of these structures submit the dimensions and maximum axle loadings of the equipment and unless a material hauling equipment lane on a bridge is shown on the drawings comply with the following specifications ..
The maximum loading on a bridge due to pneumatictired truck and trailer combinations must not exceed lb for single axles lb for tandem axles lb total gross load for single vehicles lb total gross load for truck and trailer or semitrailer combinations ..
The loading on a bridge due to and axle pneumatictired earthmovers must not exceed that shown in the following table Allowable Construction Loading on Bridges for and Axle Earthmovers Bridge girder centertocenter spacing feet Maximum axle loading pounds .
and over NOTE Minimum axle spacing For axle earthmovers Axles to feet For axle earthmovers Axles to feet Axles to feet .
Completed or existing base pavement and structures under the Departments Transportation Permits Manual whether open to the public or not Loads imposed on existing new or partially completed structures must not exceed the loadcarrying capacity of the structure or any portion of the structure as determined by AASHTO LRFD with interims and California Amendments Design Strength Limit State II .
The fc to be used in computing the load carrying capacity must be the smaller of the following .
Actual compressive strength at the time of loading .
Value of fc shown on the plans for that portion of the structure or .
times the value of fc shown on the plans for portions of the structure where no fc is shown .B Increased Load Carrying Capacity You may submit a request to the Department to redesign a structure to increase its loadcarrying capacity .
The Department does not authorize a redesign for any of the following .
Load increase of more than lb per single axle or pair of axles less than feet apart .
Total gross vehicle weight more than lb Your request to the Department must include .
Description of the structure or structures .
Detailed overload description .
Date the revised plans are required .
Signed statement agreeing to pay the costs including the engineering costs SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .
Signed statement agreeing to waive a time extension request for any delay If the Department authorizes a redesign to strengthen the structure the Engineer notifies you of the changes estimated cost and availability date of the revised plans .
If the cost and date are satisfactory to you the Engineer prepares a Change Order for the changes .
.B Material Hauling Equipment Lane on Bridges Section .B applies to a bridge constructed with a material hauling equipment lane .
You may cross the bridge with pneumatictired material hauling equipment that exceeds the size and weight limits specified but that does not exceed the load limits shown on the materialhaulingequipment loading diagram on the plans .
For each bridge with a material hauling equipment lane .
Construct a minimum foot approach at each bridge end to a grade that provides a smooth transition to the bridge roadway grade .
Maintain these approaches in a smooth and uniform condition during the operation of the equipment . .
Operate equipment such that jolting and bouncing of the equipment while crossing the bridge is prevented. . Confine equipment to the material hauling lane using temporary barriers unless the plans show that the entire bridge may be used for hauling equipment and the permanent barriers are completed . .
Allow at most piece of equipment on the bridge at one time .
If ordered verify the weight of loaded material hauling equipment by weighing .
The Department furnishes individual wheel or axle type scales .
The Department weighs the equipment within the project limits and within the highway at a location accessible to the equipment .
You determine the exact weighing location .
Install and maintain the scales .
Installing and maintaining scales is change order work . .
MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION RELIEF You may request relief from maintenance and protection responsibilities for a completed work part .
The work part must have been completed under the Contract and to the Engineers satisfaction .
Work parts eligible for relief include .
Completed .
mi section of roadway or a . mi section of one roadway of a divided highway or frontage road including ..
Planned roadway protection work ..
Lighting ..
Required traffic control .. Access facilities .
Bridge or other major structure .
Complete unit of a traffic control signal system or a highway lighting system .
Nonhighway facility constructed for another agency If relieved by the Department you are not required to perform further work on that part of work .
You are not responsible for damage to a relieved work part including damage caused by traffic or the elements except for that caused by your own activities or negligence. . DAMAGE REPAIR AND RESTORATION .A General Before Contract acceptance restore damaged work to the same state of completion as before the damage .
Restoration of damaged work includes restoration of erected falsework and formwork .
The Department does not adjust payment for repair or restoration that the Engineer determines was caused by your failure to construct the work under the Contract or protect the work .
.B Damage Caused by an Act of God Under Pub Cont Code the Department pays for repair or restoration to damaged work in excess of percent of the total bid if the damage was caused by an act of God .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK Submit a request for repair or restoration work payment before performing work other than emergency work .
The Engineer determines the repair or restoration work cost under section .
except markups are not allowed .
The Department may change the Contract for the areas requiring repair or restoration .
If the cost for the changes exceeds the repair or restoration cost based on the Bid Item List the Engineer determines the payment adjustment under section .. .C Landscape Damage .C General Repair slopes or other existing facilities that were damaged after starting job site activities and before starting plant establishment .
As ordered replace plants that have been damaged from either or both of the following conditions .
Ambient air temperature falling below degrees F during the plant establishment period .
Department or its supplier restricting or stopping water delivery during the plant establishment period This plant replacement work is change order work .
.C Plant Establishment Period of Years or More Section .C applies if a plant establishment period of years or more is shown on the Notice to Bidders .
Repair slopes or other existing facilities that were damaged before starting job site activities .
This work is change order work .
Repair slopes or other existing facilities that were damaged by a change in the runoff pattern from that which existed on the date of the Notice to Bidders and was the result of work by others within the highway .
This work is change order work .
Replace plants and repair slopes irrigation systems and other highway facilities damaged as a result of rain during the plant establishment period .
The Department pays the accumulated costs in excess of the greater of percent of the plant establishment work or the Contractor pays the other .
The Engineer determines the repair cost under section .. ..
RESERVED .
REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION Submit an RFI upon recognition of any event or question of fact arising under the Contract .
The Engineer responds to the RFI within business days .
Proceed with the work unless otherwise ordered .
You may protest the Engineers response by .
Submitting an Initial Potential Claim Record form within business days after receiving the Engineers response .
Complying with section . .
POTENTIAL CLAIMS AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION .A General Minimize and mitigate the impacts of work or events for which you will make a potential claim .
For each potential claim assign an identification number determined by chronological sequencing and the st date of the potential claim .
Use the identification number for each potential claim on the .
Initial Potential Claim Record form .
Supplemental Potential Claim Record form .
Full and Final Potential Claim Record form SECTION CONTROL OF WORK Failure to comply with this procedure is .
Waiver of the potential claim and a waiver of the right to a corresponding claim for the disputed work in the administrative claim procedure .
Bar to arbitration Pub Cont Code .
.B Initial Potential Claim Record Submit an Initial Potential Claim Record form within business days of the Engineers response to the RFI or within business days from the date when a dispute arises due to an act or failure to act by the Engineer .
The Initial Potential Claim Record form establishes the claims nature and circumstances .
The nature and circumstances must remain consistent .
The Engineer responds within business days of receiving the form .
Proceed with the work for which you will make a potential claim unless otherwise ordered .
Within days of a request provide access to the project records determined necessary by the Engineer to evaluate the potential claim .
.C Supplemental Potential Claim Record Within days of submitting the Initial Potential Claim Record form submit a Supplemental Potential Claim Record form including .
Complete nature and circumstances causing the potential claim .
Contract specifications supporting the basis of a claim .
Estimated claim cost and an itemized breakdown of the individual costs stating how the estimate was determined .
TIA The Engineer evaluates the Supplemental Potential Claim Record form and responds within days of receiving the submittal .
To pursue a potential claim comply with sections .D and .E .
If the estimated cost or effect on the scheduled completion date changes update the Supplemental Potential Claim Record form information as soon as the change is recognized and submit this information .
.D Full and Final Potential Claim Record Notify the Engineer within days of the completion date of the potentially claimed work .
The Engineer authorizes this completion date or notifies you of a revised date .
Within days of the completion of the potentially claimed work submit a Full and Final Potential Claim Record form including .
Detailed factual account of the events causing the potential claim including ..
Pertinent dates ..
Locations .. Work items affected by the potential claim .
Contract documents supporting the potential claim and a statement of the reasons these parts support entitlement .
Itemized cost breakdown if a payment adjustment is requested .
Segregate costs into the following categories .. Labor including Individuals Classifications Regular and overtime hours worked Dates worked .. Materials including Invoices Purchase orders Location of materials either stored or incorporated into the work Dates materials were transported to the job site or incorporated into the work .. Equipment including Detailed descriptions including make model and serial number SECTION CONTROL OF WORK Hours of use Dates of use Equipment rates at the rental rate listed in Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates in effect when the affected work related to the claim was performed .
Detailed account of the time impact if a time adjustment is requested ..
Dates for the requested time .
.. Reasons for a time adjustment .
.. Contract documentation supporting the requested time adjustment .
.. TIA .
The TIA must demonstrate entitlement to a time adjustment . .
Identification and copies of your documents and copies of communications supporting the potential claim including certified payrolls bills canceled checks job cost reports payment records and rental agreements .
Relevant information references and arguments that support the potential claim The Department does not consider a Full and Final Potential Claim Record form that does not have the same nature circumstances and basis of claim as those specified on the Initial Potential Claim Record form and Supplemental Potential Claim Record form .
The Engineer evaluates the information presented in the Full and Final Potential Claim Record form and responds within days of its receipt unless the Full and Final Potential Claim Record form is submitted after Contract acceptance in which case a response may not be provided .
The Engineers receipt of the Full and Final Potential Claim Record form must be evidenced by postal return receipt or the Engineers written receipt if delivered by hand .
.E Alternative Dispute Resolution .E General .Ea General Section .E applies to a contract with or more original working days .
The parties in section .E means you and the Department .
Dispute meeting in section .E refers to both the traditional and informal dispute meeting processes .
The alternative dispute resolution process must be used for the timely resolution of disputes that arise out of the work .
You must comply with section .E to pursue a claim file for arbitration or file for litigation .
The alternative dispute resolution process is not a substitute for submitting an RFI or a potential claim record .
Do not use the alternative dispute resolution process for disputes between you and subcontractors or suppliers that have no grounds for a legal action against the Department .
If you fail to comply with section .
for a potential claim on behalf of a subcontractor or supplier you release the Department of the subcontractors potential claim .
Do not use the alternative dispute resolution process for quantification of disputes for overheadtype expenses or costs .
For disputes for overheadtype expenses or costs comply with section .D .
You the Department and the DRA or DRB must complete and comply with the Dispute Resolution Advisor Agreement form or Dispute Resolution Board Agreement form .
For these forms go to the Departments Division of Construction website .
No DRA or DRBrelated meetings are allowed until you the Department and the DRA or DRB execute the agreement .
However you the Department and the DRA or DRB may agree to sign and execute the agreement at the st meeting .
.Eb Establishment of Procedures Upon selecting the DRA or DRB the parties must meet with the DRA or DRB to establish and agree to procedures for .
Submitting documents SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .
Conducting hearings .
Providing recommendations .
Associated tasks The established procedures must comply with the Contract and the Dispute Resolution Advisor Agreement form or Dispute Resolution Board Agreement form .
The procedures need not comply with laws of evidence .
.Ec Dispute Meetings You must follow the traditional dispute meeting process to pursue a potential claim .
Either you or the Department may refer a dispute to the DRA or DRB .
To request a dispute meeting submit a copy of the referral and supporting documentation to the DRA or DRB .
The documentation must describe the dispute in individual discrete segments such that resolved and unresolved discrete segments are differentiated .
Include an estimate of the cost of the affected work and impacts to the work completion date .
A copy of all documents submitted to the DRA or DRB must be simultaneously submitted to the other party .
The Department provides the DRA or DRB with the Contract documents and provides conference facilities for meetings at no cost to you .
Neither you nor the Department may meet with or discuss Contract issues with the DRA or DRB members unless the other party is present .
Only the Engineer the Departments area construction engineer or the Departments structure representative and your superintendent or project manager may present information at a dispute meeting .
If the dispute involves a subcontractor the subcontractors superintendent or project manager must be present at the dispute meeting and may present information .
Only persons who are directly involved with the Contract and who have direct knowledge of the dispute may participate in the dispute meeting .
No participation of either partys attorney is allowed .
However you and the Department may agree to a request from the DRA or DRB for participation of a person not associated with the Contract to provide technical services if the services are necessary to help the DRA or DRB make a recommendation .
If the DRA or DRB needs outside technical services you and the Department must agree to the services before they are acquired .
If you the Department and the DRA or DRB agree the technical services may be provided by technical staff who works for you or the Department .
During a dispute meeting each party presents its position makes rebuttals provides relevant documents and responds to DRA or DRB questions and requests .
The following is not allowed .
Testimony under oath .
Crossexamination .
Reporting of the procedures by a shorthand reporter or by electronic means If either party fails to attend a dispute meeting all documents submitted by the nonattending party is considered as the nonattending partys entire argument .
.Ed Informal Dispute Meetings You and the Department may resolve small and uncomplicated disputes using an informal process .
You and the Department may use this process only if you the Department and the DRA or DRB agree its use is appropriate for resolving the dispute .
The informal dispute meeting process is independent from the traditional process .
The Department does not grant time extensions for the traditional dispute process if the informal dispute process is used .
You and the Department must each provide the DRA or DRB a page brief description of the dispute with supporting documentation and any additional information requested by the DRA or DRB .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK In an informal dispute meeting each party presents its position and receives the DRAs or DRBs recommendation orally on the same day the dispute is heard .
You and the Department may ask for clarification of the DRAs or DRBs recommendation within business days of the dispute meeting .
The DRA or DRB will not be bound by its informal recommendation if a dispute is later heard in a traditional dispute meeting .
If the dispute is not resolved using the informal dispute meeting process comply with the traditional dispute meeting specifications .
.Ee Recommendations Recommendations resulting from the alternative dispute resolution process are nonbinding .
If you and the Department resolve the dispute with the aid of the DRAs or DRBs recommendation implement the resolution .
.Ef Completion of Alternative Dispute Resolution All alternative dispute resolution activities must be completed before Contract acceptance .
Accelerated timeframes may be used if you the Department and the DRA or DRB agree .
If a dispute becomes an unresolved claim after Contract acceptance comply with section .D .
Neither you nor the Department may call the DRA or DRB members who served on the Contract as a witness in arbitration or other proceedings that may arise from the Contract .
You and the Department must jointly indemnify and hold harmless the DRA or DRB members from and against all claims damages losses and expenses including attorneys fees arising out of and resulting from the findings and recommendations of the DRA or DRB .
.Eg Payment Pay the DRA or each DRB member per day for the DRAs or DRBs participation at each onsite meeting except if the DRA or a DRB member serves on more than one Department DRA or DRB the must be divided evenly among the contracts .
Onsite meetings include .
Initial project meeting .
Scheduled progress meetings for a project with a DRB .
Dispute meetings This payment includes full compensation for onsite time travel expenses transportation lodging travel time and incidentals for each day or portion thereof the DRA or DRB member is at a DRA or DRB meeting .
Before a DRA or DRB member spends any time reviewing plans and specifications evaluating positions preparing recommendations or performs any other offsite DRA or DRBrelated tasks you and the Department must agree to pay for the tasks .
Pay the DRA or DRB member per hour for these tasks .
This payment includes full compensation for incidentals such as expenses for telephone fax and computer services .
The Department reimburses you for of the invoiced costs to the DRA or DRB and of the costs of any technical services agreed to .
Submit a change order bill and associated invoices with the original supporting documents in the form of a canceled check or bank statement to receive reimbursement .
Do not add markups to the change order bill .
The Department does not pay for any DRA or DRBrelated work performed after Contract acceptance .
The Department does not pay your cost of preparing for and attending a dispute resolution meeting .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .E Dispute Resolution Advisor .Ea General Section .E applies to a contract with a total bid from million to million .
The DRA is a singlemember board you and the Department establish .
.Eb DRA Selection Within days of Contract approval you and the Department must select the DRA using the following procedure .
You and the Department each nominates DRA member candidates .
Each candidate must be on the Departments Dispute Resolution Advisor Candidates List at the Departments Division of Construction website or must .. Be knowledgeable in the type of construction and contract documents anticipated by the Contract .. Have completed training by the Dispute Resolution Board Foundation .. Have served on at least dispute resolution boards on a Department contract as a member or at least dispute resolution boards on a Department contract as the chairman .. Have no prior direct involvement on this Contract .. Have no financial interest in the Contract or with the parties subcontractors suppliers consultants or associated legal or business services within months before award and during the Contract except for payments for Department DRA or DRB services or payments for retirement or pensions from either party not tied to dependent on or affected by the net worth of the party .
You and the Department must request a disclosure statement from each nominated DRA candidate and must furnish the statements to the other party .
Each statement must include .. Resume of the candidates experience ..
Declaration statement that describes past present anticipated and planned professional or personal relationships with each of the following Parties involved in the Contract Parties principals Parties counsel Associated subcontractors and suppliers .
You and the Department must select of the candidates to be the DRA .
If you and the Department can not agree on candidate you and the Department each must select of the nominated by the other and the DRA is decided between the candidates by a coin toss .
.Ec DRA Replacement The services of the DRA may end at any time with a notice of at least days if either of the following occurs .
The DRA resigns . .
Either you or the Department replaces the DRA for failing to comply with the required employment or financial disclosure conditions of the DRA as described in the Contract and the Dispute Resolution Advisor Agreement form .
A DRA replacement is selected the same way as the original DRA .
The selection of a replacement DRA must start upon determination of the need for a replacement and must be completed within days .
The Dispute Resolution Advisor Agreement form must be amended to reflect the change of the DRA .
.Ed DRA Traditional Dispute Meeting If you choose to pursue a potential claim refer the dispute to the DRA within business days after receiving the Engineers response to your Supplemental Potential Claim Record form .
The dispute meeting must be scheduled no later than days after the DRA receives the referral unless you and the Department otherwise agree .
At least days before the scheduled dispute meeting each party must provide the DRA documentation that supports its position and any additional information requested by the DRA .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK If the DRA requests additional information within business days after the dispute meeting the party receiving the request must provide this information within business days of receiving the request .
The DRA provides a written recommendation within days of the dispute meeting unless you and the Department agree to allow more time .
Within business days of receiving the DRAs recommendation either you or the Department may request clarification of any part of the recommendation .
Only one request for clarification from each party is allowed per dispute .
Within days after receiving the DRAs recommendation each party must furnish a written response to the DRA indicating acceptance or rejection of the recommendation .
If a party rejects the recommendation and has new information that supports its position the party may request reconsideration .
The reconsideration request must be made within days after receiving the DRAs recommendation .
Only one reconsideration request from each party is allowed per dispute .
If both you and the Department accept the DRAs recommendation but can not agree on the time or payment adjustment within days of accepting the recommendation either party may request that the DRA recommend an adjustment .
.E Dispute Resolution Board .Ea General Section .E applies to a contract with a total bid of over million .
The DRB is a member board that you and the Department establish .
.Eb DRB Member Selection Within days of Contract approval you and the Department must select DRB members and establish the DRB using the following procedure .
You and the Department each nominates a DRB member candidate who is on the Departments approved list .
For the list of approved member candidates go to the Departments Division of Construction website .
If you or the Department nominates someone who is not on that list the candidate must .. Be knowledgeable in the type of construction and contract documents anticipated by the Contract .. Have completed training by the Dispute Resolution Board Foundation .. Have no prior direct involvement on this Contract .. Have no financial interest in the Contract or with the parties subcontractors suppliers consultants or associated legal or business services within months before award and during the Contract except for payments for Department DRA or DRB services or payments for retirement or pensions from either party not tied to dependent on or affected by the net worth of the party .
You and the Department must request a disclosure statement from each nominated DRB member candidate and must each furnish it to the other party .
The statement must include .. Resume of the candidates experience ..
Declaration statement that describes past present anticipated and planned professional or personal relationships with each of the following Parties involved in the Contract Parties principals Parties counsel Associated subcontractors and suppliers .
You and the Department are allowed ..
Onetime objection to the others candidate without stating a reason ..
Objection to any of the others subsequent candidates based on a specific breach of the candidates responsibilities or qualifications under items and above .
If you or the Department objects to the others candidate the party whose candidate was objected to must nominate another DRB candidate within days . .
The st candidate from a party that receives no objection becomes that partys DRB member. . You and the Department each provide written notification to your selected DRB member .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .
Within days of their notifications the selected DRB members recommend to you and the Department the rd DRB member candidate and provide that candidates disclosure statement . .
Within days of the recommendation you and the Department must each notify the first DRB members whether you approve or disapprove of the recommended rd DRB member candidate . .
If the DRB members can not agree on the rd DRB candidate they will submit a list of candidates to you and the Department for final selection and approval . .
If the DRB members do not recommend a rd DRB candidate within days of notification of their selections or if you and the Department do not agree on the rd DRB member candidate within days of the recommendation or if you and the Department do not agree on any of the candidates on the list provided by the first selected DRB members you and the Department each must select candidates from the current list of arbitrators certified by the Public Works Contract Arbitration Committee established by Pub Cont Code et seq .
who will be willing to serve as a DRB member .
The first selected DRB members must select the rd member in a blind draw of these candidates . .
The DRB members then decide which of the three will act as the DRB chairman .
If you and the Department do not agree with the selected chairman the rd member will act as the DRB chairman .
.Ec DRB Member Replacement The service of a DRB member may end at any time with a notice of at least days if any of the following occurs .
A member resigns .
The Department replaces its selected member .
You replace your selected member .
The Departments and your selected members replace the rd member .
Either you or the Department replace any member for failing to comply with the required employment or financial disclosure conditions of DRB membership as described in the Contract and in the Dispute Resolution Board Agreement form .
Replacing any DRB member must be accomplished by written notification to the DRB and the other party with substantiation for replacing the member .
A replacement DRB member is selected the same way as the original DRB member .
Selecting a replacement must start upon determination of the need for a replacement and must be completed within days .
The Dispute Resolution Board Agreement form must be amended to reflect the change to the DRB .
.Ed DRB Progress Meetings You and the Department must periodically meet with the DRB and visit the job site so the DRB members can keep abreast of construction activities and develop familiarity with the work in progress .
The progress meetings must occur at the start of the project and at least once every months after that .
Both parties must attend each progress meeting .
You and the Department may agree to waive scheduled progress meetings when the only work remaining is plant establishment .
.Ee DRB Traditional Dispute Meeting If you choose to pursue a potential claim refer the dispute to the DRB within days after receiving the Engineers response to your Supplemental Potential Claim Record form unless a facilitated dispute resolution is included in the signed original partnering charter in which case make the referral within days after receiving the response .
The dispute meeting must be held no sooner than days and no later than days after the DRB receives the referral unless you and the Department otherwise agree .
At least days before the scheduled dispute meeting each party must furnish the DRB documentation that supports its position and any additional information requested by the DRB .
If the DRB requests additional information within days after the dispute meeting the party receiving the request must furnish this information within days of receiving the request .
SECTION CONTROL OF WORK The DRB provides a written recommendation report within days of the dispute meeting unless you and the Department agree to allow more time .
Within days of receiving the DRBs recommendation report either you or the Department may request clarification of any part of the report .
Only one request for clarification from each party is allowed per dispute .
Within days after receiving the DRBs recommendation each party must furnish a written response to the DRB indicating acceptance or rejection of the recommendation .
If a party rejects the recommendation and has new information that supports its position the party may request reconsideration .
The reconsideration request must be made within days after receiving the DRBs recommendation .
Only one request for reconsideration from each party is allowed per dispute .
If both you and the Department accept the DRBs recommendation but can not agree on the time or payment adjustment within days of accepting the recommendation either party may request that the DRB recommend an adjustment .
.F Reserved ..
RESERVED .
FINAL INSPECTION AND CONTRACT ACCEPTANCE When you complete the work request the Engineers final inspection .
If the Engineer determines that the work is complete the Engineer recommends Contract acceptance .
Immediately after Contract acceptance you are relieved from .
Maintenance and protection duties .
Responsibility for injury to persons or property or damage to the work occurring after Contract acceptance except as specified in section . .
GUARANTEE Guarantee that work remains free from substantial defects for year after Contract acceptance except for work parts for which you were relieved of maintenance and protection .
Guarantee each of these relieved work parts for year after the relief date .
The guarantee excludes damage or displacement caused by an event outside your control including .
Normal wear and tear .
Improper operation .
Insufficient maintenance .
Abuse .
Unauthorized change .
Act of God During the guarantee period repair or replace each work part having a substantial defect .
The Department does not pay for corrective work .
During corrective work activities provide the same insurance specified before Contract acceptance .
The Contract bonds must be in force until the later of the expiration of the guarantee period or the completion of the corrective work .
If a warranty specification conflicts with section .
comply with the warranty specification .
During the guarantee period the Engineer monitors the completed work .
If the Engineer finds work having a substantial defect the Engineer lists the defective work parts and furnishes you the list .
Within days of receipt of the list submit for authorization a detailed plan for correcting the work .
Include a schedule that includes .
Start and completion dates .
List of labor equipment materials and any special services you plan to use SECTION CONTROL OF WORK .
Work related to the corrective work including traffic control and temporary and permanent pavement markings The Engineer notifies you when the plan is authorized .
Start the corrective work and related work within days of notice .
If the Engineer determines corrective work is urgently required to prevent injury or property damage .
The Engineer furnishes you an order to start emergency repair work and a list of parts requiring corrective work .
Mobilize within hours and start work .
Submit a corrective work plan within business days of starting the emergency repair work If you fail to perform the work as specified the Department may perform the work and bill you .
..
RESERVED CONTROL OF MATERIALS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to the control of materials .
Store materials and samples in a way that preserves the quality and facilitates prompt inspection .
Material incorporated into the work must be new .
Before the preconstruction conference submit material source information on a Notice of Materials to be Used form. . DEPARTMENTFURNISHED MATERIALS Request Departmentfurnished materials except sign panels at least days before their scheduled installation .
Request sign panels at least days before their scheduled installation .
If the Department furnishes the material .
At the job site unload and store the material .
At a location other than the job site deliver the material to the job site and store it The Engineer orders the return and disposal of surplus Departmentfurnished material .
This returning and disposing of material is change order work .
You are responsible for the cost of replacing lost or damaged Departmentfurnished material .
The Department deducts replacement costs .
Departmentfurnished material not used in the work remains the property of the Department. . LOCAL MATERIALS Local material must be rock sand gravel earth or mineral material other than local borrow or selected material obtained or produced from a source in the work vicinity specifically for use on the project .
Local borrow must not be a material from an established commercial source .
Upon your request the Department tests material from an untested local source .
If satisfactory material from that source is used in the work the Department does not charge you for the tests otherwise the Department deducts the test costs. . BUY AMERICA .A General Reserved .B Crumb Rubber Pub Res Code d Furnish crumb rubber with a certificate of compliance .
Crumb rubber must be .
Produced in the United States .
Derived from waste tires taken from vehicles owned and operated in the United States .C Steel and Iron Materials Steel and iron materials must be melted and manufactured in the United States except .
Foreign pig iron and processed pelletized and reduced iron ore may be used in the domestic production of the steel and iron materials .
If the total combined cost of the materials does not exceed the greater of .
percent of the total bid or materials produced outside the United States may be used if authorized Furnish steel and iron materials to be incorporated into the work with certificates of compliance and certified mill test reports .
Mill test reports must indicate where the steel and iron were melted and manufactured .
SECTION CONTROL OF MATERIALS All melting and manufacturing processes for these materials including an application of a coating must occur in the United States .
Coating includes all processes that protect or enhance the value of the material to which the coating is applied . .
SPECIFIC BRAND OR TRADE NAME AND SUBSTITUTION A reference to a specific brand or trade name establishes a quality standard and is not intended to limit competition .
You may use a product that is equal to or better than the specified brand or trade name if authorized .
Submit a substitution request with a time period that .
Follows Contract award .
Allows days for review .
Causes no delay Include substantiating data with the substitution request that proves that substitution .
Causes no delay .
Is of equal or better quality and suitability QUALITY ASSURANCE .
GENERAL .A General Section includes provisions related to quality .
Quality assurance includes all activities used to provide an overall level of quality for the project and determine compliance with the Contract documents .
Quality control includes sampling testing and inspections performed under your QC program to control material quality and ensure the specified quality characteristics for the project are met .
Department acceptance includes sampling testing and inspections performed by the Department to verify compliance with the Contract .
The Departments independent assurance program is described in the Departments Independent Assurance Manual Procedures for Accreditation of Laboratories and Qualification of Testers .
For the manual go to the METS website .
For a material specified to comply with a State Specification number the material may comply with a later version of the specification .
Obtain State Specifications from METS .
For a material specified to comply with a requirement for a quality characteristic shown in the following table the quality characteristic is tested under the corresponding California Test California Tests Quality characteristic California Test Relative compaction or Sand equivalent Resistance Rvalue Gradation sieve analysis Durability index .B Authorized Facility Audit Lists Section .B applies where a facility is specified to be on an Authorized Facility Audit List .
An audit authorized by the Department not more than years before completion of the fabrication process is acceptable if the Department determines the audit was for the same type of work to be performed .
For procedures to be included on an Authorized Facility Audit List go to the METS website .
SECTION CONTROL OF MATERIALS .C Authorized Material Lists Section .C applies where a material is specified to be on an Authorized Material List .
The material must be on an Authorized Material List before it is incorporated into the work .
For procedures to be included on an Authorized Material List go to the METS website .
.D Authorized Material Source Lists Section .D applies where a material is specified to be on an Authorized Material Source List .
The material source must be on an Authorized Material Source List before the item from the source is incorporated into the work .
For procedures to be included on an Authorized Material Source List go to the METS website .
.E Material Source Inspection and Testing Section .E applies if a material is to be inspected or tested at the source .
Submit an inspection request form .
At least business days before the requested inspection date for a material source within California. . At least business days before the requested inspection date for a material source outside California but within the United States. . days before the planned production start for a material source outside the United States .
Notify the Engineer at least days before the actual start .
For the inspection request form and the procedure for its submittal go to the METS website .
Notify the Engineer of each submittal .
For each item shown in the following table the Department deducts the corresponding amount shown SECTION CONTROL OF MATERIALS Source Inspection Expense Deductions Item Distancea Deduction Steel pipe piling Prestressing system Tier and tier precast concrete members Epoxycoated reinforcement Structural steel for sign structures Miscellaneous metal Extinguishable message signs Variable message signs Changeable message signs Service equipment enclosures Telephone demarcation cabinets Closed circuit television cabinets Weighinmotion cabinets Highway advisory radio cabinets Poles for electrical systems for poles and for every multiple of poles thereafter Structural steel The greater of . . .lb The greater of . . .lb Structural steel paint The greater of . . .sq ft The greater of . . .sq ft Check samples High mast poles PTFE bearings lots PTFE bearings lots aDistance is airline miles from both Sacramento and Los Angeles to the inspection source .
.F Test Samples Section .F applies where a test sample is specified or if a test sample is requested .
Notify the Engineer days before taking a sample .
Submit material to be tested with a Sample Identification Card .
For the card go to the METS website .
Restore work immediately after sampling .
If requested obtain the Departments authorization for the material before incorporating the material represented by the test sample into the work .
.G.K Reserved .
QUALITY CONTROL .A General Material production and testing equipment must measure accurately and precisely .
SECTION CONTROL OF MATERIALS .B Quality Control Program Develop implement and maintain a QC program .
Prepare and maintain QC records including .
Names and qualifications of .. Samplers .. Testers ..
Inspectors .
Testing laboratories identification and certifications .
Testing equipment calibrations and certifications .
Inspection reports .
Sampling and testing records organized by date and type of material .
Test results with comparison of quality characteristic requirements .
Test results in relation to action and any suspension limits .
Records of corrective actions and suspensions Within hours notify the Engineer of any noncompliance identified by your QC program .
Allow the Department access to all QC records .
Submit QC test data and QC test results within business days of test completion .
.C Quality Control Manager Section .C applies to work requiring a QC manager .
The QC manager must be responsible directly to you for the quality of the work including materials and workmanship performed by you and your subcontractors .
Assign the QC manager before the start of the affected work .
The QC manager must be the sole individual responsible for .
Receiving reviewing and approving all correspondence submittals and reports before they are submitted to the Department .
Signing the QC plan .
Implementing the QC plan .
Maintaining the QC records The QC manager must be your employee or must be hired by a subcontractor providing only QC services .
The QC manager must not be employed or compensated by a subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who will provide other services or materials for the project .
Notify the Engineer of the name and contact information of the QC manager .
.D Quality Control Plans Submit copies of each authorized QC plan .
Make copy available at each location where work is performed. . DEPARTMENT ACCEPTANCE .A General The Department may use multiple acceptance methods for a material .
Specifications in sections titled Department Acceptance do not include all requirements on which the Department makes its acceptance .
The Department may inspect sample and test materials for compliance with the Contract at any time .
Allow the Department to record including photograph and video to ensure a material is produced to comply with the Contract .
You may examine the records and reports of tests the Department performs .
SECTION CONTROL OF MATERIALS Schedule work to allow time for the Departments inspection sampling and testing .
The Department deducts testing costs for work that does not comply with the Contract .
The Department may retest material previously tested and authorized for use .
If the Department notifies you of a retest furnish resources for retesting .
.B Job Site Inspection and Testing Section .B applies if a material is to be inspected or tested at the job site .
The material must be authorized for use before it is incorporated into the work .
.C Certificates of Compliance Section .C applies where a certificate of compliance is specified and if any material is produced outside the United States .
Submit a certificate of compliance .
Before the material is incorporated into the work .
For each lot of the material .
Identify the lot on the certificate .
Signed by the producer of the material and stating that the material complies with the Contract LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to your .
Compliance with laws .
Responsibilities for public safety and convenience .
Responsibilities for indemnification insurance and liability .
LAWS .A General Comply with laws regulations orders and decrees applicable to the project .
Indemnify and defend the State against any claim or liability arising from the violation of a law regulation order or decree by you or your employees .
Immediately report to the Engineer a discrepancy or inconsistency between the Contract and a law regulation order or decree .
If the Department incurs any fines or penalties because of your failure to comply with a law regulation order or decree the Department deducts the amount of the fine or penalty .
Immediately notify the Engineer if a regulatory agency requests access to the job site or to records .
Submit a list of documents provided to the agency and issued enforcement actions .
.B US Fair Labor Standards Act Comply with USC et seq .
.C Emissions Reduction Submit to the Department the following certification before performing the work I am aware of the emissions reduction regulations being mandated by the California Air Resources Board .
I will comply with such regulations before commencing the performance of the work and maintain compliance throughout the duration of this Contract .
Contract signing constitutes submittal of this certification .
.D.H Reserved .I Government Code .I General Reserved .I Nondiscrimination Under CA Code Regs and .
During the performance of this contract contractor and its subcontractors shall not unlawfully discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race religion color national origin ancestry physical handicap medical condition marital status age over or sex .
Contractors and subcontractors shall insure that the evaluation and treatment of their employees and applicants for employment are free of such discrimination .
Contractors and subcontractors shall comply with the provisions of the Fair Employment and Housing Act Gov .
Code Section et seq .
and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder Cal .
Admin .
Code Tit .
Section .
et seq ..
The applicable regulations of the Fair Employment and Housing Commission implementing Government Code Section set forth in Chapter of Division of Title of the California Administrative Code are incorporated into this contract by reference and made a part hereof as if set forth in full .
Contractor and its subcontractors shall give written notice of their obligations under this clause to labor organizations with which they have a collective bargaining or other agreement . .
This Contractor shall include the nondiscrimination and compliance provisions of this clause in all subcontracts to perform work under the contract .
STANDARD CALIFORNIA NONDISCRIMINATION CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS GOV .
CODE SECTION SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC These specifications are applicable to all state contractors and subcontractors having a construction contract or subcontract of or more. . As used in the specifications a .
Administrator means Administrator Office of Compliance Programs California Department of Fair Employment and Housing or any person to whom the Administrator delegates authority b .
Minority includes i Black all persons having primary origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa but not of Hispanic origin ii Hispanic all persons of primary culture or origin in Mexico Puerto Rico Cuba Central or South America or other Spanish derived culture or origin regardless of race iii Asian Pacific Islander all persons having primary origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East Southeast Asia the Indian Subcontinent or the Pacific Islands and iv American Indian Alaskan Native all persons having primary origins in any of the original peoples of North America and who maintain culture identification through tribal affiliation or community recognition . .
Whenever the contractor or any subcontractor subcontracts a portion of the work it shall physically include in each subcontract of or more the nondiscrimination clause in this contract directly or through incorporation by reference .
Any subcontract for work involving a construction trade shall also include the Standard California Construction Contract Specifications either directly or through incorporation by reference . .
The contractor shall implement the specific nondiscrimination standards provided in paragraph a through e of these specifications . .
Neither the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement nor the failure by a union with whom the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement to refer either minorities or women shall excuse the contractors obligations under these specifications Government Code Section or the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto . .
In order for the nonworking training hours of apprentices and trainees to be counted such apprentices and trainees must be employed by the contractor during the training period and the contractor must have made a commitment to employ the apprentices and trainees at the completion of their training subject to the availability of employment opportunities .
Trainees must be trained pursuant to training programs approved by the U.S. Department of Labor or the California Department of Industrial Relations . .
The contractor shall take specific actions to implement its nondiscrimination program .
The evaluation of the contractors compliance with these specifications shall be based upon its effort to achieve maximum results from its actions .
The contractor must be able to demonstrate fully its efforts under Steps a. through e. below a .
Ensure and maintain a working environment free of harassment intimidation and coercion at all sites and at all facilities at which the contractors employees are assigned to work .
The contractor where possible will assign two or more women to each construction project .
The contractor shall specifically ensure that all foremen superintendents and other onsite supervisory personnel are aware of and carry out the contractors obligations to maintain such a working environment with specific attention to minority or female individuals working at such sites or in such facilities .
b .
Provide written notification within seven days to the director of DFEH when the union or unions with which the Contractor has a collective bargaining agreement has not referred to the Contractor a minority person or woman sent by the Contractor or when the Contractor has other information that the union referral process has impeded the Contractors efforts to meet its obligations .
c. Disseminate the Contractors equal employment opportunity policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and training recruitment and outreach programs and requesting their cooperation in assisting the Contractor to meet its obligations and by posting the company policy on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each location where construction work is performed .
d. Ensure all personnel making management and employment decisions regarding hiring assignment layoff termination conditions of work training rates of pay or other employment decisions including all supervisory personnel superintendents general foremen onsite SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC foremen etc .
are aware of the Contractors equal employment opportunity policy and obligations and discharge their responsibilities accordingly .
e. Ensure that seniority practices job classifications work assignments and other personnel practices do not have a discriminatory effect by continually monitoring all personnel and employment related activities to ensure that the equal employment opportunity policy and the Contractors obligations under these specifications are being carried out . .
Contractors are encouraged to participate in voluntary associations which assist in fulfilling their equal employment opportunity obligations .
The efforts of a contractor association joint contractorunion contractorcommunity or other similar group of which the contractor is a member and participant may be asserted as fulfilling any one or more of its obligations under these specifications provided that the contractor actively participates in the group makes every effort to assure that the group has a positive impact on the employment of minorities and women in the industry ensures that the concrete benefits of the program are reflected in the Contractors minority and female workforce participation and can provide access to documentation which demonstrates the effectiveness of actions taken on behalf of the Contractor .
The obligation to comply however is the Contractors . .
The Contractor is required to provide equal employment opportunity for all minority groups both male and female and all women both minority and nonminority .
Consequently the Contractor may be in violation of the Fair Employment and Housing Act Gov .
Code Section et seq .
if a particular group is employed in a substantially disparate manner . .
Establishment and implementation of a bona fide affirmative action plan pursuant to Section b of this Chapter shall create a rebuttal presumption that a contractor is in compliance with the requirements of Section of the Government Code and its implementing regulations . .
The Contractor shall not use the nondiscrimination standards to discriminate against any person because of race color religion sex national origin ancestry physical handicap medical condition marital status or age over . .
The Contractor shall not enter into any subcontract with any person or firm decertified from state contracts pursuant to Government Code Section . .
The Contractor shall carry out such sanctions and penalties for violation of these specifications and the nondiscrimination clause including suspension termination and cancellation of existing subcontracts as may be imposed or ordered pursuant to Government Code Section and its implementing regulations by the awarding agency .
Any Contractor who fails to carry out such sanctions and penalties shall be in violation of these specifications and Government Code Section . .
The Contractor shall designate a responsible official to monitor all employment related activity to ensure that the company equal employment opportunity policy is being carried out to submit reports relating to the provisions hereof as may be required by OCP and to keep records .
Records shall at least include for each employee the name address telephone numbers construction trade union affiliation if any employee identification number when assigned social security number race sex status e.g .
mechanic apprentice trainee helper or laborer dates of changes in status hours worked per week in the indicated trade rate of pay and locations at which the work was performed .
Records shall be maintained in any easily understandable and retrievable form however to the degree that existing records satisfy this requirement contractors shall not be required to maintain separate records .
.J Reserved .K Labor Code .K General Work on the job site must comply with Labor Code et seq .
and CA Code of Regs et seq .
Work includes roadside production and processing of materials .
Payroll records include time cards canceled checks cash receipts trust fund forms books documents schedules forms reports receipts or other information which reflect job assignments work schedules by days and hours and the disbursement of payment to workers CA Code of Regs .
.K Wages The Department obtains the general prevailing rate of wages applicable to the work to be done .
The rate includes .
Basic hourly rate SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .
Employer payments for health and welfare pension vacation apprenticeship training fees travel time and subsistence pay as provided for in Labor Code . .
Similar purposes The general prevailing wage rates and any applicable changes to these wage rates are available .
At the Departments Labor Compliance Office of the district in which the work is located .
From the Department of Industrial Relations website Post the general prevailing wage rates at a prominent place at the job site Labor Code ..
The wage determinations refer to expiration dates .
The determinations with a single asterisk after the expiration date and in effect on the date of advertisement for bids are good for the life of the Contract .
The determinations with double asterisks after the expiration date indicate the wage rate to be paid for work performed after this date has been determined .
If work is to extend past this date pay the new rate and incorporate it into the Contract .
Changes in general prevailing wage determinations apply to the Contract when the Director of Industrial Relations has issued them at least days before advertisement .
Labor Code .
and CA Code of Regs The Department does not recognize any claim for additional payment because of a payment by the Contractor of any wage rate in excess of the prevailing wage rate specified in the Contract .
The Contractor and any subcontractor must forfeit to the Department not more than per day or part of a day for each worker paid less than the prevailing wage rate and pay the worker the difference between the prevailing wage rate and the rate paid Labor Code .
The Labor Commissioner determines the amount of this penalty and bases the amount on .
Whether the failure to pay the correct prevailing wage rate was a goodfaith mistake that the Contractor or subcontractor promptly and voluntarily corrected upon notice .
Prior record of the Contractor or subcontractor in meeting its prevailing wage obligations .
Contractor or subcontractors willful failure to pay the correct rate of prevailing wages If a worker employed by a subcontractor on a public works project is not paid the general prevailing per diem wages by the subcontractor the Contractor is not liable for the penalties described in section .K unless the Contractor had knowledge of the failure to pay the correct general prevailing per diem wages or unless the Contractor fails to comply with the following requirements Labor Code .
The contract executed between the Contractor and the subcontractor for the performance of work on the public works project must include a copy of the requirements in Labor Code .
and . .
The Contractor must monitor the payment of the specified general prevailing rate of per diem wages by periodic review of the certified payroll records of the subcontractor . .
Upon becoming aware of the subcontractors failure to pay the specified prevailing rate of wages to the subcontractors workers the Contractor must diligently take corrective action to stop or rectify the failure including withholding sufficient funds due the subcontractor for work performed on the public works project. . Before making final payment to the subcontractor for work performed on the public works project the Contractor must obtain an affidavit signed under penalty of perjury from the subcontractor that the subcontractor has paid the specified general prevailing rate of per diem wages to its employees on the public works project and any amounts due under Labor Code .
Under Labor Code the Department must notify the contractor on a public works project within days of receipt by the Department of a complaint of the failure of a subcontractor on that public works project to pay workers the general prevailing rate of per diem wages .
.K Certified Payroll Records Labor Code Keep accurate payroll records .
Submit a copy of your certified payroll records weekly including those of subcontractors .
Include .
Each employees SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .. Full name ..
Address .. Social security number .. Work classification .. Straight time and overtime hours worked each day and week .. Actual wages paid for each day to each Journeyman Apprentice Worker Other employee you employ for the work .. Pay rate .. Itemized deductions made ..
Check number issued .
Apprentices and the apprenticetojourneyman ratio Each certified payroll record must include a Statement of Compliance form signed under penalty of perjury that declares .
Information contained in the payroll record is true correct and complete .
Employer has complied with the requirements of sections and for any work performed by his or her employees on the public works project .
Wage rates paid are at least those required by the Contract The Department allows the use of a form with identical wording as the Statement of Compliance form provided by the Department .
You may submit certified payroll records electronically to the mailbox address that corresponds to the district in which the work is located .
The districts electronic mailbox addresses are as shown in the following table Electronic Mailboxes District Address district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov district.payrollsdot.ca.gov Before submitting the payroll records electronically you must complete and sign the Contractors Acknowledgement and submit it to the districts electronic mailbox address .
The Department responds with an email containing a Caltrans Internet Certificate to be used for the electronic submission of payroll records .
When you accept the certificate and reply to the email the Department is ready to accept your electronic submissions .
Each electronic submission must .
Include certified payroll records in a nonmodifiable PDF file .
No spreadsheets Microsoft Word documents or passwordprotected documents are accepted . .
Include a signed Statement of Compliance form with each weekly record. . Be received by the Department by close of business on the th day of the month for the prior months work .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .
Be encrypted before submission . .
Contain the following information in the subject line .. Contract number .
.. Week ending date as WE mmddyy . .
Contain contract number and week ending date per submission .
For additional information on electronic submission of certified payroll records go to the Departments Labor Compliance website .
Make certified payroll records available for inspection at all reasonable hours at your main office on the following basis .
Upon the employees request or upon request of the employees authorized representative make available for inspection a certified copy of the employees payroll record . .
Refer the publics requests for certified payroll records to the Department .
Upon the publics request the Department makes available for inspection or furnishes copies of your certified payroll records .
Do not give the public access to the records at your main office .
Make all payroll records available for inspection and copying or furnish a copy upon request of a representative of the .
Department .
Division of Labor Standards Enforcement of the Department of Industrial Relations .
Division of Apprenticeship Standards of the Department of Industrial Relations Furnish the Department the location of the records .
Include the street address city and county .
Furnish the Department a notification of a location and address change within business days of the change .
Comply with a request for the records within days after you receive a written request .
If you do not comply within this period the Department withholds from progress payments a penalty for each day or part of a day for each worker until you comply .
You are not assessed this penalty for a subcontractors failure to comply with Labor Code .
The Department withholds from progress payments for delinquent or inadequate records Labor Code ..
If you have not submitted an adequate record by the months th day for the period ending on or before the st of that month the Department withholds up to percent of the monthly progress estimate exclusive of mobilization .
The Department does not withhold more than or less than .
.K Apprentices Comply with the apprentice to journeyman ratio requirements Labor Code .g .
Comply with the training contribution requirements Labor Code .m .
For answers to questions contact the Division of Apprenticeship Standards before starting work .
The Department deducts from progress payments civil penalties assessed by the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards for violating Labor Code .
Labor Code .. .K Working Hours Eight hours is a legal days work Labor Code .
The time of service of any worker employed on public work is limited and restricted to hours in day and hours in calendar week except as provided by Labor Code Labor Code .
A Contractors employee may work more than hours per day and hours per week if the Contractor pays the employee times the basic pay rate for the hours worked in excess of hours per day and hours per week Labor Code .
For each worker employed in the work for each day the worker works more than hours in day and hours in calendar week without overtime pay the Department deducts as a penalty for violating Labor Code Labor Code .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .K Occupational Safety and Health Standards .Ka General Comply with applicable occupational safety and health standards rules regulations and orders .
The Occupational Safety and Health Standards Board is the only agency authorized in the State to adopt and enforce occupational safety and health standards Labor Code et seq .. You are the controlling employer and must ensure hazardous conditions are corrected Labor Code .
The Engineer may notify CalOSHA if you fail to establish or maintain a safe and healthful workplace .
Submit copies of your Injury and Illness Prevention Program and permits required by CalOSHA .
The program must address the use of personal and companyissued electronic devices during work .
Do not allow the use of entertainment and personal communication devices in the work zone .
Workers may use a communication device for business purposes in the work area at a location where their safety and the safety of other workers and the traveling public is not compromised .
.Kb Excavation Safety Comply with Labor Code while excavating .
For an excavation feet or more in depth submit shop drawings for a protective system .
The drawings must show the design and details for providing worker protection from caving ground during excavation .
Shop drawings of protective systems for which the Construction Safety Orders require design by a registered professional engineer must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
The submittal must allow review time and include the contents shown in the following table except the review time is days for an excavation on or affecting railroad property Drawing Review Time and Contents Topic Plan not requiring a signature Plan requiring a signature Review time business days before excavating days before excavating Contents Drawings Calculations Material information Proprietary system information Drawings Calculations Material information Proprietary system information Soil classification Soil properties Soil design calculations .Kc Tunnel Safety CalOSHA classifies tunnels into one of the following classifications .
Nongassy .
Potentially gassy .
Gassy .
Extrahazardous If a tunnel location is described in the Contract the classification is included in the Information Handout and you must .
Designate an onsite Safety Representative under CA Code of Regs .
Submit the name of your onsite Safety Representative at least days before starting work at each tunnel .
Prominently post a notice at the job site of ..
Tunnel classifications .. Any special orders rules special conditions or regulations related to tunnel work .
Ensure your workers are informed of these classifications SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC Notify the Engineer at least days before a worker enters a tunnel not described in the Contract .
The Department obtains the classification of the tunnel .
The Engineer may suspend the work because of a change directly resulting from the Contractors planned activities that causes activities to fall under the Tunnel Safety Orders of CA Code of Regs .
.Kd Confined Space Safety Comply with CA Code of Regs while working in a confined space .
.Ke Scaffolding Reserved .Kf.Ki Reserved .Kj Lead Safety .Kji General Reserved .Kjii Lead Compliance Plan Section .Kjii applies if a bid item for a lead compliance plan is shown on the Bid Item List .
Regulations containing specific CalOSHA requirements when working with lead include CA Code of Regs ..
Submit a plan .
That documents your compliance program to prevent or minimize worker exposure to lead .
Including the items listed in CA Code of Regs .eB .
Sealed and signed by a CIH Allow days for review .
Obtain authorization for the plan before starting any activity that presents the potential for lead exposure .
Before starting any activity that presents the potential for lead exposure to employees who have no prior training including State employees provide a safety training program to these employees that complies with CA Code of Regs .
and your lead compliance plan .
Submit copies of air monitoring or job site inspection reports made by or under the direction of the CIH under CA Code of Regs .
within days after the date of monitoring or inspection .
Supply personal protective equipment training and washing facilities required by your lead compliance plan for State employees .
.Kjiii Earth Material Containing Lead Reserved .Kjivviii Reserved .Kk.Kt Reserved .L Public Contract Code .L General Reserved .L Antitrust Claims In entering into a public works contract or a subcontract to supply goods services or materials pursuant to a public works contract the contractor or subcontractor offers and agrees to assign to the awarding body all rights title and interest in and to all causes of action it may have under section of the Clayton Act U.S.C .
Sec .
or under the Cartwright Act Chapter commencing with of Part of Division of the Business and Professions Code arising from purchases of goods services or materials pursuant to the public works contract or the subcontract .
This assignment shall be made and become effective at the time the awarding body tenders final payment to the contractor without further acknowledgment by the parties .
Pub Cont Code .
b SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .M Public Resources Code .M General Reserved .M Fire Protection Reserved .M Surface Mining and Reclamation Act Imported borrow or aggregate material must come from a surface mine permitted under the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of Pub Res Code et seq .
or from a source not subject to this act .
For the list of permitted sites go to the Department of Conservation Office of Mine Reclamation website .
If you import borrow or aggregate material from a surface mine not on this list submit proof that the source is not subject to this act .
.M.M Reserved .N Reserved .O Vehicle Code Under Veh Code the Department determines areas within the project limits are open to public traffic .
For those areas comply with the requirements set forth in Divisions and of the Veh Code .
Veh Code does not relieve you or any other person from the duty of exercising due care .
.P.Z Reserved .
PUBLIC CONVENIENCE Compliance with section .
does not relieve you of your responsibility for public safety .
Construction activities must not inconvenience the public or abutting property owners .
Schedule and conduct work to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the public and abutting property owners .
Avoid undue delay in construction activities to reduce the publics exposure to construction .
Where possible route traffic on new or existing paved surfaces .
Maintain convenient access to driveways houses and buildings .
When an abutting property owners access across the rightofway line is to be eliminated or replaced under the Contract the existing access must not be closed until the replacement access facility is usable .
Construct temporary approaches to a crossing and an intersecting highway .
Provide a reasonably smooth and even surface for use by traffic at all time during the excavation of a roadway and construction of an embankment .
Before other grading activities place fill at culverts and bridges to allow traffic to cross .
If ordered excavate a roadway cut in layers and construct an embankment in partial widths at a time alternating construction from one side to the other and routing traffic over the side opposite the one under construction .
Install or construct culverts on only the width of the traveled way at a time keep the traveled way portion being used by traffic open and unobstructed until the opposite side of the traveled way is ready for use by traffic .
Upon completion of rough grading or placing any subsequent layer bring the surface of the roadbed to a smooth and even condition free of humps and depressions and satisfactory for the use of the public .
After subgrade preparation for a specified layer of material has been completed repair any damage to the roadbed or completed subgrade including damage caused by public use .
While subgrade and paving activities are underway allow the public to use the shoulders .
If halfwidth paving methods are used allow the public to use the side of the roadbed opposite the one under construction .
If enough width is available keep open a passageway wide enough to accommodate at least lanes of traffic at locations where subgrade and paving activities are underway .
Shape shoulders or reshape subgrade as necessary to accommodate traffic during subgrade preparation and paving activities .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC Apply a dust palliative for the prevention or alleviation of dust nuisance .
Install signs lights flares Type K temporary railing barricades and other facilities to direct traffic .
Provide flaggers whenever necessary to direct the movement of the public through or around the work .
Flagging must comply with section .
The Department pays you for this work under section .. You are required to pay for the cost of replacing or repairing all facilities installed under change order work for the convenience direction or warning of the public that are lost while in your custody or are damaged by your operations to such an extent as to require replacement or repair .
The Engineer may order or consent to your request to open a completed section of surfacing pavement or structure roadway surface for public use .
You will not be compensated for any delay to your construction activities caused by the public .
This does not relieve you from any other contractual responsibility. . PUBLIC SAFETY You are responsible to provide for public safety .
Do not construct a temporary facility that interferes with the safe passage of traffic .
Control dust resulting from the work inside and outside the rightofway .
Move workers equipment and materials without endangering traffic .
Whenever your activities create a condition hazardous to the public furnish erect and maintain those fences temporary railing barricades lights signs and other devices and take any other necessary protective measures to prevent damage or injury to the public .
Any fences temporary railing barricades lights signs or other devices furnished erected and maintained by you are in addition to those for which payment is provided elsewhere in the specifications .
Provide flaggers whenever necessary to ensure that the public is given safe guidance through the work zone .
Flagging must comply with section .
The Department pays you for this work under section .. At locations where traffic is being routed through construction under oneway controls move your equipment in compliance with the oneway controls unless otherwise ordered .
Use of signs lights flags or other protective devices must comply with the California MUTCD and any directions of the Engineer .
Signs lights flags or other protective devices must not obscure the visibility of nor conflict in intent meaning and function of either existing signs lights and traffic control devices or any construction area signs .
Keep existing traffic signals and highway lighting in operation .
Other forces within the Department will perform routine maintenance of these facilities during the work .
Cover signs that direct traffic to a closed area .
Except for work specified in section maintaining and removing the covers on construction area signs is change order work .
Install temporary illumination such that the illumination and the illumination equipment do not interfere with public safety .
The installation of general roadway illumination does not relieve you from furnishing and maintaining any protective devices .
Equipment must enter and leave the highway via existing ramps and crossovers and must move in the direction of traffic .
All movements of workmen and construction equipment on or across lanes open to traffic must be performed in a manner that do not endanger the public .
Your vehicles or other mobile equipment leaving an open traffic lane to enter the construction area must slow down gradually in advance of the location of the turnoff to give the traffic following an opportunity to slow down .
When leaving a work area and entering a roadway carrying traffic your vehicles and equipment must yield to traffic .
Immediately remove hauling spillage from a roadway lane or shoulder open to traffic .
When hauling on roadways trim loads and remove material from shelf areas to minimize spillage .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC Notify the Engineer not less than days and not more than days before the anticipated start of an activity that will change the vertical or horizontal clearance available to traffic including shoulders .
If vertical clearance is temporarily reduced to .
feet or less place low clearance warning signs in compliance with the California MUTCD and any directions of the Engineer .
Signs must comply with the dimensions color and legend requirements of the California MUTCD and section .
except that the signs must have black letters and numbers on an orange retroreflective background .
WP signs must be illuminated so that the signs are clearly visible .
Pave or provide full width continuous and cleared wood walks for pedestrian openings through falsework .
Protect pedestrians from falling objects and concretecuring water .
Extend overhead protection for pedestrians at least feet beyond the edge of the bridge deck .
Illuminate all pedestrian openings through falsework .
Temporary pedestrian facilities must comply with the California MUTCD Part Chapter D Pedestrian and Worker Safety .
Do not store vehicles material or equipment in a way that .
Creates a hazard to the public .
Obstructs traffic control devices Do not install or place temporary facilities used to perform the work which interfere with the free and safe passage of traffic .
Temporary facilities that could be a hazard to public safety if improperly designed must comply with design requirements described in the Contract for those facilities or if none are described with standard design criteria or codes appropriate for the facility involved .
Submit shop drawings and design calculations for the temporary facilities and show the standard design criteria or codes used .
Shop drawings and supplemental calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
If you appear to be neglectful or negligent in furnishing warning devices and taking protective measures the Engineer may direct your attention to the existence of a hazard .
You must furnish and install the necessary warning devices .
If the Engineer points out the inadequacy of warning devices and protective measures that action on the part of the Engineer does not relieve you from your responsibility for public safety or abrogate your obligation to furnish and pay for these devices and measures .
Install Type K temporary railing or other authorized protective systems under any of the following conditions .
Excavations Where the near edge of the excavation is within feet from the edge of an open traffic lane .
Temporarily unprotected permanent obstacles When the work includes the installation of a fixed obstacle together with a protective system such as a sign structure together with protective railing and you elect to install the obstacle before installing the protective system or you for your convenience and as authorized remove a portion of an existing protective railing at an obstacle and do not replace such railing completely the same day .
Storage areas When material or equipment is stored within feet of the edge of an open traffic lane and the storage is not otherwise prohibited by the Contract .
Height differentials When construction operations create a height differential greater than .
feet within feet of the edge of traffic lane Installation of Type K temporary railing is not required if an excavation within feet from the edge of an open traffic lane is protected by any of the following .
Steel plate or concrete covers of adequate thickness to prevent accidental entry by traffic or the public .
Side slope where the downhill slope is horizontalvertical or less unless a naturally occurring condition .
Barrier or railing Offset the approach end of Type K temporary railing a minimum of feet from the edge of an open traffic lane .
Install the temporary railing on a skew toward the edge of the traffic lane of not more than SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC foot transversely to feet longitudinally with respect to the edge of the traffic lane .
If the foot minimum offset can not be achieved the temporary railing must be installed on the to skew to obtain the maximum available offset between the approach end of the railing and the edge of the traffic lane and an array of temporary crash cushion modules must be installed at the approach end of the temporary railing .
Secure Type K temporary railing in place before starting work for which the temporary railing is required .
If a traffic lane is closed with channelizers for excavation work move the devices to the adjacent edge of the traveled way when not excavating .
Space the devices as specified for the closure .
Do not move or temporarily suspend anything over a traffic lane open to the public unless the public is protected. . INDEMNIFICATION .A General You must defend indemnify and save harmless the State including its officers employees and agents excluding agents who are design professionals from any and all claims demands causes of action damages costs expenses actual attorneys fees losses or liabilities in law or in equity Section .
Claims arising out of or in connection with your performance of this Contract for .
Bodily injury including but not limited to bodily injury sickness or disease emotional injury or death to persons including but not limited to the public any employees or agents of you the State or any other contractor and .
Damage to property of anyone including loss of use thereof caused or alleged to be caused in whole or in part by any negligent or otherwise legally actionable act or omission of you or anyone directly or indirectly employed by you or anyone for whose acts you may be liable .
Except as otherwise provided by law these requirements apply regardless of the existence or degree of fault of the State .
You are not obligated to indemnify the State for Claims arising from conduct delineated in Civ Code and for Claims arising from any defective or substandard condition of the highway that existed at or before the start of work unless this condition has been changed by the work or the scope of the work requires you to maintain existing highway facilities and the Claim arises from your failure to maintain .
Your defense and indemnity obligation shall extend to Claims arising after the work is completed and accepted if the Claims are directly related to alleged acts or omissions by you that occurred during the course of the work .
Any inspection of the work by the State is not a waiver of full compliance with these requirements .
Your obligation to defend and indemnify is not excused because of your inability to evaluate liability or because you evaluate liability and determine that you are not liable .
You must respond within days to the tender of any Claim for defense and indemnity by the State unless this time has been extended by the State .
If you fail to accept or reject a tender of defense and indemnity within days in addition to any other remedy authorized by law the Department may withhold such funds the State reasonably considers necessary for its defense and indemnity until disposition has been made of the Claim or until the Contractor accepts or rejects the tender of defense whichever occurs first .
With respect to thirdparty claims against you you waive all rights of any type to express or implied indemnity against the State its officers employees or agents excluding agents who are design professionals .
Nothing in the Contract is intended to establish a standard of care owed to any member of the public or to extend to the public the status of a thirdparty beneficiary for any of these indemnification specifications .
.B Responsibility to Other Entities You are responsible for any liability imposed by law and for injuries to or death of any person including workers and the public or damage to property .
Indemnify and save harmless any county city or district and its officers and employees connected with the work within the limits of which county city or district the work is being performed all in the same manner and to the same extent specified for the protection of the State .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .
INSURANCE .A General Nothing in the Contract is intended to establish a standard of care owed to any member of the public or to extend to the public the status of a thirdparty beneficiary for any of these insurance specifications .
.B Casualty Insurance Obtain and maintain insurance on all of your operations with companies acceptable to the State as follows .
Keep all insurance in full force and effect from the start of the work through Contract acceptance. . All insurance must be with an insurance company with a rating from A.M. Best Financial Strength Rating of A or better and a Financial Size Category of VII or better . .
Maintain completed operations coverage with a carrier acceptable to the State through the expiration of the patent deficiency in construction statute of repose set forth in Civ Pro Code .. .C Workers Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance Under Labor Code secure the payment of workers compensation under Labor Code .
Submit to the Department the following certification before performing the work Labor Code I am aware of the provisions of Section of the Labor Code which require every employer to be insured against liability for workers compensation or to undertake selfinsurance in accordance with the provisions of that code and I will comply with such provisions before commencing the performance of the work of this contract .
Contract signing constitutes your submittal of this certification .
Provide Employers Liability Insurance in amounts not less than .
for each accident for bodily injury by accident .
policy limit for bodily injury by disease .
for each employee for bodily injury by disease If there is an exposure of injury to your employees under the US Longshoremens and Harbor Workers Compensation Act the Jones Act or under laws regulations or statutes applicable to maritime employees coverage must be included for such injuries or claims .
.D Liability Insurance .D General Carry General Liability and Umbrella or Excess Liability Insurance covering all operations by or on behalf of you providing insurance for bodily injury liability and property damage liability for the following limits and including coverage for .
Premises operations and mobile equipment .
Products and completed operations .
Broad form property damage including completed operations .
Explosion collapse and underground hazards .
Personal injury .
Contractual liability .D Liability LimitsAdditional Insureds The limits of liability must be at least the values shown in the following table SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC Liability Limits Total bid For each occurrencea Aggregate for productscompleted operation General aggregateb Umbrella or excess liabilityc aCombined single limit for bodily injury and property damage .
bThis limit must apply separately to your work under this Contract .
cThe umbrella or excess policy must contain a clause stating that it takes effect drops down in the event the primary limits are impaired or exhausted .
Do not require a small business subcontractor to carry liability insurance that exceeds the limits shown in the preceding table .
For a small business subcontractor interpret Total Bid in the table as the dollar amount of subcontracted work .
As used in section .D a small business .
For a nonfederalaid contract is defined in CA Code of Regs and is incorporated by this reference .
For a federalaid contract is defined in CFR .
and is incorporated by this reference The State including its officers directors agents excluding agents who are design professionals and employees must be named as additional insureds under the General Liability and Umbrella Liability Policies with respect to liability arising out of or connected with work or operations performed by or on behalf of you under this Contract .
Coverage for such additional insureds does not extend to liability .
Arising from any defective or substandard condition of the roadway which existed at or before the time you started work unless such condition has been changed by the work or the scope of the work requires you to maintain existing roadway facilities and the claim arises from your failure to maintain .
For claims occurring after the work is completed and accepted unless these claims are directly related to alleged acts or omissions of you that occurred during the course of the work or .
To the extent prohibited by Ins Code .. Additional insured coverage must be provided by a policy provision or by an endorsement providing coverage at least as broad as Additional Insured Form B endorsement form CG as published by the Insurance Services Office ISO or other form designated by the Department .
.D Contractors Insurance Policy is Primary The policy must stipulate that the insurance afforded the additional insureds applies as primary insurance .
Any other insurance or selfinsurance maintained by the State is excess only and must not be called upon to contribute with this insurance .
.E Automobile Liability Insurance Carry automobile liability insurance including coverage for all owned hired and nonowned automobiles .
The primary limits of liability must be not less than combined single limit for each accident for bodily injury and property damage .
The umbrella or excess liability coverage required under section .D also applies to automobile liability .
.F Policy Forms Endorsements and Certificates Provide your General Liability Insurance under Commercial General Liability policy form no .
CG as published by the Insurance Services Office ISO or under a policy form at least as broad as policy form no .
CG .
.G Deductibles The State may expressly allow deductible clauses which it does not consider excessive overly broad or harmful to the interests of the State .
Regardless of the allowance of exclusions or deductions by the SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC State you are responsible for any deductible amount and must warrant that the coverage provided to the State complies with section .. .H Enforcement The Department may assure your compliance with your insurance obligations .
Ten days before an insurance policy lapses or is canceled during the Contract period you must submit to the Department evidence of renewal or replacement of the policy .
If you fail to maintain any required insurance coverage the Department may maintain this coverage and withhold or charge the expense to you or terminate your control of the work .
You are not relieved of your duties and responsibilities to indemnify defend and hold harmless the State its officers agents and employees by the Departments acceptance of insurance policies and certificates .
The minimum insurance coverage amounts do not relieve you for liability in excess of such coverage nor do they preclude the State from taking other actions available to it including the withholding of funds under this Contract .
.I SelfInsurance Selfinsurance programs and selfinsured retentions in insurance policies are subject to separate annual review and approval by the State .
If you use a selfinsurance program or selfinsured retention you must provide the State with the same protection from liability and defense of suits as would be afforded by firstdollar insurance .
Execution of the Contract is your acknowledgment that you will be bound by all laws as if you were an insurer as defined under Ins Code and that the selfinsurance program or selfinsured retention shall operate as insurance as defined under Ins Code . . LEGAL ACTIONS AGAINST THE DEPARTMENT .A General If legal action is brought against the Department over compliance with a State or federal law rule or regulation applicable to highway work then .
If the Department in complying with a court order prohibits you from performing work the resulting delay is a suspension related to your performance unless the Department terminates the Contract . .
If a court order other than an order to show cause or the final judgment in the action prohibits the Department from requiring you to perform work the Department may delete the prohibited work or terminate the Contract .
.B Seal Coat Claims Pay for claims for personal property damage caused by screening and bituminous binder .
Seal coat claims are limited to .
percent of the total bid .
Damage occurring between the st day of screening spreading and days after the last day of screening spreading for each seal coat location Within days of the last screening spreading do the following .
Process and resolve all claims reported or submitted to you by the public as follows ..
Within business days of receipt of a claim submit to the Department a copy of the claim a written analysis of the claim and a statement indicating whether or not you will pay the claim .
If you reject a claim provide the reasons for rejection in writing .
..
If the claimant becomes dissatisfied with your handling of the claim immediately refer the claimant to the local district claims office for assistance in resolving the claim . .
Submit to the Department evidence of your paid claims .
All claims presented to the Department any district claims office or the State Board of Control Govt Code et seq .
are processed and resolved by the Department as follows SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .
The claims are processed as formal government claims subject to all laws and policies and are resolved as the Department determines including referring the claim to you for handling . .
If the Department or the State Board of Control approves settlement of a claim or is ordered to pay pursuant to a court order the claim is paid from funds withheld from you . .
Within business days of the Departments determination that you are responsible for resolving the claim the Department sends a copy of the claim to you for resolution or notifies you of the Departments decision to resolve the claim .
The Department withholds an amount not to exceed percent of the total bid to resolve all claims .
The amount is held no longer than days following the last spreading of screenings so that the Department has ample time to resolve any pending claims .
After days any remaining amount withheld is returned to you .
If no withheld funds remain or have been returned the Department may pay any claims and seek reimbursement from you through an offset or any other legal means .
Any reimbursement or offset to be recovered from you including all other paid claims is limited to percent of the total bid .
Section .B does not limit your obligation to defend and indemnify the Department . .
PERSONAL LIABILITY Neither the Director the Engineer nor any other officer or authorized employee of the State of California nor any officer or employee of any county city or district shall be personally responsible for any liability arising under or by virtue of the Contract .
..
RESERVED .
FEDERAL LAWS FOR FEDERALAID CONTRACTS .A General Section .
includes specifications required in a federalaid construction contract and applies to a federalaid contract .
A copy of form FHWA is included in section .B .
The training and promotion section of section II refers to training provisions as if they were included in the special provisions .
The Department specifies the provisions in section .D of the Standard Specifications .
If a number of trainees or apprentices is required the Department shows the number on the Notice to Bidders .
Interpret each FHWA clause shown in the following table as having the same meaning as the corresponding Department clause FHWA Nondiscrimination Clauses FHWA section FHWA clause Department clause Training and Promotion In the event a special provision for training is provided under this contract this subparagraph will be superseded as indicated in the special provision .
If section .D applies section .D supersedes this subparagraph .
Records and Reports If onthejob training is being required by special provision the contractor will be required to collect and report training data .
If the Contract requires on thejob training collect and report training data .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .B FHWA SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC .C Female and Minority Goals To comply with section II Nondiscrimination of Required Contract Provisions FederalAid Construction Contracts the Department is including in section .C female and minority utilization goals for federalaid construction contracts and subcontracts that exceed .
The nationwide goal for female utilization is .
percent .
The goals for minority utilization Fed Reg are as shown in the following table SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC Minority Utilization Goals Economic area Goal Redding CA .
NonSMSA Counties CA Lassen CA Modoc CA Plumas CA Shasta CA Siskiyou CA Tehama Eureka CA .
NonSMSA Counties CA Del Norte CA Humboldt CA Trinity San FranciscoOaklandSan Jose CA SMSA Counties SalinasSeasideMonterey CA CA Monterey .
San FranciscoOakland CA CA Alameda CA Contra Costa CA Marin CA San Francisco CA San Mateo .
San Jose CA CA Santa Clara CA .
Santa Cruz CA CA Santa Cruz .
Santa Rosa CA CA Sonoma .
VallejoFairfieldNapa CA CA Napa CA Solano .
NonSMSA Counties CA Lake CA Mendocino CA San Benito .
Sacramento CA SMSA Counties Sacramento CA CA Placer CA Sacramento CA Yolo .
NonSMSA Counties CA Butte CA Colusa CA El Dorado CA Glenn CA Nevada CA Sierra CA Sutter CA Yuba .
StocktonModesto CA SMSA Counties Modesto CA CA Stanislaus .
Stockton CA CA San Joaquin .
NonSMSA Counties CA Alpine CA Amador CA Calaveras CA Mariposa CA Merced CA Tuolumne .
FresnoBakersfield CA SMSA Counties Bakersfield CA CA Kern .
Fresno CA CA Fresno .
NonSMSA Counties CA Kings CA Madera CA Tulare .
Los Angeles CA SMSA Counties AnaheimSanta AnaGarden Grove CA CA Orange .
Los AngelesLong Beach CA CA Los Angeles .
SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC OxnardSimi ValleyVentura CA CA Ventura .
RiversideSan BernardinoOntario CA CA Riverside CA San Bernardino .
Santa BarbaraSanta MariaLompoc CA CA Santa Barbara .
NonSMSA Counties CA Inyo CA Mono CA San Luis Obispo .
San Diego CA SMSA Counties San Diego CA CA San Diego .
NonSMSA Counties CA Imperial .
For each July during which work is performed under the Contract you and each nonmaterialsupplier subcontractor with a subcontract of or more must complete Form FHWA PR Appendix C to CFR .
Submit the forms by August .
.D Training Section .D applies if a number of trainees or apprentices is shown on the Notice to Bidders .
As part of your equal opportunity affirmative action program provide onthejob training to develop full journeymen in the types of trades or job classifications involved .
You have primary responsibility for meeting this training requirement .
If you subcontract a Contract part determine how many trainees or apprentices are to be trained by the subcontractor .
Where feasible percent of apprentices or trainees in each occupation must be in their st year of apprenticeship or training .
Distribute the number of apprentices or trainees among the work classifications on the basis of your needs and the availability of journeymen in the various classifications within a reasonable recruitment area .
Before starting work submit .
Number of apprentices or trainees to be trained for each classification .
Training program to be used .
Training starting date for each classification Obtain the Departments approval for this submitted information before you start work .
The Department credits you for each apprentice or trainee you employ on the work who is currently enrolled or becomes enrolled in an approved program .
The primary objective of section .D is to train and upgrade minorities and women toward journeymen status .
Make every effort to enroll minority and women apprentices or trainees such as conducting systematic and direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority and women apprentices or trainees to the extent they are available within a reasonable recruitment area .
Show that you have made the efforts .
In making these efforts do not discriminate against any applicant for training .
Do not employ as an apprentice or trainee an employee .
In any classification in which the employee has successfully completed a training course leading to journeyman status or in which the employee has been employed as a journeyman .
Who is not registered in a program approved by the US Department of Labor Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training SECTION LEGAL RELATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITY TO THE PUBLIC Ask the employee if the employee has successfully completed a training course leading to journeyman status or has been employed as a journeyman .
Your records must show the employees answers to the questions .
In your training program establish the minimum length and training type for each classification .
The Department and FHWA approves a program if one of the following conditions is met .
Program is calculated to .. Meet your equal employment opportunity responsibilities .
.. Qualify the average apprentice or trainee for journeyman status in the classification involved by the end of the training period . .
Program is registered with the US Department of Labor Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training and it is administered in a way consistent with the equal employment responsibilities of federalaid highway construction contracts .
Obtain Department approval for your training program before you start work involving the classification covered by the program .
Provide training in the construction crafts not in clerktypist or secretarialtype positions .
Training is allowed in lowerlevel management positions such as office engineers estimators and timekeepers if the training is oriented toward construction applications .
Training is allowed in the laborer classification if significant and meaningful training is provided and approved by the FHWA division office .
Offsite training is allowed if the training is an integral part of an approved training program and does not make up a significant part of the overall training .
The Department reimburses you cents per hour of training given an employee on this Contract under an approved training program .
For onsite training .
For offsite training if the apprentice or trainee is currently employed under a federalaid contract and you do at least one of the following ..
Contribute to the cost of the training ..
Provide the instruction to the apprentice or trainee .. Pay the apprentices or trainees wages during the offsite training period .
If you comply with section .D Each apprentice or trainee must .
Start training on the project as soon as feasible after the start of work involving the apprentices or trainees craft .
Remain on the project as long as training opportunities exist in the apprentices or trainees work classification or until the apprentice or trainee has completed the training program Furnish the apprentice or trainee .
Copy of the program you will comply with in providing the training .
Certification showing the type and length of training satisfactorily completed Maintain records and submit reports documenting your performance under section .D .
PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to prosecuting the Contract and work progress . .
SCHEDULE .A General Upon completion of all work the Department returns the withholds associated with section .
and makes a payment adjustment for work not performed in the same manner as workcharacter changes .
.B Level Critical Path Method Schedule .B General Section .B applies to a contract with a total bid less than million and less than original working days .
Before or at the preconstruction conference submit a CPM baseline schedule .
For each schedule submit .
Plotted original timescaled network diagram on a sheet at least by inches with a title block and timeline .
Readonly compact disc or other Engineerauthorized datastorage device containing the schedule data if software is used to make the schedule .
Label the device with .. Contract number .. CPM schedule number and date produced ..
File name .B Schedule Format On each schedule show .
Planned and actual start and completion dates of each work activity including applicable .. Submittal development .. Submittal review and acceptance .. Material procurement .. Contract milestones and constraints .. Equipment and plant setup .. Interfaces with outside entities .. Erection and removal of falsework and shoring .. Test periods .. Major traffic stage change ..
Final cleanup .
Order that you propose to prosecute the work .
Logical links between the timescaled work activities .
All controlling activities .
Legible description of each activity .
At least predecessor and successor to each activity except for project start and project end milestones .
Duration of at least working day for each activity .
Start milestone date as the Contract approval date .B Updated Schedule Submit a monthly updated schedule that includes the status of work completed to date and the work yet to be performed as planned .
You may include changes to updated schedules that do not alter a critical path or extend the scheduled completion date compared to the current schedule .
Changes may include .
Adding or deleting activities SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .
Changing activity constraints .
Changing durations .
Changing logic If any proposed change in planned work would alter the critical path or extend the scheduled completion date submit a revised schedule within days of the proposed change .
.C Level Critical Path Method Schedule .C General Section .C applies to a contract with a total bid less than million and or more original working days a total bid from to million or a total bid over million and less than original working days .
Submit baseline monthly updated and final updated schedules each consistent in all respects with the time and order of Contract work requirements .
Perform work in the sequence indicated on the current accepted schedule .
Use computer software to prepare each schedule .
Ensure that all activity sequences are logical and that each schedule shows a coordinated plan for completing of the work .
If the Contract includes construction staging and you propose changes to the described staging do not perform work affected by the proposed changes until the Engineer accepts your schedule .
A change to the schedule that changes the described staging is change order work .
The Engineers review and acceptance of schedules does not void any Contract part and does not void your responsibility for submitting complete and accurate information .
Correct rejected schedules and resubmit them within days of notification by the Engineer .
Allow days for review of the resubmittal .
Errors or omissions on schedules do not void your responsibility for completing all work within the time specified for completion of the work .
If either you or the Engineer discovers that any aspect of the schedule has an error or omission after a schedule has been accepted correct it on the next updated schedule .
.C Schedule Format For the schedule format comply with the st paragraph of section .B and show .
Calculations using the CPM to determine controlling activities . .
Duration activities less than working days. . Each required constraint .
Constraints other than those required by the specifications may be included only if authorized .
.C Computer Software .Ca General Submit a description of your proposed schedule software for authorization .
Software must be compatible with the current version of the Microsoft Windows operating system in use by the Engineer .
The schedule software must include the latest version of Primavera P for Windows or equal .
Any proposed schedule software equal to Primavera P must be capable of .
Generating files that can be imported into Primavera P . Comparing schedules and providing reports of changes in activity ID activity description constraints calendar assignments durations and logic ties SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .Cb Reserved .C Data and Network Diagrams For each schedule submit .
datastorage device containing the schedule data .
sets of originally plotted timescaled network diagrams The datastorage device must comply with item of the rd paragraph of section .B .
The timescaled network diagrams must .
Show a continuous flow of information from left to right .
Be based on early start and early finish dates of activities .
Clearly show the primary critical path using graphical presentation .
Be on by inches or larger sheets .
Include a title block and a timeline on each page .C Baseline Schedule Submit a baseline schedule and all support data within days of Contract approval .
Allow days for review after the submittal .
Starting the week the baseline schedule is first submitted meet with the Engineer weekly to discuss and resolve schedule issues until the baseline schedule is accepted .
The baseline schedule must include the entire scope of work and how you plan to complete all work contemplated .
The baseline schedule must show the activities that define the critical path .
Multiple critical paths and nearcritical paths must be kept to a minimum .
A total of not more than percent of the baseline schedule activities must be critical or near critical unless otherwise authorized .
The baseline schedule must not extend beyond the number of original working days .
.C Updated Schedule Each updated schedule must comply with section .B .
Meet with the Engineer to review work progress on or before the st day of each month starting month after the baseline schedule is accepted .
Allow days for review after the updated schedule and all support data are submitted .
The review period does not start until the previous months required schedule is accepted .
Updated schedules not accepted or rejected within the review period are accepted .
The updated schedule must .
Have a data date of the st day of the month or other date established by the Engineer .
Show changes from accepted revised schedules .C Final Updated Schedule Submit a final updated asbuilt schedule with actual start and finish dates for the activities within days after work completion .
Submit a written certificate with this submittal signed by your project manager or an officer of the company stating To my knowledge and belief the enclosed final updated schedule reflects the actual start and finish dates of the actual activities for the project contained herein .
An officer of the company may delegate in writing the authority to sign the certificate to a responsible manager .
SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .D Level Critical Path Method Schedule .D General Section .D applies to a contract with a total bid over million and or more original working days .
Comply with section .C .
.D Schedule Format For the schedule format comply with section .C and show .
At least but not more than activities unless authorized .
The number of activities must be sufficient to assure adequate planning of the project to permit monitoring and evaluation of progress and to do an analysis of time impacts. . Departmentowned float as the predecessor activity to the scheduled completion date. . Activities with identification codes for responsibility stage work shifts location and bid items .
You may show early completion time on any schedule if you comply with the Contract .
Early completion time is a resource for your exclusive use .
You may increase early completion time by improving production reallocating resources to be more efficient performing sequential activities concurrently or by completing activities earlier than planned .
You may also submit a VECP that will reduce construction time .
You may show a scheduled completion date that is later than the work completion date on an updated schedule after the baseline schedule is accepted .
Provide an explanation for a late scheduled completion date in the narrative report included with the schedule .
.D Computer Software Computer software must comply with section .C .
.D Data Network Diagrams and Reports For each schedule submittal submit .
datastorage device containing the schedule data .
sets of originally plotted timescaled network diagrams .
copies of a narrative report The datastorage device must comply with item of the rd paragraph of section .B .
The network diagrams must comply with section .C except the sheets must be by inches .
The narrative report must be organized in the following sequence with all applicable documents included .
Transmittal letter .
Work completed during the period .
Identification of unusual conditions or restrictions regarding labor equipment or material including multiple shifts day work weeks specified overtime or work at times other than regular days or hours .
Description of the current critical path .
Changes to the critical path and scheduled completion date since the last schedule submittal .
Description of problem areas .
Current and anticipated delays including ..
Cause of delay .. Impact of delay on other activities milestones and completion dates .. Corrective action and schedule adjustments to correct the delay .
Pending items and status of ..
Permits .. Change orders .. Time adjustments .. Noncompliance notices .
Reasons for an early or late scheduled completion date in comparison to the work completion date SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .D Preconstruction Scheduling Conference Hold a preconstruction scheduling conference with your project manager and the Engineer within days after Contract approval .
The Engineer conducts the conference and reviews the specifications for a Level CPM schedule with you .
Within days after Contract approval submit a general timescaled logic diagram showing the major activities and sequence of planned operations .
Be prepared to discuss the proposed work plan and schedule methodology during the preconstruction scheduling conference .
If the Contract includes construction staging and you propose changes to the described staging the general timescaled logic diagram must show the changes and resulting time impacts .
Be prepared to discuss your proposal .
At this conference submit the alphanumeric coding structure and activity identification system for labeling work activities .
To easily identify relationships each activity description must indicate its associated scope or location of work by including such terms as quantity of material type of work bridge number station to station location side of highway such as left right northbound or southbound lane number shoulder ramp name ramp line descriptor or mainline .
The Engineer reviews the logic diagram coding structure and activity identification system and provides any required baseline schedule changes to you for implementation .
.D Baseline Schedule The baseline schedule must comply with section .C .
The baseline schedule must have a data date of Contract approval .
If you start work before Contract approval the baseline schedule must have a data date of the st day you performed work at the job site .
If you submit an early completion baseline schedule that shows work completion in less than percent of the original working days the baseline schedule must be supplemented with resource allocations for every task activity and include timescaled resource histograms .
Resource allocations must be shown to a level of detail that facilitates report generation based on labor crafts and equipment classes for you and your subcontractors .
Use average composite crews to display the labor loading of job site construction activities .
Optimize and level labor to reflect a reasonable plan for accomplishing the work and to assure that resources are not duplicated in concurrent activities .
The timescaled resource histograms must show labor crafts and equipment classes to be used .
The Engineer may review the baseline schedule activity resource allocations using Means Productivity Standards for Construction or equivalent to determine whether the schedule is practicable .
.D Updated Schedule The updated schedule must comply with section .C except the th paragraph .
The updated schedule must .
Have a data date of the st day of the month or other date established by the Engineer .
Show the status of work actually completed to date and the work yet to be performed as planned .
Show actual activity start dates percent complete and finish dates .
Show durations for work that has been completed as the work actually occurred including the Engineers review and your resubmittal times Justify in writing the reasons for any changes to planned work .
If any proposed changes in planned work results in altering a critical path or near critical path or extending the schedule completion date submit a revised schedule and a TIA within days of the proposed change .
SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .D Time Impact Analysis .Da General Submit a TIA with each request for adjustment of Contract time or whenever you or the Engineer considers that an authorized or anticipated change may impact the critical path or work progress .
The TIA must .
Illustrate the impacts of each change or delay on the current scheduled completion date or internal milestone. . Use the accepted schedule that has a data date closest to and before the event .
If the Engineer determines that the accepted schedule used does not appropriately represent the conditions before the event the accepted schedule must be updated to the day before the event being analyzed . .
Include an impact schedule developed from incorporating the event into the accepted schedule by adding or deleting activities or by changing durations or logic of existing activities .
If the impact schedule shows that incorporating the event modifies the critical path and scheduled completion date of the accepted schedule the difference between scheduled completion dates of the schedules must be equal to the adjustment of Contract time .
The Engineer may construct and use an appropriate project schedule or other recognized method to determine adjustments in Contract time until you submit the TIA .
Submit copies of the TIA within days of receiving a written request for a TIA .
Allow days for review of the submitted TIA .
Authorized TIA schedule changes must be shown on the next updated schedule .
If a TIA you submit is rejected meet with the Engineer to discuss and resolve issues related to the TIA .
If clarification is needed after you meet you are allowed days to submit a protest .
If agreement is not reached you are allowed business days from the date you receive the Engineers response to your protest to submit an Initial Potential Claim Record form .
Show only actual asbuilt work not unauthorized changes related to the TIA in subsequent updated schedules .
If agreement is reached at a later date the authorized TIA schedule changes must be shown on the next updated schedule .
The Department withholds remaining payment on the progress schedule critical path method bid item if a TIA is requested and not submitted within days .
The Department returns the withhold in the next progress payment after the submittal of the requested TIA .
.Db DepartmentOwned Float Prepare a TIA whenever requested to determine the effect of Departmentowned float .
Department owned float is a resource for the exclusive use of the Department .
The Engineer may accrue Departmentowned float by early review completion of any submittal if the early review completion saves time on the critical path .
The Engineer documents Departmentowned float by ordering you to update the Departmentowned float activity on the next updated schedule .
Include a log of the action on the Departmentowned float activity and include a discussion of the action in the narrative report .
The Engineer may use Departmentowned float to mitigate past present or future Department delays by offsetting a potential time extension for a Change Order .
.Dc Ordered Changes For an ordered change that affects the scheduled completion date prepare a TIA to determine the effect of adjusting Contract working days .
Include the impacts of the ordered change in the next updated schedule .
SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS An ordered change that affects the controlling activity on the critical path is a basis for a time adjustment .
The Department grants a time extension only if the total float is absorbed and the scheduled completion date is delayed or more working days due to the ordered change .
.D Final Updated Schedule The final updated schedule must comply with section .C .
.D Payment The Department pays you for progress schedule critical path method as follows .
A total of percent of the item total is paid upon ..
Completion of percent of all work ..
Acceptance of schedules and authorization of TIAs required when percent of all work is complete .
A total of percent of the item total is paid upon completion of percent of all work and acceptance of schedules and authorization of TIAs required when percent of all work is complete .
A total of percent of the item total is paid upon completion of percent of all work and acceptance of schedules and authorization of TIAs required when percent of all work is complete .
A total of percent of the item total is paid upon completion of all work acceptance of schedules and authorization of TIAs required when all work is complete and submittal of the certified final updated schedule The Department does not adjust payment for any increased or decreased work ordered in submitting schedules .
.E.F Reserved .
PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE Attend a preconstruction conference with key personnel including your assigned representative at a time and location determined by the Engineer .
Submit documents as required before the preconstruction conference .
You may start work before the preconstruction conference .
Be prepared to discuss the topics and documents shown in the following table Topic Document Potential claim and dispute resolution Potential claim forms Contractors representation Assignment of Contractors representative DBE and DVBE Final utilization reports Equipment Equipment list Labor compliance and equal employment opportunity Job site posters and benefit and payroll reports Material inspection Notice of Materials to be Used form Materials on hand Request for Payment for Materials on Hand form Measurements Partnering Quality control QC plans Safety Injury and Illness Prevention Program and job site posters Schedule Baseline schedule and Weekly Statement of Working Days form Subcontracting Subcontracting Request form Surveying Survey Request form Traffic control Traffic contingency plan and traffic control plans Utility work Weight limitations Water pollution control SWPPP or WPCP Work restrictions PLACs Action submittals SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .
START OF JOB SITE ACTIVITIES .A General Reserved .B Standard Start For a project that does not require a SWPPP start job site activities within days after receiving notice that the Contract has been approved by the Attorney General or the attorney appointed and authorized to represent the Department .
For a project that requires a SWPPP start job site activities within days after receiving notice that the Contract has been approved by the Attorney General or the attorney appointed and authorized to represent the Department .
Submit a notice hours before starting job site activities .
If the project has more than work location submit a separate notice for each location .
You may start job site activities before receiving notice of Contract approval if you .
Deliver the signed Contract bonds and evidence of insurance to the Department .
Submit a hour notice .
Obtain an encroachment permit from the Department .
Receive the Departments authorization to start .
Perform work at your own risk .
Perform work under the Contract If the Contract is approved work already performed that complies with the Contract is authorized .
If the Contract is not approved leave the job site in a neat condition .
If a facility has been changed restore it to its former condition or an equivalent condition .
The Department does not pay for the restoration .
The Department does not adjust time for work performed before Contract approval .
.C Delayed Start Reserved .D Early ReturnEarly Start Reserved .E NextDay Start Reserved .F Flexible Start Reserved .G Potential Budget Impasse Start Reserved .H.J Reserved .
TIME The contract time starts on the earlier of the following .
Day you start job site activities after Contract approval .
Last day specified to start job site activities in section .
Complete the work within the Contract time .
Meet each specified interim workcompletion date .
The Engineer issues a Weekly Statement of Working Days form by the end of the following week .
The Weekly Statement of Working Days form shows SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS .
Working days and nonworking days during the reporting week .
Time adjustments .
Calculations of work completion dates including working days remaining .
Controlling activities .
SUSPENSIONS The Engineer may suspend work wholly or in part due to conditions unsuitable for work progress .
Provide for public safety and a smooth and unobstructed passageway through the work zone during the suspension as specified in sections .
and .. Providing the passageway is force account work .
The Department makes a time adjustment for the suspension due to a critical delay .
The Engineer may suspend work wholly or in part due to your failure to fulfill the Engineers orders fulfill a Contract part or perform weatherdependent work when conditions are favorable so that weatherrelated unsuitable conditions are avoided or do not occur .
The Department may provide for a smooth and unobstructed passageway through the work during the suspension and deduct the cost from payments .
The Department does not make a time adjustment for the suspension .
Upon the Engineers order of suspension suspend work immediately .
Resume work when ordered . .
DELAYS .A General To request a delayrelated time or payment adjustment submit an RFI .
.B Time Adjustments The Department may make a time adjustment for a critical delay .
The Engineer uses information from the schedule to evaluate requests for time adjustments .
To request an adjustment submit a revised schedule showing the delays effect on the controlling activity .
If the delay has .
Occurred submit records of the dates and what work was performed during the delayed activity .
Not occurred submit the expected dates or duration of the delayed activity Update the schedule to the last working day before the start of the delay if ordered .
.C Payment Adjustments The Department may make a payment adjustment for an excusable delay that affects your costs .
Only losses for idle equipment idle workers and moving or transporting equipment are eligible for delay related payment adjustments .
The Engineer determines payment for idle time of equipment in the same manner as determinations are made for equipment used in the performance of force account work under section .
with the following exceptions .
Delay factor in the Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates applies to each equipment rental rate. . Daily number of payable hours equals the normal working hours during the delay not to exceed hours per day. . Delay days exclude nonworking days. . Markups are not added .
The Engineer determines payment adjustment for the idle workers under section .B but does not add markups .
The Engineer includes costs due to necessary extra moving or transporting of equipment .
The Department does not make a payment adjustment for overhead incurred during nonworking days of additional construction seasons experienced because of delay .
SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS ..
RESERVED .
LIQUIDATED DAMAGES .A General The Department specifies liquidated damages Pub Cont Code .
Liquidated damages if any accrue starting on the st day after the expiration of the working days through the day of Contract acceptance except as specified in sections .B and .C .
The Department withholds liquidated damages before the accrual date if the anticipated liquidated damages may exceed the value of the remaining work .
Liquidated damages for all work except plant establishment are as shown in the following table Liquidated Damages Total bid Liquidated damages per day From over To If all work except plant establishment is complete and the total number of working days have expired liquidated damages are per day .
.B Failure to Complete Work Parts within Specified Times The Department may deduct specified damages from payments for each day needed to complete a work part in excess of the time specified for completing the work part .
Damages for untimely completion of work parts may not be equal to the daily amount specified as liquidated damages for the project as a whole but the Department does not simultaneously assess damages for untimely completion of work parts and for the whole work .
Damages accrue starting the st day after a work part exceeds the specified time through the day the specified work part is complete .
.C Failure to Complete Work Parts by Specified Dates The Department may deduct specified damages from payments for each day needed to complete a work part in excess of the specified completion date for the work part .
Damages for untimely completion of a work part may not be equal to the daily amount specified as liquidated damages for the project as a whole but the Department does not simultaneously assess damages for untimely completion of a work part and the whole work .
Damages accrue starting the st day after an unmet completion date through the day the work part is complete .
.D Reserved ..
RESERVED .
CONTRACTORS CONTROL TERMINATION The Department may terminate your control of the work for failure to do any of the following Pub Cont Code .
Supply an adequate workforce .
Supply material as described .
Pay subcontractors Pub Cont Code .
Prosecute the work as described in the Contract SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS The Department may also terminate your control for failure to maintain insurance coverage .
For a federalaid project the Department may terminate your control of the work for failure to include Required Contract Provisions FederalAid Construction Contracts in subcontracts .
The Department gives notice to you and your surety at least business days before terminating control .
The notice describes the failures and the time allowed to remedy the failures .
If failures are not remedied within the time provided the Department takes control of the work .
The Department may complete the work if the Department terminates the Contractors control or you abandon the project Pub Cont Code .
The Department determines the unpaid balance under Pub Cont Code and the Contract .
At any time before final payment of all claims the Department may convert a Contractors control termination to a Contract termination. . CONTRACT TERMINATION .A General The Director may terminate the Contract if it serves the States best interest .
The Department issues you a written notice implements the termination and pays you .
.B Relief from Responsibility for Work Upon receiving a termination notice .
Stop work .
Notify subcontractors and suppliers of the Contract termination and stop Contractrelated work .
Perform the Engineerordered work to secure the job site for termination .
Remove equipment .
Subject to the Engineers authorization settle terminationrelated claims and liabilities involving subcontractors and suppliers assign to the Department the rights titles or interests held by you with respect to these parties .C Responsibility for Materials Upon receiving a termination notice protect unused material until .
You submit an inventory of materials already produced purchased or ordered but not yet used include the location of the material . .
The Engineer identifies materials that will be retained by the Department .
Submit bills of sales or other records of material title . .
The Engineer confirms that unused materials paid by progress payment and materials furnished by the State have been delivered and stored as ordered . .
The titles are transferred for materials purchased by the Department .
Dispose of materials that will not be retained by the Department .
.D Contract Acceptance after Termination The Engineer recommends Contract acceptance after determining the completion of .
Work ordered to be completed before termination .
Other work ordered to secure the project before termination .
Material delivery and title transfer The Department pays you under section .. .E Payment Adjustment for Termination If the Department issues a termination notice the Engineer determines the payment for termination based on the following .
Direct cost for the work ..
Including SECTION PROSECUTION AND PROGRESS Mobilization .
Demobilization .
Securing the job site for termination .
Losses from the sale of materials .
.. Not including Cost of materials you keep .
Profit realized from the sale of materials .
Cost of material damaged by Act of God .
Act of a public enemy .
Fire .
Flood .
Governordeclared state of emergency .
Landslide .
Tsunami .
Other credits . .
Cost of remedial work as estimated by the Engineer is not reimbursed. . Allowance for profit not to exceed percent of the cost of the work .
Prove a likelihood of having made a profit had the Contract not been terminated. . Material handling costs for material returned to the vendor or disposed of as ordered. . Costs in determining the payment adjustment due to the termination excluding attorney fees and litigation costs .
Termination of the Contract does not relieve the surety of its obligation for any just claims arising out of the work performed .
..
RESERVED PAYMENT .
GENERAL Section includes specifications related to work payment . .
MEASUREMENT .A General The Department determines bid item quantities under US customary units .
Except for final pay item quantities the Engineer measures quantities for payment .
.B Weighing Equipment and Procedures .B General Measure material quantities for payment with devices that comply with .
CA Code of Regs et seq . .
Bus Prof Code et seq .
To determine the material payment quantities use measuring devices that have been sealed by the Department of Food and Agricultures Division of Measurement Standards or its designated representative .
If a device is not type approved by the Division of Measurement Standards type approve it under California Test .
Notify the Engineer at least business day before equipment testing .
Use material plant controllers having elements affecting the data accuracy and delivery that have been sealed by the Engineer .
Make these elements available to the Engineer for inspection .
If the elements are adequate for use the Engineer seals them .
If manipulation of a security seal occurs stop material production .
Do not resume production until the Engineer reinspects and reseals the device .
Measure material paid for by weight on sealed scales regularly inspected by the Department of Food and Agricultures Division of Measurement Standards or its designated representative .
Obtain authorization of portable vehicle scale installations before sealing .
.B Equipment Each scale must be long enough to fit an entire vehicle or a combination vehicle on the scale deck .
The Department allows you to weigh a combination vehicle separately if you disconnect the vehicles .
Construct scale undersupports .
Using portland cement concrete containing at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard produced from commercial quality materials .
Such that footing heights are at least inches thick .
With a bearing surface at least inches wide and bearing pressure on the footing not over lbsq ft In constructing a scale .
Provide drainage to prevent water from saturating the ground under the scale .
Use bulkheads that prevent displacement .
If shimming is necessary .. Use securely attached metal shims or grout .. Do not use wedges to shim the supports .. Do not use shim material in excess of inches .
Install mechanical indicating elements level plumb and rigidly mounted on the concrete undersupports .
For a hopper scale rigidly attach the lever systems and mechanical indicating elements such that no weight is lost from bending or support distortion SECTION PAYMENT Each scale used to determine material payment quantities must be operated by a licensed weighmaster Bus Prof Code et seq ..
Submit a public weighmasters certificate or certified daily summary weigh sheets for each weighed material quantity .
The Department may witness material weighing and check and compile the daily scale weight record .
Each vehicle operator must obtain weight or load slips from the weighmaster .
Submit these records at the delivery point .
.B Procedures Each day weigh empty vehicles used to haul material paid for by weight .
Each vehicle must have a legible identification mark .
The Department may verify a material weight by having an empty and loaded vehicle weighed on any scale the Engineer designates .
If imported topsoil soil amendment or mulch is measured by volume .
Each vehicle must allow for an accurate determination of its contents .
Unless vehicles are of uniform capacity each vehicle must have a legible identification mark showing its volumetric capacity .
Load vehicles to at least the volumetric capacity .
Level vehicle loads on arrival at the delivery point If determining a quantity paid on a volume basis is impractical or if authorized weigh the material and the Engineer converts the result to a volume measurement .
The Engineer determines the conversion factors and if you agree adopts this method of measurement .
.C Final Pay Item Quantities The Department shows a bid item quantity as a final pay item for payment purposes only .
For a final pay item accept payment based on the Bid Item List quantity regardless of the actual quantity used unless dimensions are changed by the Engineer .
.D Quantities of Aggregate and Other Roadway Materials The Engineer determines the weights of aggregate and other roadway material that are being paid for by weight as shown in the following table and does not include the deducted weight of water in their payment quantities Determination of Quantities of Aggregate and Other Roadway Materials Material Quantity determination Aggregate or other roadway material except as otherwise shown in this table By deducting the weight of water in the materiala in excess of percent of the dry weight of the material from the weight of the material Imported borrow imported topsoil AB By deducting the weight of water in the materiala in excess of percent of the dry weight of the material from the weight of the material Straw By deducting the weight of water in the materiala in excess of percent of the dry weight of the material from the weight of the material Fiberb Engineer does not deduct the weight of water AB and aggregate for CTBs As specified in section and section NOTE Percentage of water is determined by California Test .
aAt the time of weighing bWeight of water in the fibera must not exceed percent of the dry weight of the fiber. . PAYMENT SCOPE The Department pays you for furnishing the resources and activities required to complete the work .
The Departments payment is full compensation for furnishing the resources and activities including .
Risk loss damage repair or cost of whatever character arising from or relating to the work and performance of the work SECTION PAYMENT .
PLACs and taxes .
Any royalties and costs arising from patents trademarks and copyrights involved in the work The Department does not pay for your loss damage repair or extra costs of whatever character arising from or relating to the work that is a direct or indirect result of your choice of construction methods materials equipment or manpower unless specifically mandated by the Contract .
Payment is .
Full compensation for all work involved in each bid item shown on the Bid Item List by the unit of measure shown for that bid item .
For the price bid for each bid item shown on the Bid Item List or as changed by change order with a specified price adjustment Full compensation for work specified in divisions I II and XI is included in the payment for the bid items involved unless .
Bid item for the work is shown on the Bid Item List .
Work is specified as change order work Work paid for under one bid item is not paid for under any other bid item .
Payment for a bid item includes payment for work in sections referenced by the section set forth by that bid item .
If an alternative is described in the Contract the Department pays based on the bid items for the details and specifications not described as an alternative unless the bid item is described as an alternative in which case the Department pays based on the details and specifications for that alternative .
The Department pays for change order work based on one or a combination of the following .
Bid item prices .
Force account .
Agreed price .
Specialist billing If the Engineer chooses to pay for change order work based on an agreed price but you and the Engineer can not agree on the price the Department pays by force account .
If a portion of extra work is covered by bid items the Department pays for this work as changed quantities in those items .
The Department pays for the remaining portion of the extra work by force account or agreed price .
The Department pays percent annual interest for unpaid and undisputed .
Progress payments .
Afteracceptance payment except for claims For these payments interest starts to accrue days after the st working day following the th day of the month that payment is due .
For a change order bill not submitted within days after performing the work interest starts to accrue days after the st working day following the th day of the month that payment is due .
The Department pays percent annual interest for unpaid and undisputed claims .
Interest starts to accrue days after the Department accepts a claim statement .
The Department pays percent annual interest for awards in arbitration Civ Code .
If the amount of a deduction or withhold exceeds the final payment the Department invoices you for the difference to be paid upon receipt .
Pay your subcontractors within days of receipt of each progress payment under Pub Cont Code and ..
SECTION PAYMENT .
FORCE ACCOUNT .A General For work paid by force account the Engineer compares the Departments records to your daily force account work report .
When you and the Engineer agree on the contents of the daily forceaccount work reports the Engineer accepts the report and the Department pays for the work .
If the records differ the Department pays for the work based only on the information shown on the Departments records .
If a subcontractor performs work at force account accept an additional percent markup to the total cost of that work paid at force account including markups specified in section .
as reimbursement for additional administrative costs .
The markups specified for labor materials and equipment include compensation for all delay costs overhead costs and profit .
If an items unit price is adjusted for workcharacter changes the Department excludes your cost of determining the adjustment .
Payment for owneroperated labor and equipment is made at the marketpriced invoice submitted .
For nonsubcontracted work paid by force account for a contract with a TRO bid item the markups are those shown in the following table instead of those specified in sections .BD Cost Percent markup Labor Materials Equipment rental .B Labor Labor payment is full compensation for the cost of labor used in the direct performance of the work plus a percent markup .
Forceaccount labor payment consists of .
Employer payment to the worker for ..
Basic hourly wage .. Health and welfare .. Pension ..
Vacation .. Training .. Other State and federalrecognized fringe benefit payments .
Labor surcharge percentage in Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates current during the work paid at force account for .. Workers compensation insurance .. Social security .. Medicare .. Federal unemployment insurance .. State unemployment insurance .. State training taxes .
Subsistence and travel allowances paid to the workers .
Employer payment to supervisors if authorized The percent markup consists of payment for all overhead costs related to labor but not designated as costs of the labor used in the direct performance of the work including .
Home office overhead .
Field office overhead .
Bond costs .
Profit .
Labor liability insurance .
Other fixed or administrative costs that are not costs of the labor used in the direct performance of the work SECTION PAYMENT .C Materials Material payment is full compensation for materials you furnish and use in the work .
The Engineer determines the cost based on the material purchase price including delivery charges except .
percent markup is added .
Supplier discounts are subtracted whether you took them or not .
If the Engineer believes the material purchase prices are excessive the Department pays the lowest current wholesale price for a similar material quantity .
If you procured the materials from a source you wholly or partially own the determined cost is based on the lower of the .. Price paid by the purchaser for similar materials from that source on Contract items .. Current wholesale price for those materials .
If you do not submit a material cost record within days of billing the determined cost is based on the lowest wholesale price .. During that period ..
In the quantities used .D Equipment Rental .D General Equipment rental payment is full compensation for .
Rental equipment costs including moving the equipment to and from the change order work site using its own power. . Transport equipment costs for rental equipment that can not be transported economically using its own power .
No payment is made during transport for the transported equipment. . percent markup .
If you want to return the equipment to a location other than its original location the payment to move the equipment must not exceed the cost of returning the equipment to its original location .
If you use the equipment for work other than work paid by force account the transportation cost is included in the other work .
Before moving or loading the equipment obtain authorization for the equipment rentals original location .
The Engineer determines rental costs .
Using the rates in Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates .. By classifying equipment using manufacturers ratings and manufacturerapproved changes .
.. Current during the work paid by force account .
..
Regardless of equipment ownership but the Department uses the rental document rates or minimum rental cost terms if Rented from an equipment business you do not own .
Hourly rate in Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates is .
per hour or less . .
Using the rates established by the Engineer for equipment not listed in Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates .
You may submit cost information that helps the Engineer establish the rental rate but the Department uses the rental document rates or minimum rental cost terms if ..
Rented from an equipment business you do not own .
..
The Engineer establishes a rate of .
per hour or less . .
Using rates for transport equipment not exceeding the hourly rates charged by established haulers .
Equipment rental rates include the cost of .
Fuel .
Repairs and maintenance .
Oil .
Depreciation .
Lubrication .
Storage .
Supplies .
Insurance .
Small tools that are not consumed by use .
Incidentals .
Necessary attachments SECTION PAYMENT The Department pays for small tools consumed by use .
The Engineer determines the payment for small tools consumed by use based on Contractorsubmitted invoices .
The Engineer may authorize rates in excess of those in the Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates if .
You submit a request to use rented equipment .
Equipment is not available from your normal sources or from one of your subcontractors .
Rented equipment is from an independent rental company .
Proposed equipment rental rate is reasonable .
The Engineer authorizes the equipment source and the rental rate before you use the equipment The Department pays for fuel consumed during the operation of rented equipment not included in the invoiced rental rates .
.D Equipment On the Job Site For equipment on the job site at the time required to perform work paid by force account the time paid is the time .
To move the equipment to the location of work paid by force account plus an equal amount of time to move the equipment to another location on the job site when the work paid by force account is completed .
To load and unload equipment .
Equipment is operated to perform work paid by force account and ..
Hourly rates are paid in hour increments .. Daily rates are paid in day increments .D Equipment Not On the Job Site and Not Required for OriginalContract Work For equipment not on the job site at the time required to perform work paid by force account and not required for the original Contract work the time paid is the time the equipment is operated to perform work paid by force account and the time to return the equipment to its source when the work paid by force account is completed .
The minimum total time paid is .
day if daily rates are paid .
hours if hourly rates are paid If daily rates are recorded equipment .
Idled is paid as day .
Operated less than hours is paid as day .
Operated hours or more is paid as day If the minimum total time exceeds hours and if hourly rates are listed the Department rounds up hours operated to the nearest hour increment and pays based on the hours shown the following table .
The table does not apply when equipment is not operated due to breakdowns in which case rental hours are the hours the equipment was operated .
Equipment Rental Hours Hours operated Hours paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SECTION PAYMENT .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . hours used .D Equipment Not On the Job Site and Required for OriginalContract Work For equipment not on the job site at the time required to perform work paid by force account and required for the original Contract work the time paid is the time .
To move the equipment to the location of work paid by force account plus an equal amount of time to move the equipment to a location on the job site or its source when the work paid by force account is completed .
Equipment is operated to perform work paid by force account .D NonOwnerOperated Dump Truck Rental Submit the rental rate for a nonowneroperated dump truck .
The Engineer determines the payment rate .
Payment for the rental of a nonowneroperated dump truck is for the cost of renting a dump truck including its driver .
For the purpose of markup payment only the nonowneroperated dump truck is rental equipment and the owner is a subcontractor . .
EXTRA WORK PERFORMED BY SPECIALISTS If the Engineer determines that you or your subcontractors are not capable of performing specialty extra work a specialist may be used .
Itemize the labor material and equipment rental costs unless it is not the special service industrys established practice to provide itemization in which case the Engineer accepts current marketpriced invoices for the work .
The Engineer may accept an invoice as a specialist billing for work performed at an offjob site manufacturing plant or machine shop .
The Engineer determines the cost based on the specialist invoice price minus any available or offered discounts plus a percent markup. . CHANGED QUANTITY PAYMENT ADJUSTMENTS .A General The unit prices specified in section .
are adjusted under section .. .B Increases of More Than Percent If the total bid item quantity exceeds percent of the quantity shown on the Bid Item List and if no approved Change Order addresses payment for the quantity exceeding percent the Engineer may adjust the unit price for the excess quantity under section .
or the following .
The adjustment is the difference between the unit price and the unit cost of the total item pay quantity . .
In determining the unit cost the Engineer excludes the items fixed costs .
You have recovered the fixed costs in the payment for percent shown on the Bid Item List. . After excluding fixed costs the Engineer determines the item unit cost under section ..
If the payment for the number of units of a bid item in excess of percent of the Bid Item List is less than at the unit price the Engineer may not adjust the unit price unless you request it .
.C Decreases of More Than Percent If the total item pay quantity is less than percent of the quantity shown on the Bid Item List and if no approved Change Order addresses payment for the quantity less than percent you may request a unit price adjustment .
The Engineer may adjust the unit price for the decreased quantity under section .
or the following SECTION PAYMENT .
The adjustment is the difference between the unit price and the unit cost of the total pay quantity . .
In determining the unit cost the Engineer includes the items fixed costs. . After including fixed costs the Engineer determines the item unit cost under section ..
The Department does not pay more than percent of the item total in the Bid Item List .
.D Eliminated Items If the Engineer eliminates an item the Engineer notifies you and the Department pays your costs incurred before the notification date .
If you order authorized material for an eliminated item before the notification date and the order can not be canceled either of the following occurs .
If the material is returnable to the vendor the Engineer orders you to return the material and the Department pays your handling costs and vendor charges . .
The Department pays your cost for the material and its handling and becomes the material owner .
The Engineer determines the payment for the eliminated bid item under section .. . PAYMENT ADJUSTMENTS FOR PRICE INDEX FLUCTUATIONS .A General Section .
applies to asphalt contained in materials for pavement structures and pavement surface treatments such as HMA tack coat asphaltic emulsions bituminous seals asphalt binders and modified asphalt binders placed in the work .
Section .
does not apply if you opted out of payment adjustments for price index fluctuations at the time of bid .
The Engineer adjusts payment whenever the California statewide crude oil price index for the month the material is placed is more than percent higher or lower than the price index at the time of bid .
The Department determines the California statewide crude oil price index each month on or about the st business day of the month using the average of the posted prices in effect for the previous month as posted by Chevron ExxonMobil and ConocoPhillips for the Buena Vista and Midway Sunset fields .
If a company discontinues posting its prices for a field the Department determines the index from the remaining posted prices .
The Department may include additional fields to determine the index .
For the California statewide crude oil price index go to the Departments Division of Construction website .
If the adjustment is a decrease in payment the Department deducts the amount from the monthly progress payment .
The Department makes payment adjustments due to price index fluctuations for changed quantities under section ..
If you do not complete the work within the Contract time payment adjustments during the overrun period are determined using the California statewide crude oil price index in effect for the month in which the overrun period began .
If the price index at the time of placement increases .
percent or more over the price index at bid opening notify the Engineer. . percent or more over the price index at bid opening do not furnish material containing asphalt until the Engineer authorizes you to proceed with that work .
The Department may decrease bid item quantities eliminate bid items or terminate the Contract .
Before placing material containing asphalt submit the current sales and use tax rate in effect in the tax jurisdiction where the material is to be placed .
Submit a public weighmasters certificate for HMA tack coat asphaltic emulsions and modified asphalt binders including those materials not paid for by weight .
For slurry seals submit a separate public weighmasters certificate for the asphaltic emulsion .
SECTION PAYMENT .B Asphalt Quantities .B General Reserved .B Hot Mix Asphalt The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in HMA using the following formula Qh HMATT x Xa where Qh quantity in tons of asphalt used in HMA HMATT HMA total tons placed Xa theoretical asphalt content from the job mix formula expressed as a percentage of the total weight of HMA .B Rubberized Hot Mix Asphalt The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in RHMA using the following formula Qrh RHMATT x . x Xarb where Qrh quantity in tons of asphalt in asphalt rubber binder used in RHMA RHMATT RHMA total tons placed Xarb theoretical asphalt rubber binder content from the job mix formula expressed as a percentage of the total weight of rubberized HMA .B Hot Mix Asphalt with Modified Asphalt Binder The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in HMA with modified asphalt binder using the following formula Qmh MHMATT x Xam x Xmab where Qmh quantity in tons of asphalt in modified asphalt binder used in HMA MHMATT modified asphalt binder HMA total tons placed Xam specified percentage of asphalt modifier Xmab theoretical modified asphalt binder content from the job mix formula expressed as a percentage of the total weight of HMA .B Hot Mix Asphalt Containing Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in HMA containing RAP using the following formula Qrap HMATT x Xaa where Xaa Xta Xnew x Xra and Qrap quantity in tons of asphalt used in HMA containing RAP HMATT HMA total tons placed Xaa asphalt content of HMA adjusted to account for the asphalt content in RAP expressed as a percentage of the total weight of HMA Xta total asphalt content of HMA expressed as a percentage of the total weight of HMA Xnew theoretical percentage of new aggregate in the HMA containing RAP determined from the RAP percentage in the job mix formula Xra asphalt content of RAP expressed as percentage .B Tack Coat The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in tack coat Qtc as either of the following SECTION PAYMENT .
Asphalt binder using the asphalt binder total tons placed as tack coat .
Asphaltic emulsion by applying the formula in section .B to the asphaltic emulsion total tons placed as tack coat .B Asphaltic Emulsion The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in asphaltic emulsions including fog seals and tack coat using the following formula Qe AETT x Xe where Qe quantity in tons of asphalt used in asphaltic emulsions AETT undiluted asphaltic emulsions total tons placed Xe minimum percent residue specified in section based on the type of emulsion used You may determine Xe by submitting daily test results for asphalt residue for the asphaltic emulsion used .
If you choose this option you must .
Take sample for every tons but not less than sample per day in the presence of the Engineer from the delivery truck at midload from a sampling tap or thief and as follows ..
Draw and discard the st gallon .. Take separate gal samples .
Submit the st sample at the time of sampling .
Furnish the nd sample within business days of sampling to an authorized laboratory that participates in the AASHTO Proficiency Sample Program .
Submit test results from the laboratory within business days of the sample date .B Slurry Seal The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in slurry seals Qss by applying the formula in section .B to the quantity of asphaltic emulsion used in producing the slurry seal mix .
.B Modified Asphalt Binder The Engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in modified asphalt binder using the following formula Qmab MABTT x Xam where Qmab quantity in tons of asphalt used in modified asphalt binder MABTT modified asphalt binder total tons placed Xam specified percentage of asphalt modifier The quantity of extender oil is included in the quantity of asphalt .
.B Other Materials For materials containing asphalt not covered in sections .B through .B the Engineer determines the method for calculating the quantity of asphalt Qo .
.C Payment Adjustments The Engineer includes payment adjustments for price index fluctuations in progress estimates .
If material containing asphalt is placed within months during estimate period the Engineer calculates separate adjustments .
Each adjustment is calculated using the price index for the month in which the quantity of material containing asphalt subject to adjustment is placed in the work .
The sum of the adjustments is used for increasing or decreasing payment in the progress estimate .
The Engineer calculates each payment adjustment using the following formula PA Qt x A where SECTION PAYMENT PA payment adjustment in dollars for asphalt contained in materials placed in the work for a given month Qt sum of all quantities of asphalt Qh Qrh Qmh Qrap Qtc Qe Qss Qmab Qo A adjustment in dollars per ton of asphalt used to produce materials placed in the work rounded to the nearest .
where A IuIb .
x Ib x T for an increase in the crude oil price index exceeding percent A IuIb .
x Ib x T for a decrease in the crude oil price index exceeding percent and Iu California statewide crude oil price index for the month in which the quantity of asphalt subject to adjustment was placed in the work Ib California statewide crude oil price index for the month in which the bid opening for the project occurred T Sales and use tax rate expressed as a percent currently in effect in the tax jurisdiction where the material is placed .
If the tax rate information is not submitted timely the statewide sales and use tax rate is used in the payment adjustment calculations until the tax rate information is submitted .
..
RESERVED .
TIMERELATED OVERHEAD .A General Section .
applies if a bid item for timerelated overhead is included in the Contract .
If a bid item for timerelated overhead is included you must exclude the timerelated overhead from every other bid item price .
.B Payment Quantity The TRO quantity does not include the number of working days to complete plant establishment work .
For a contract with a TRO lump sum quantity on the Bid Item List the Department pays you based on the following conversions .
LS unit of measure is replaced with WDAY .
Lump sum quantity is replaced with the number of working days bid .
Lump sum unit price is replaced with the item total divided by the number of working days bid .C Payment Inclusions Payment for the TRO bid item includes payment for timerelated field and homeoffice overhead for the time required to complete the work .
The field office overhead includes timerelated expenses associated with the normal and recurring construction activities not directly attributed to the work including .
Salaries benefits and equipment costs of .. Project managers .. General superintendents .. Field office managers .. Field office staff assigned to the project .
Rent .
Utilities .
Maintenance .
Security .
Supplies .
Office equipment costs for the projects field office The homeoffice overhead includes the fixed general and administrative expenses for operating your business including .
General administration SECTION PAYMENT .
Insurance .
Personnel and subcontract administration .
Purchasing .
Accounting .
Project engineering and estimating Payment for the TRO bid item does not include payment for .
Homeoffice overhead expenses specifically related to ..
Your other contracts or other businesses .. Equipment coordination .. Material deliveries ..
Consultant and legal fees .
Nontimerelated costs and expenses such as mobilization licenses permits and other charges incurred once during the Contract .
Additional overhead involved in incentivedisincentive provisions to satisfy an internal milestone or multiple calendar requirements .
Additional overhead involved in performing additional work that is not a controlling activity .
Overhead costs incurred by your subcontractors of any tier or suppliers .D Payment Schedule For progress payments the total work completed for the TRO bid item is the number of working days shown for the pay period on the Weekly Statement of Working Days form .
For progress payments the Department pays a unit price equal to the lesser of the following amounts .
Price per working day as bid or as converted under section .B .
percent of the total bid divided by the number of original working days For a contract without plant establishment work the Department pays you the balance due for the TRO item total as specified in section .B .
For a contract with plant establishment work the Department pays you the balance due for the TRO item total in the st progress payment after all nonplant establishment work is completed .
.E Payment Adjustments The overhead adjustment specified in section .C does not apply .
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the TRO quantity except as specified in section .E .
Section .Db does not apply to TRO except as specified for the audit report below .
If the TRO bid item quantity exceeds percent of the quantity shown on the Bid Item List or as converted under section .B the Engineer may adjust or you may request an adjustment of the unit price for the excess quantity .
For the adjustment submit an audit report within days of the Engineers request .
The report must be prepared as specified for an audit report for an overhead claim in section .Db .
Within days of the Engineers request make your financial records available for an audit by the State for the purpose of verifying the actual rate of TRO described in your audit .
The actual rate of TRO described is subject to the Engineers authorization .
The Department pays the authorized actual rate for TRO in excess of percent of the quantity shown on the Bid Item List or as converted under section .B .
The Department pays for the cost of the report the Contractor pays for the other .
The cost is determined under section ..
SECTION PAYMENT ..
RESERVED .
WORKCHARACTER CHANGES The Department adjusts a bid item unit price based on the difference between the cost to perform the work as planned and the cost to perform the work as changed .
The Engineer determines the payment adjustment under section ..
The Department adjusts payment for only the work portion that changed in character. . PROGRESS PAYMENTS .A General The Department pays you based on Engineerprepared monthly progress estimates .
Each estimate reflects .
Total work completed during the pay period .
Change order bills if ..
Submitted by the th day of a month .. Approved by the th day of a month .
Amount for materials on hand .
Amount earned for mobilization .
Deductions .
Withholds .
Resolved potential claims .
Payment adjustments Submit certification stating the work complies with the QC procedures .
The Engineer does not process a progress estimate without a signed certification .
.B Schedule of Values Section .B applies to a lump sum bid item for which a schedule of values is specified to be submitted .
The sum of the amounts for the work units listed in the schedule of values must equal the lump sum price bid for the bid item .
Obtain authorization for a schedule of values before you perform work shown on the schedule .
The Department does not process a progress payment for the bid item without an authorized schedule of values .
Accept progress payments for overhead profit bond costs and other fixed or administrative costs as distributed proportionally among the items listed except that for a contract with a bid item for mobilization accept progress payments for bond costs as included in the mobilization bid item .
For changed quantities of the work units listed the Department adjusts payments in the same manner as specified for changed quantities of bid items under section .. .C Materials On Hand A material on hand but not incorporated into the work is eligible for a progress payment if .
Listed in a special provision as eligible and is in compliance with other Contract parts .
Purchased .
Invoice is submitted .
Stored within the State and you submit evidence that the stored material is subject to the Departments control .
Requested on the Departmentfurnished form .D Mobilization .D General Section .D applies if a bid item for mobilization is shown on the Bid Item List .
Payments for mobilization made under section .D are in addition to the partial payments made under Pub Cont Code .
SECTION PAYMENT Section .D applies unless the Contract includes a special provision for section .D that specifies section .D applies .
.D Mobilization for Projects Except for Those Over Water Requiring Marine Access The Department makes partial payments for mobilization under Pub Cont Code a except the amount of work completed does not include the amount earned for mobilization .
The partial payment amount is reduced by a prorated amount bid in excess of the maximum allowed under Pub Cont Code a .
The Department pays the item total for mobilization in excess of the maximum allowed under Pub Cont Code a in the st payment after Contract acceptance .
.D Mobilization for Projects Over Water Requiring Marine Access The Department makes partial payments for mobilization under Pub Cont Code b except the amount of work completed does not include the amount earned for mobilization .
The partial payment amount is reduced by a prorated amount bid in excess of the maximum allowed under Pub Cont Code b .
The Department pays the item total for mobilization in excess of the maximum allowed under Pub Cont Code b in the st payment after Contract acceptance .
.E Withholds .E General The Department may withhold payment for noncompliance .
The Department returns the noncompliance withhold in the progress payment following the correction of noncompliance except as specified in section .E .
Withholds are not retentions under Pub Cont Code and do not accrue interest under Pub Cont Code .. Withholds are cumulative and independent of deductions .
Section .E does not include all withholds that may be taken the Department may withhold other payments as specified .
.E Progress Withholds The Department withholds percent of a progress payment for noncompliant progress .
Noncompliant progress occurs when .
Total days to date exceed percent of the working days .
Percent of the working days elapsed exceeds the percent of value of the work completed by more than percent The Engineer determines the percent of the working days elapsed by dividing the total days to date by the revised Contract working days and converting the quotient to a percentage .
The Engineer determines the percent value of the work completed by summing payments made to date and the amount due on the current progress estimate dividing this sum by the current total estimated value of the work and converting the quotient to a percentage .
These amounts are shown on the Progress Payment Voucher form .
When the percent of the working days elapsed minus the percent value of work completed is less than or equal to percent the Department returns the withhold in the next progress payment .
.E Performance Failure Withholds During each estimate period you fail to comply with a Contract part including the submittal of a document as specified the Department withholds a part of the progress payment except as specified below for the failure to submit a document during the last estimate period .
These documents include QC plans schedules traffic control plans and water pollution control submittals .
SECTION PAYMENT For performance failure the Department withholds percent of the progress payment but does not withhold more than percent of the total bid .
For multiple performance failures the Department withholds percent of the progress payment but does not withhold more than percent of the total bid .
During the last estimate period if you fail to submit a document as specified the Department withholds for each document .
The Department returns the withhold within days after receipt of the document .
.E Stop Notice Withholds The Department may withhold payments to cover claims filed under Civ Code et seq .
Stop notice information may be obtained from the Division of Accounting Office of External Accounts Payable .
.E Penalty Withholds Penalties include fines and damages that are proposed assessed or levied against you or the Department by a governmental agency or private lawsuit .
Penalties are also payments made or costs incurred in settling alleged violations of federal State or local laws regulations requirements or PLACs .
The cost incurred may include the amount spent for mitigation or correcting a violation .
If the Department is assessed a penalty the Department may withhold the penalty amount until the penalty disposition has been resolved .
The Department may withhold penalty amounts without notifying you .
Instead of the withhold you may provide a bond equal to the highest estimated liability for any disputed penalties proposed except you may not provide a bond for withholds related to labor compliance violations .
.E.E Reserved .F Retentions Section .F applies before January .
The Department does not retain moneys from progress payments due to the Contractor for work performed Pub Cont Code .
.G.M Reserved .
PAYMENT AFTER CONTRACT ACCEPTANCE .A General Reserved .B Payment Before Final Estimate After Contract acceptance the Department pays you based on the Engineerprepared estimate that includes withholds and the balance due after the deduction of previous payments .
.C Proposed Final Estimate The Engineer estimates the amount of work completed and shows the amount payable in a proposed final estimate based on .
Contract items .
Payment adjustments .
Work paid by force account or agreed price .
Extra work .
Deductions Submit either a written acceptance of the proposed final estimate or a claim statement postmarked or hand delivered before the st day after receiving the proposed final estimate .
If you claim that the proposed final estimate is less than percent of your total bid the Department adjusts the final payment to cover your overhead .
The adjustment is percent of the difference between SECTION PAYMENT the total bid and the final estimate .
The Department does not make this adjustment on a terminated contract .
.D Final Payment and Claims .D General If you accept the proposed final estimate or do not submit a claim statement within days of receiving the estimate the Engineer provides you the final estimate and the Department pays the amount due within days .
This final estimate and payment is conclusive except as specified in sections . . and ..
If you submit a claim statement within days of receiving the Engineers proposed final estimate the Engineer provides you a semifinal estimate and the Department pays the amount due within days .
The semifinal estimate is conclusive as to the amount of work completed and the amount payable except as affected by any claims or as specified in sections . . and .. .D Claim Statement .Da General For each claim submit a claim statement showing only the identification number that corresponds to the Full and Final Potential Claim Record form and the final amount of the additional payment requested except .
If the final amount of the requested payment differs from the amount requested in the Full and Final Potential Claim Record form .
For a claim for quantities withholds deductions liquidated damages or change order bills .
For an overhead claim If the final amount of the requested payment differs from the amount requested in the Full and Final Potential Claim Record form submit .
Identification number that corresponds to the Full and Final Potential Claim Record form .
Final amount of additional payment requested .
Basis for the changed amount .
Contract documentation that supports the changed amount .
Statement of the reasons the Contract documentation supports the claim The Engineer notifies you of an omission of or a disparity in the exclusive identification number .
Within days of the notification correct the omission or disparity .
If the omission or disparity is not resolved after days the Engineer assigns a new number .
For a claim for quantities withholds deductions or change order bills submit .
Final amount of the additional payment requested .
Enough detail to enable the Engineer to determine the basis and amounts of the additional payment requested .Db Overhead Claims Include with an overhead claim .
Final amount of additional payment requested .
Independent CPA audit report Failure to submit the audit report with an overhead claim with the claim statement is a waiver of the overhead claim and operates as a bar to arbitration on the claim Pub Cont Code ..
The Department deducts an amount for field and home office overhead paid on added work from any claim for overhead .
The value of the added work equals the value of the work completed minus the total bid .
The home office overhead deduction equals percent of the added work .
The field office overhead deduction equals percent of the added work .
If you intend to pursue a claim for reimbursement for field or home office overhead beyond that provided expressly by the Contract SECTION PAYMENT .
Notify the Engineer within days of receiving the proposed final estimate of your intent to seek reimbursement for specific overhead costs beyond that provided by the Contract .
Specifically identify each claim and each date associated with each claim for which you seek reimbursement for specific overhead costs beyond that provided by the Contract .
Timely submit all other claims .
Within days of receiving the proposed final estimate submit an audit report prepared by an independent CPA including ..
Calculations with supporting documentation of actual home office and project field overhead costs ..
Calculations specifying the actual daily rates for both field and home office overhead not including a profit markup for the entire duration of the project expressed as a rate per working day .. Start and end dates of the actual project performance period number of working days overhead cost pools and all allocation bases used to calculate your actual field and home office overhead daily rates .
Field overhead costs from which the daily rate is calculated must be .. Allowable under CFR ..
Supported by reliable records .. Related solely to the project ..
Incurred during the actual project performance period .. Comprised of only timerelated field overhead costs .. Not a direct cost .
Homeoffice overhead costs from which the daily rate is calculated must be .. Allowable under CFR ..
Supported by reliable records ..
Incurred during the actual project performance period .. Comprised of only fixed homeoffice overhead costs .. Not a direct cost The actual rate of timerelated overhead is subject to authorization by the Engineer .
The CPAs audit must be performed as an examinationlevel engagement under the attestation engagements in the Government Auditing Standards published by the Comptroller General of the United States .
The CPAs audit report must express an opinion of whether or not your calculations of your actual field and home office overhead daily rates comply with section .Db .
The attest documentation prepared by the CPA in connection with the audit must be reproduced and submitted for review with the audit report .
The Department provides markups for all work paid by force account .
Overhead for field and home office costs are included in the markups .
Overhead claims in excess of Contract markups are not allowed under the Contract .
If you seek reimbursement for costs not allowed under the Contract the Department does not pay your cost of performing the independent CPA examination specified in section .Db including preparation of the audit report .
.Dc Declaration Submit a declaration that includes the following language with the claim statement I declare under penalty of perjury according to the laws of the State of California that the foregoing claims with specific reference to the California False Claims Act Govt Code et seq .
and to the extent the project contains federal funding the US False Claims Act USC et seq .
are true and correct and that this declaration was signed on ______date_______ __ at _________________ California .
.Dd Waiver A claim is waived if .
Claim does not have a corresponding Full and Final Potential Claim Record form identification number .
Claim does not have the same nature circumstances and basis of the claim as the corresponding Full and Final Potential Claim Record form SECTION PAYMENT .
Claim is not included in the claim statement .
You do not comply with the claim procedures .
You do not submit the declaration specified in section .Dc .D Final Determination of Claims Failure to allow timely access to the supporting data for a claim when requested waives the claim .
The Departments costs in reviewing or auditing a claim not supported by the Contractors accounting or other records are damages incurred by the State within the meaning of the California False Claims Act .
If the Engineer determines that a claim requires additional analysis the Engineer schedules a review board meeting .
Meet with the board of review and make a presentation supporting the claim .
After the Engineer or review board finishes reviewing the claim the Department makes the final determination of claims and provides it to you .
The Engineer provides you a final estimate and the Department pays the amount due within days .
The final estimate is conclusive as to the amount of work completed and the amount payable except as specified in sections . . and ..
Your failure to comply with the claim procedures is a bar to arbitration under Pub Cont Code .. ..
RESERVED .
CLERICAL ERRORS For years after Contract acceptance estimates and payments are open to correction and adjustment for clerical errors .
Either you or the Department pays to the other the amount due except for clerical errors resulting in an adjustment less than in which case no payment is made . .
ARBITRATION Pub Cont Code through .
provides for the resolution of contract claims by arbitration .
Start arbitration by filing a complaint with the Office of Administrative Hearings in Sacramento CA Code Regs .
File the arbitration complaint no later than days after receiving the Departments final written decision on a claim Pub Cont Code .. DIVISION II GENERAL CONSTRUCTION GENERAL GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for performing construction work. . WORK SEQUENCING .A General Reserved .B Traffic Elements If maintaining existing traffic management system elements during construction is shown on the Bid Item List conduct a preconstruction operational status check of the existing traffic management system elements and each elements communication status with the Traffic Management Center before starting job site activities .
Conduct the status check with the Engineer and the Departments traffic operations electrical representatives .
The status check must include existing traffic management system elements not shown and elements that may not be affected by your work activities .
The Departments traffic operations representatives will provide you a certified list of .
Existing traffic management system elements and their locations within the project limits .
Fully functioning elements .
Nonoperational elements If maintaining existing traffic management system elements during construction is not shown or is not on the Bid Item List and an existing system element is discovered during the work conduct an operational status check .
This work is change order work .
.C Landscaping and Irrigation Facilities .C General Reserved .C Irrigation Facilities Upon discovering an irrigation facility not described in the Contract immediately notify the Engineer .
The Engineer orders the locating and protecting of the irrigation facility .
The locating and protecting is change order work .
.C Landscaping Reserved .D Traffic Stripes Pavement Markings and Pavement Markers Before obliterating any traffic stripes pavement markings and pavement markers to be replaced at the same location reference the stripes markings and markers .
Include limits and transitions with control points to reestablish the new stripes markings and markers .
Submit your references to the control points at least business days before obliterating the stripes markings and markers .
.E Excavation If a difference in excess of .
foot exists between the elevation of the existing pavement and the elevation of an excavation within feet of the left edge or within feet of the right edge of the traveled way at the end of each working day place and compact material against the vertical cut adjacent to the traveled way .
During the excavation you may use native material for this purpose except you must use structural material once you start placing the structural section .
Place the material to the top of the existing pavement and taper at a slope of horizontalvertical or flatter to the bottom of the excavation .
Do not use treated base for the taper. . TIME CONSTRAINTS Reserved SECTION GENERAL .
TRAINING AND MEETINGS Training and meetings are held at times and locations you and the Engineer agree to .
..
RESERVED RESERVED WATER USAGE Section includes general specifications for using water for construction activities .
The Department encourages you to conserve water in all construction activities .
The Engineer notifies you of any water shortage or mandate from a local water authority to ration water .
Within days of the notification submit a water conservation plan .
The plan must include .
List of construction activities that require water .
Measures you will implement for each activity to conserve water .
Method for curing concrete other than the water method if included in the work .
Dust palliative you will use for dust control DUST CONTROL Section includes general specifications for controlling dust resulting from the work .
Prevent and alleviate dust by .
Applying a dust palliative under section .
Applying temporary soil stabilization under section .
Managing material stockpiles under section .C WATERING Section includes specifications for developing a water supply furnishing water and applying water .
Developing a water supply includes developing a supply of water and furnishing pipes or other equipment needed to convey the water to the water application equipment .
Water may be potable or nonpotable .
Nonpotable water must be either recycled water or nonpotable water developed from other sources .
The sources and discharge of recycled water must comply with the waterrecycling criteria of the CDPH and the requirements of the appropriate RWQCB .
Obtain either a waste discharge permit or a waiver from the appropriate RWQCB for each water source .
Submit a copy of the permit or waiver before using the water in the work .
If an available source of water is described in the Information Handout verify the quality and quantity of water .
Nonpotable water must not be conveyed in tanks or drain pipes that will be used to convey potable water .
Nonpotable water supplies and potable water supplies must not be connected .
Nonpotable water supply tanks pipes and other conveyances of nonpotable water must be labeled Nonpotable Water Do Not Drink .
Each water storage tank and distribution system must be equipped with positive shutoff valves .
Keep at least mobile unit with a capacity of at least gal the job site at all times for applying water unless all water is applied through pipes or another authorized method .
For compacting embankment material subbase base and surfacing material and for dust control apply water with equipment that will apply it uniformly .
For compaction you may use a chemical additive if authorized .
If a bid item for develop water supply is shown on the Bid Item List the Department does not adjust the lump sum price for any increase or decrease in the quantity of water required or for change order work .
RESERVED WELDING GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for welding where welding is specified to comply with an AWS welding code .
Do not perform welding using fluxcored welding electrodes that comply with AWS A. EXT or EXT .
Wherever reference is made to the following AWS welding codes in the Contract the year of adoption for these codes is as shown in the following table AWS code Year of adoption D. D. D. D. D. D. . DEFINITIONS continuous inspection QC Inspector must be within close proximity of all welders or welding operators such that inspections by the QC Inspector of each welding activity at each welding location do not lapse for a period exceeding minutes .
gross nonconformance Rejectable indications are present in more than percent of the tested weld length. . QUALITY CONTROL INSPECTOR Replace clause .. of AWS D. the st paragraph of clause .. of AWS D. and clause .. of AWS D. with The QC Inspector must be the duly assigned person who acts for and on your behalf for inspection testing and quality related matters for all welding .
The QA Inspector is the authorized representative who acts for and on behalf of the Engineer .
The QC Inspector must be responsible for QC acceptance or rejection of materials and workmanship .
Where the term Inspector is used without further qualification it refers to the QC Inspector .
The QC Inspector must document inspection and approval of .
All joint preparations assembly practices joint fitups and welding techniques .
Performance of each welder welding operator and tack welder on a daily basis for each day welding is performed For each inspection including fitup WPS verification and final weld inspection the QC Inspector must confirm and document compliance with the specifications AWS welding codes and any referenced drawings . .
PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS The Engineer has the authority to verify the qualifications or certifications of any welder QC Inspector or NDT personnel to specified levels by retests or other means determined by the Engineer .
If welding will be performed without gas shielding then qualification must also include welding without gas shielding .
Replace clause of AWS D. clause .
of AWS D. and clause of AWS D. with Personnel performing NDT must be qualified and certified under American Society for Nondestructive Testing ASNT Recommended Practice No .
SNTTCA and the written practice of the NDT firm .
The written practice of the NDT firm must comply with or exceed the guidelines of the ASNT SECTION WELDING Recommended Practice No .
SNTTCA .
Individuals who perform NDT review the results and prepare the written reports must be one of the following .
Certified NDT Level II technicians .
Level III technicians certified to perform the work of Level II technicians .
WELD JOINT DETAILS If weld joint details proposed for use in the work are not prequalified under clause of AWS D. or figure .
or .
of AWS D. submit the proposed WPS and the intended weld joint locations .
Upon authorization of the proposed joint detail locations and qualification of the proposed joint details welders and welding operators using these details must weld an additional qualification test plate using the WPS variables and the weld joint detail to be used in production .
The test plate must .
Have the maximum thickness to be used in production and a minimum length of inches. . Be mechanically and radiographically tested .
Mechanical and radiographic testing and acceptance criteria must comply with the applicable AWS codes .
If a nonprequalified weld joint configuration is proposed using a combination of WPSs for work welded under AWS D. you may conduct a single test combining the WPSs to be used in production if the essential variables including weld bead placement of each process are limited to those established in table .
of AWS D ..
The Engineer will witness all procedure qualification tests for WPSs that were not previously authorized by the Department .
Submit an inspection request form to METS at least days before performing any procedure qualification tests .
Notify the Engineer of your submittal .
Witnessing of qualification tests by the Engineer does not constitute authorization of the intended joint locations welding parameters or essential variables. . NONDESTRUCTIVE TESTING Replace paragraph of clause of AWS D. with .
If indications that exhibit these planar characteristics are present at scanning sensitivity or other evidence exists to suggest the presence of transverse cracks a more detailed evaluation of the discontinuity by other means must be performed e.g .
alternate UT techniques RT grinding or gouging for visual inspection or MT of the excavated areas .. For welds that have transverse cracks excavate the full length of the crack plus inches of weld metal on each side adjacent to the crack and reweld .
Clause .. of AWS D. clause .. of AWS D. and clause .. of AWS D. do not apply .
The Engineer may order you to perform NDT that is in addition to the visual inspection or NDT specified in the specifications or AWS welding code .
The additional NDT and associated repair work is change order work .
If the NDT discloses an attempt to defraud or reveals a gross nonconformance the Department does not pay for the costs associated with the repair of the deficient area the NDT of the weld and of the repair or any delays caused by the repair .
If less than percent of NDT is specified for any weld the entire length of weld must comply with the specified acceptance criteria .
If any welding deficiencies are discovered by additional NDT ordered or performed by the Engineer that uses the same NDT method as that originally specified the Department does not pay for the costs associated with the repair of the deficient area including NDT of the weld and of the weld repair or any delays caused by the repair .
If any welding deficiencies are discovered by visual inspection ordered or performed by the Engineer the Department does not pay for the costs associated with the repair of a deficient area or any delays caused by the repair .
SECTION WELDING WELDING QUALITY CONTROL .
GENERAL Section applies to work welded under sections and .
and work in section that must comply with an AWS welding code .
Section does not apply to stud welding .
All welding requires inspection by the Engineer .
You must provide continuous inspection when any welding is being performed. . WELDING QUALITY CONTROL MANAGER Assign a welding QC manager .
The welding QC manager must be registered as a civil engineer in the State or currently certified as a CWI. . SUBMITTALS .A General If welding is performed at the job site submit an inspection request form at least business days before performing welding at the job site .
Notify the Engineer of your submittal .
.B Welding Quality Control Plan Before submitting a welding QC plan hold a prewelding meeting to discuss the requirements for the welding QC plan .
The meeting attendees must include the Engineer your welding QC manager and a representative from each entity performing welding or inspection for the Contract .
For the contents format and organization required for a welding QC plan go to the METS Web site .
Submit copies of a welding QC plan for each subcontractor or supplier for each item of work for which welding is performed .
Submit an amended welding QC plan or an addendum to the welding QC plan for any changes to .
WPSs .
NDT firms .
QC personnel or procedures .
NDT personnel or procedures .
Systems for tracking and identifying welds .
Welding personnel Allow days for the Engineers review of an amended welding QC plan or an addendum to the welding QC plan .
Submit copies of each authorized QC plan and any authorized addendums .
Make copy available at each location where work is performed .
.C Welding Report Submit a welding report within days following the performance of any welding .
The welding report must include .
Daily production log for welding for each day that welding is performed .
Reports of all visual weld inspections and NDT performed whether specified additional or informational .
Radiographs and radiographic reports and other required NDT reports .
Summary of welding and NDT activities that occurred during the reporting period .
Reports of each application of heat straightening .
Summarized log listing the rejected lengths of weld by welder position process joint configuration and piece number .
Documentation that you have .. Evaluated all radiographs and radiograph reports and NDT and NDT reports ..
Corrected all rejectable deficiencies and that all repaired welds have been reexamined using the required NDT and found acceptable SECTION WELDING .
Reports or chart recordings of each application of any stress relieving used .
Reports and chart recordings for any electroslag welding used The daily production log must include .
Locations of all welding .
For each location the welders names quantity of welding performed any problems or deficiencies discovered and any testing or repair work performed .
Daily report from each QC Inspector Clearly write the following information on the outside of radiographic film envelopes .
Name of the QC manager .
Name of the NDT firm .
Name of the radiographer .
Date .
Contract number .
Complete part description .
All included weld numbers report numbers and station markers or views as detailed in the welding QC plan Clearly write on all interleaves the part description and all included weld numbers and station markers or views as detailed in the welding QC plan .
Use a maximum of pieces of film for each interleave .
The QC Inspector or certified technician must sign all visual inspection and NDT reports and submit them daily to the welding QC manager for review and signature before submittal to the Engineer .
Corresponding names must be clearly printed or typewritten adjacent to all signatures .
The Engineer reviews the welding report to determine whether you are complying with the welding QC plan and the Contract .
Except for field welded steel pipe piling and field welded bar reinforcement in CIP concrete piling .
Allow the Engineer days to review the report. . You may encase in concrete or cover welds for which the welding report has been submitted before receiving authorization of the welding report .
If you choose this option you will not be relieved of the responsibility for incorporating material in the work that complies with the Contract .
Material not complying with the Contract is subject to rejection .
For field welded steel pipe piling and field welded bar reinforcement in CIP concrete piling .
Allow the Engineer business days to review the welding report .
Do not install the steel pipe piling or encase the reinforcement in concrete until the Engineer has authorized the welding report .D Certificates of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance for each item of work for which welding is performed .
The certificate must be signed by the welding QC manager .
The certificate must state that all of the materials and workmanship incorporated in the work and all required tests and inspections of this work have been performed in compliance with the Contract . .
PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS Clauses and of AWS D. the nd paragraph of clause .. of AWS D. clauses through of AWS D. and clause .. of AWS D. are replaced with The QC Inspector must be currently certified as an AWS Certified Welding Inspector under AWS QC .
The QC Inspector may be assisted by an Assistant QC Inspector provided that this individual is currently certified as an AWS Certified Associate Welding Inspector under AWS QC .
The Assistant QC Inspector may perform inspection under the direct supervision of the QC Inspector provided the assistant is always within visible and audible range of the QC Inspector .
The QC Inspector must be responsible for signing all reports and for determining if welded materials comply with the SECTION WELDING workmanship and acceptance criteria .
The ratio of QC Assistants to QC Inspectors must not exceed to .
Welding inspection personnel or NDT firms to be used in the work must not be employed or compensated by any subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who will provide other services or materials for the Contract unless one of the following conditions is met .
Work is welded at a permanent fabrication or manufacturing plant that is certified under the AISC Certification Program for Steel Bridge Fabricators Intermediate Bridges and FractureCritical Member endorsement if required . .
Structural steel for building construction work is performed at a permanent fabrication or manufacturing plant that is certified under the AISC Quality Certification Program Category STD Standard for Steel Building Structures .
Except for the exempt facilities identified above an authorized independent third party must witness the qualification tests for welders or welding operators .
The independent third party must be currently certified as a CWI and must not be an employee of the Contractor performing the welding .
Allow days for the Engineer to review the qualifications and copy of the current certification of the independent third party. . WELDING INSPECTION Replace clause .. of AWS D. with The QC Inspector must inspect and approve each joint preparation assembly practice welding technique joint fitup and the performance of each welder welding operator and tack welder to make certain that the applicable requirements of this code and the qualified WPS are met .
The QC Inspector must examine the work to make certain that it complies with clauses and ..
The size and contour of all welds must be measured using suitable gauges .
Visual inspection for cracks in welds and base metal and for other discontinuities must be aided by strong light magnifiers or other devices as necessary .
You may use acceptance criteria different from those specified in this code if authorized. . WELDING PROCEDURES QUALIFICATION Welding procedures qualification for work welded under AWS D. must comply with clause .
or .. of AWS D. and the following .
Unless considered prequalified qualify fillet welds in each position .
Conduct the fillet weld soundness test using the essential variables of the WPS as established by the PQR. . For qualifying joints that do not comply with figures .
and .
of AWS D. conduct the test complying with figure .
using the welding parameters that were established for the test conducted complying with figure .. . Macroetch tests are required for WPS qualification tests and acceptance must comply with clause .. of AWS D .. .
If a nonstandard weld joint is to be made using a combination of WPSs you may conduct a test under figure .
combining the qualified or prequalified WPSs to be used in production if the essential variables including weld bead placement of each process are limited to those established in table .
of AWS D .. . Before preparing mechanical test specimens inspect the PQR welds by visual and radiographic tests .
The backing bar must be inches in width and must remain in place during NDT .
Results of the visual and radiographic tests must comply with clause .. of AWS D. excluding clause All other requirements for clause .
are applicable. . REPAIR WORK Notify the Engineer immediately if you discover welding problems deficiencies base metal repairs or any other type of repairs not included in the welding QC plan .
Submit the proposed repair procedures to correct them .
Allow the Engineer days to review the repair procedures .
You must receive authorization before performing SECTION WELDING .
rdtime excavations of welds or base metal to repair unacceptable discontinuities regardless of NDT method .
Repairs of cracks .
Repairs not included in the welding QC plan Requests to perform rdtime excavations repairs of cracks or repairs not included in the welding QC plan must include an engineering evaluation .
At a minimum the engineering evaluation must address .
Cause of each defect .
Why the repair will not degrade the material properties .
What steps are being taken to prevent similar defects from happening again WELDING FOR OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .
GENERAL Section applies to work welded under sections and .. Fabricate overhead sign structures standards and poles at a plant on the Authorized Facility Audit List. . WELDING INSPECTION Welding inspection personnel or NDT firms to be used in the work must not be employed or compensated by any subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who provide other services or materials for the Contract except for welding performed at a permanent fabrication or manufacturing plant that is certified under the AISC Quality Certification Program .
The AISC Certification category for overhead sign structures is Bridge and Highway Metal Component CPT or Simple Steel Bridge Structures SBR .
The AISC Certification category for pole structures is Bridge and Highway Metal Component CPT or Standard for Steel Building Structures STD. . SUBMITTALS Submit a welding report under section .C except submit the welding report business days before submitting the certificate of compliance .
RESERVED TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for providing temporary traffic control .
Temporary traffic control including flagging apparel temporary traffic control devices and equipment for flaggers must comply with the California MUTCD Part Temporary Traffic Control. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Assign flaggers to .
Control traffic .
Warn the public of any dangerous conditions resulting from the work activities .
Provide for the passage of traffic through the work as specified for the passage of traffic for public convenience and public safety Maintain flagging apparel traffic control devices and equipment for flaggers in good repair. . PAYMENT The Department determines the cost of furnishing flaggers including transporting flaggers as specified for force account work and pays you of that cost .
RESERVED TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for providing temporary traffic control devices .
Providing temporary traffic control devices includes installing placing maintaining repairing replacing and removing temporary traffic control devices .
Do not use different types of channelizing devices on the same alignment .
The types include plastic drums portable delineators channelizers tubular markers traffic cones and Type I and Type II barricades .
.A Definitions Category temporary traffic control devices Small devices weighing less than lb certified as crashworthy by crash testing or crash testing of similar devices .
Category temporary traffic control devices include traffic cones plastic traffic drums portable delineators and channelizers .
Category temporary traffic control devices Small devices weighing less than lb that are not expected to produce significant changes in vehicular velocity but could cause harm to impacting vehicles .
Category temporary traffic control devices include barricades and portable sign supports .
Category temporary traffic control devices Devices weighing lb or more that are expected to produce significant changes in the vehicular velocity of impacting vehicles .
Category temporary traffic control devices include crash cushions impact attenuator vehicles temporary railing temporary barrier and end treatments for temporary railings and barriers .
orange Orange redorange fluorescent orange or fluorescent redorange .
useable shoulder area Any longitudinal paved or unpaved contiguous surface adjacent to the traveled way with .
Enough weightbearing capacity to support temporary traffic control devices such as flashing arrow signs PCMSs and impact attenuator vehicles SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
Slope not greater than horizontalvertical .A Submittals If requested submit the following as informational submittals .
Selfcertification for crashworthiness of Category temporary traffic control devices at least business days before starting any work using the devices or within business days after the request if the devices are already in use .
Either you or the manufacturer must perform the selfcertification .
Include the following information ..
Date .. Federal aid number for a federalaid contract .. Contract number district county route and post miles of the project limits .. Company name street address city state and zip code of the certifying vendor ..
Printed name signature and title of the certifying person .. Types of Category temporary traffic control devices .
List of proposed Category temporary traffic control devices at least business days before starting any work using the devices or within business days after the request if the devices are already in use .
Obtain a standard form for selfcertification from the Engineer .
Submit a sample of the type of portable delineator that you will be using before placing the delineators on the job site .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials The condition of temporary traffic control devices must comply with the most current edition of the American Traffic Safety Services Association publication Quality Guidelines for Temporary Traffic Control Devices and Features .
Category temporary traffic control devices must be on FHWAs list of acceptable crashworthy Category hardware for work zones .
For this list go to FHWAs Safety Program website .
Category temporary traffic control devices must be labeled with the FHWA acceptance letter code and the name of the manufacturer .
The label must be legible and permanently affixed to the temporary traffic control device by the manufacturer .
Category temporary traffic control devices must be on the Authorized Material List for highway safety features .
Retroreflectivity for the following materials must comply with Table A Minimum Maintained Retroreflectivity Levels of the California MUTCD and be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Retroreflective sheeting for barricades .
Retroreflective bands for portable delineators .
Retroreflective sheeting for construction area signs .
Retroreflective sheeting for channelizers .
Reflectors for Type K temporary railing .
Retroreflective cone sleeves .
White and orange retroreflective stripes for plastic traffic drums The following temporary traffic control devices must be visible from feet during the hours of darkness under an illumination of legal highbeam headlights by persons with vision or vision corrected to .
Retroreflective bands on portable delineators .
Retroreflective sheeting on channelizers .
Retroreflective cone sleeves on traffic cones SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .C Construction Perform all layout work necessary to place channelizing devices .
On the proper alignment .
Uniformly at the location and spacing described .
Straight on a tangent alignment .
On a true arc in a curved alignment If temporary traffic control devices are damaged displaced or stop operating or functioning as described from any cause during the progress of the work immediately repair repaint or replace the components and restore them to their original locations and positions .
If ordered furnish and place additional temporary traffic control devices .
This work is change order work unless the temporary traffic control devices are being furnished and placed for public safety or public convenience .
.D Payment Not Used .
TRAFFIC CONES .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing traffic cones .
.B Materials A traffic cone must be flexible orange and manufactured from commercialquality material designed for the intended purpose .
The outer section of the portion above the base of the traffic cone must be translucent and fabricated of a highly pigmented orange PV compound .
The overall height of a traffic cone must be at least inches and the bottom inside diameter of the traffic cone must be at least .
inches .
During the hours of darkness a traffic cone must have a retroreflective cone sleeve .
Retroreflective cone sleeves must be one of the following types .
Removable flexible retroreflective cone sleeves fabricated from inchwide retroreflective sheeting with the cone sleeves placed a maximum of inches from the top of the cone .
Do not use the sleeves during daylight hours . .
Permanently affixed semitransparent retroreflective cone sleeves fabricated from inchwide semitransparent retroreflective sheeting with the cone sleeves placed a maximum of inches from the top of the cone .
You may use traffic cones with semitransparent retroreflective cone sleeves during daylight hours . .
Permanently affixed doubleband retroreflective cone sleeves consisting of white retroreflective bands .
The top band must be inches wide and placed a maximum of inches from the top of the cone .
The lower band must be inches wide placed inches below the bottom of the top band .
You may use traffic cones with doubleband retroreflective cone sleeves during daylight hours .
.C Construction Use the same type of retroreflective cone sleeve for all cones used on the project .
Anchor the base of a traffic cone if it does not have enough size and weight to keep the cone in an upright position .
.D Payment Not Used SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
PLASTIC TRAFFIC DRUMS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for placing plastic traffic drums .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for plastic traffic drums .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials A plastic traffic drum must comply with the manufacturers instructions for weight and ballast .
A plastic traffic drum must .
Be orange LDPE .
Be flexible and collapsible upon vehicle impact .
Have a weighted base to maintain an upright position and prevent displacement by passing traffic .
Have a height such that the top of the drum is at least inches above the traveled way The weighted base must .
Be detachable .
Be shaped to prevent rolling upon impact .
Have a inch maximum outside diameter .
Have a inch maximum height above the ground surface .C Construction Use type of plastic traffic drum on the project .
Use the same type and brand of retroreflective sheeting for all plastic traffic drums used on the project .
Do not use sandbags or comparable ballast .
Moving plastic traffic drums from location to location if ordered after initial placement is change order work .
.D Payment Not Used .
PORTABLE DELINEATORS .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing portable delineators .
.B Materials A portable delineator including its base must be made of a material that has enough rigidity to remain upright when unattended and must be flexible or collapsible upon impact by a vehicle .
The base must be shaped to prevent rolling after impact and anchored or weigh enough to keep the delineator in an upright position .
Ballast for a portable delineator must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
A portable delineator must be a minimum of inches in height .
The vertical portion of a portable delineator must be predominantly orange .
The post must be not less than inches in width or diameter .
Retroreflectorization of a portable delineator that has a height of less than inches must be provided by two inchwide white bands placed a maximum of inches from the top with a maximum of inches between the bands .
Retroreflectorization of a portable delineator that has a height of inches or more SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL must be provided by four to inchwide alternating orange and white stripes with the top stripe being orange .
.C Construction Use only type of portable delineator on the project .
.D Payment Not Used .
CHANNELIZERS .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing channelizers .
.B Materials A channelizer must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Its post must be orange .
A channelizer must be affixed with byinch retroreflective white sheeting .
.C Construction Install channelizers on clean dry surfaces .
Cement the channelizer bases to the pavement as specified for cementing pavement markers to the pavement in section .
When no longer required for the work remove the channelizers and the underlying adhesive used to cement the channelizer bases to the pavement .
Do not remove channelizers that are shown to be left in place at the time of work completion .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED .
BARRICADES .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing barricades .
.B Materials Markings for barricade rails must be alternating orange and white retroreflective stripes .
Orange retroreflective sheeting must match color PR no .
Highway Orange of the FHWA Color Tolerance Chart .
The interface between the rail surface and the retroreflective sheeting must be free of air bubbles or voids .
The predominant color of barricade components other than the rails must be white or unpainted galvanized metal or aluminum .
You may use a Type III barricade as a sign support if the barricade has been successfully crash tested under NCHRP Report criteria as a single unit with an attached sign panel of the size and type to be used .
A sign panel for a construction area sign or marker panel to be mounted on a barricade must comply with section .B .
Do not imprint an owner identification on the retroreflective face of any rail .
.C Construction Place each barricade such that the stripes slope downward in the direction road users are to pass .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL Place each sandfilled bag near the ground level on the lower parts of the frame or stays to serve as ballast for the barricades .
Do not place ballast on top of barricades or over any retroreflective barricade rail face that is facing traffic .
Do not remove barricades that are shown to be left in place at the time of work completion .
Moving a barricade from location to location is change order work if ordered after initial placement of the barricade .
.D Payment Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION AREA SIGNS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for placing construction area signs .
Construction area signs include all temporary signs and object markers required for the direction of traffic through or within the project limits and general information signs .
.A Definitions background Dominant sign color .
legend Letters numerals tildes bars arrows route shields symbols logos borders artwork and miscellaneous characters that are intended to convey specific meanings on traffic signs .
.A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .B General A construction area sign must be the product of a commercial sign manufacturer and have Type III or higher grade retroreflective sheeting .
The style font size and spacing of the legend must comply with the Standard Alphabets published in the FHWAs Standard Highway Signs Book .
The sign must be visible from feet and legible from feet at noon on a cloudless day and during the hours of darkness under an illumination of legal lowbeam headlights by persons with vision or vision corrected to .
A fabric sign panel on a portable sign is not subject to the visibility and legibility requirements for headlight illumination during the hours of darkness .
A construction area warning or guide sign must have a black legend on a retroreflective orange background .
A W advance warning sign for highwayrail grade crossings must have a black legend on a retroreflective yellow background .
.B StationaryMounted Signs Materials for a stationarymounted sign must comply with section for the type of panel involved .
A temporary sign support of any type placed within feet from the edge of the traveled way must comply with the specifications for a Category temporary traffic control device .
The sign post must be good sound wood posts with the breakaway feature as shown for a roadside sign .
Fastening hardware and back braces must be commercialquality materials .
.B Portable Signs Each portable sign must consist of a base standard or framework and a sign panel .
Units delivered to the job site must be capable of being placed into immediate operation .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL A sign panel for a portable sign must comply with the specifications for a stationarymounted sign panel or be fabricated from one of the following materials .
Type VI retroreflective elastomeric rollup fabric on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Nonretroreflective cotton drill fabric .
Nonretroreflective flexible industrial nylon fabric .
Another type of fabric if authorized Do not use nonretroreflective portable signs during the hours of darkness .
The bottom of the portable sign panel must be at least foot above the edge of the traveled way .
.B Temporary Object Markers A temporary object marker must be mounted on a stationary wood or metal post and must comply with section .
A marker panel for a Type N CA Type P CA or Type R CA object marker must comply with the specifications for a marker panel for a stationary sign panel in section .B .
A target plate post and the hardware for a Type K CA and Type L CA temporary object marker must comply with the specifications for these items in section .
.B General Information Signs Reserved .C Construction .C General Place all construction area signs outside of the traveled way .
Do not block a bicycle or pedestrian pathway with a construction area sign .
Place install maintain and remove temporary object markers shown as construction area signs as specified for construction area signs .
Maintain accurate information on construction area signs .
Immediately replace or correct signs that convey inaccurate information .
During the progress of work immediately cover or remove unneeded signs .
Cover each unneeded sign such that the message can not be seen .
Securely fasten the cover to prevent movement from wind .
Check each covered sign daily for damage to the cover and immediately replace any cover if needed .
Clean each construction area sign panel at the time of installation and at least once every months thereafter .
Be prepared to furnish additional construction area sign panels posts and mounting hardware or portable sign mounts on short notice due to changing traffic conditions or damage caused by traffic or other conditions .
Maintain an inventory of commonly required items at the job site or make arrangements with a supplier who is able to furnish the items daily on short notice .
Replace any damaged construction area sign or repair the sign if authorized .
Remove any sign panel that exhibits irregular luminance shadowing or dark blotches at nighttime under vehicular headlight illumination .
.C StationaryMounted Signs Install stationarymounted signs as described for the installation of roadside signs except .
Back braces and blocks for sign panels are not required for signs inches or smaller in width and diamondshaped signs by inches or smaller. . Bottom of the sign panel must be at least feet above the edge of the traveled way .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
You may install a construction area sign on an aboveground temporary platform sign support or on an existing lighting standard or other support if authorized .
Do not make holes in a standard to support the sign if it is installed on an existing lighting standard. . Post embedment must be at least .
feet if the post hole is backfilled around the post with commercialquality concrete .
The concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
The Engineer determines the post size and number of posts if the type of sign installation is not shown .
Excavate each post hole by hand methods without the use of power equipment .
You may use power equipment where you determine that subsurface utilities are not present in the area of the proposed post hole if authorized .
The posthole diameter must be at least inches greater than the longest cross sectional dimension of the post if it is backfilled with commercialquality concrete .
Furnishing installing maintaining moving and removing any additional construction area signs if ordered is change order work .
.C General Information Signs Reserved .D Payment Not Used .
TELESCOPING FLAG TREES .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing telescoping flag trees .
.B Materials Telescoping flag trees must be manufactured from commercialquality material designed for the intended purpose and capable of maintaining an upright position at all times while in use .
.C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED .
TYPE K TEMPORARY RAILING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for placing Type K temporary railing and Type K temporary terminal sections .
Type K temporary railing must consist of interconnected PC concrete barrier panels .
You may have your name or logo on each panel of Type K temporary railing .
The name or logo must not be more than inches in height and must be located not more than inches above the bottom of the rail panel .
Reinforcing steel must comply with section .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for Type K temporary railing not cast at the job site .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .B Materials .B General Concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except load tickets and a certificate of compliance are not required .
Steel bars to receive bolts at the ends of the concrete panels must comply with ASTM AAM .
The bolts must comply with ASTM A .
You may substitute a round bar of the same diameter for the endconnecting bolt shown .
If a round bar is used the round bar must .
Comply with ASTM AAM .
Have a minimum length of inches .
Have a inchdiameter inchthick plate welded on the upper end using a inch fillet weld The final surface finish of the railing must comply with section .F .
Cure the exposed surfaces of the railing by the water method the formsinplace method or the curing compound method using curing compound no. . .B Type K Temporary Terminal Section The closure plate for a Type K temporary terminal section must be a white commercialquality steel plate shaped to conform to the cross section of the barrier .
The mechanical expansion anchors for connecting the closure plate to the railings must comply with section for concrete anchorage devices .
.C Construction .C General Before placing Type K temporary railing on the job site paint the exposed surfaces of the railing with white paint complying with the specifications for acrylic emulsion paint for exterior masonry .
The repainting of the units is change order work if it is ordered after the units are in place .
Place Type K temporary railing on a firm stable foundation .
Grade the foundation to provide a uniform bearing surface throughout the entire length of the railing .
Structure excavation and backfill must comply with section except compaction of earth fill placed behind Type K temporary railing in a curved layout is not required .
Place and maintain the abutting ends of PC concrete units in alignment without substantial offset from each other .
The drilling of holes and bonding of threaded rods or dowels must comply with the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section .
Install a reflector on the top or face of the rail of each rail unit placed within feet of a traffic lane .
Apply adhesive for mounting the reflector under the reflector manufacturers instructions .
Install a Type P marker panel at each end of railing placed adjacent to a lane twoway highway and at the end facing traffic for railing installed adjacent to a oneway roadbed .
If the railing is placed on a skew install the marker at the end of the skew nearest the traveled way .
Type P marker panels must comply with section except you must furnish the marker panels .
After removing Type K temporary railing .
Restore the area to its previous condition or construct it to its planned condition if temporary excavation or embankment was used to accommodate the railing . .
Remove all threaded rods or dowels to a depth of at least inch below the surface of the concrete .
Fill the resulting holes with mortar under section except cure the mortar by the water method or by the curing compound method using curing compound no . .
If the Engineer orders a lateral move of Type K temporary railing and repositioning is not shown the lateral move is change order work and the railing is not measured in the new position .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .C Type K Temporary Terminal Section When the Type K temporary terminal section is no longer required remove the anchor bolts connecting the closure plate to the concrete barrier or cut the bolts flush with the face of the barrier .
If the anchor bolts are removed fill the holes with grout .
.D Payment The payment quantity for temporary railing Type K is the length measured along the top of the railing . .
TEMPORARY TRAFFIC SCREENS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing temporary traffic screens .
.B Materials Temporary traffic screen panels must be CDX grade or better plywood or weatherresistant strand board .
Wale boards must be Douglas fir rough sawn construction grade or better .
Pipe screen supports must be schedule galvanized steel pipe .
Nuts bolts and washers must be cadmium plated .
Screws must be black or cadmiumplated flat head crossslotted screws with fullthread length .
.C Construction Install and anchor temporary traffic screens to the top of the Type K temporary railing .
The temporary traffic screen must have footlong openings spaced at foot intervals .
A lateral move of Type K temporary railing with attached temporary traffic screen is change order work if ordered and repositioning is not shown .
.D Payment The payment quantity for temporary traffic screen is the length measured along the line of the screen with no deductions for openings in the temporary traffic screen . .
TEMPORARY CRASH CUSHION MODULES .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules in groupings or arrays .
If activities expose traffic to a fixed obstacle protect the traffic from the obstacle with a sandfilled temporary crash cushion .
The crash cushion must be in place before opening traffic lanes adjacent to the obstacle .
.B Materials Each sandfilled temporary crash cushion module must be manufactured after March and be on the Authorized Material List for highway safety features .
The color of each module must be standard yellow with black lids as furnished by the manufacturer .
Each module must be free from structural flaws and objectionable surface defects .
For a module requiring a seal the top edge of the seal must be securely fastened to the wall of the module by a continuous strip of heavyduty tape .
Fill each module with sand under the manufacturers instructions and to the sand capacity in pounds for each module shown .
Sand for filling the modules must be clean commercialquality washed concrete sand .
When sand is placed in a module the sand must contain no more than percent water when tested under California Test .
.C Construction Use the same type of crash cushion module for a single grouping or array .
Temporary crash cushion arrays must not encroach on the traveled way .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL Secure the sandfilled modules in place before starting an activity requiring a temporary crash cushion .
Maintain sandfilled temporary crash cushions in place at each location including times when work is not actively in progress .
You may remove the crash cushions during the work shift for access to the work if the exposed fixed obstacle is feet or more from the nearest lane carrying traffic .
Reset the crash cushion before the end of the work shift .
Immediately repair sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules damaged due to your activities .
Remove and replace any module damaged beyond repair .
Repair and replacement of temporary crash cushion modules damaged by traffic are change order work .
You may place sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules on movable pallets or frames complying with the dimensions shown .
The pallets or frames must provide a fullbearing base beneath the modules .
Do not move the modules and supporting pallets or frames by sliding or skidding along the pavement or bridge deck .
Attach a Type R or Type P marker panel to the front of the temporary crash cushion if the closest point of the crash cushion array is within feet of the traveled way .
Firmly fasten the marker panel to the crash cushion with commercial quality hardware or by other authorized methods .
Attach the Type R marker panel such that the top of the panel is inch below the module lid .
Attach the Type P marker panel such that the bottom of the panel rests upon the pallet or roadway surface if pallets are not used .
A lateral move of a temporary crash cushion module is change order work if ordered and the repositioning is not shown .
Remove sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules including sand pallets or frames and marker panels at Contract acceptance .
Do not install sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules in the permanent work .
.D Payment The payment quantity for temporary crash cushion module does not include .
Modules placed for public safety .
Modules placed in excess of the number described .
Repositioned modules .
IMPACT ATTENUATOR VEHICLES .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for using impact attenuator vehicles .
.A Definitions impact attenuator vehicle Support truck towing a deployed attenuator mounted to a trailer or a support truck with a deployed attenuator mounted to the support truck .
.A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each attenuator .
.A Quality Assurance Before using an impact attenuator vehicle conduct a meeting with the Engineer subcontractors and other parties involved with traffic control to discuss the operation of the impact attenuator vehicle during moving lane closures and when placing and removing components of a stationary traffic control system .
Schedule the location time and date for the meeting with all participants .
Furnish a meeting facility located within miles of the job site or at another location if authorized .
.B Materials An impact attenuator vehicle must be on the Authorized Material List for highway safety features .
The vehicle must comply with Veh Code Div .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL Each attenuator must be individually identified with the manufacturers name address attenuator model number and a specific serial number .
The name and number must be a minimum inch high and located on the left street side lower front corner .
An impact attenuator vehicle must comply with the following test levels as specified in the National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report .
Test level if the preconstruction posted speed limit is mph or more .
Test level or if the preconstruction posted speed limit is mph or less The impact attenuator vehicle must comply with the attenuator manufacturers instructions for .
Support truck except the weight of the support truck must be within the allowable vehicle weight limits shown on the Authorized Material List for highway safety features and the manufacturers instructions .
Trailermounted attenuator .
Truckmounted attenuator A flashing arrow sign must comply with section .
except you may use a PCMS instead of a flashing arrow sign .
A PCMS used as a flashing arrow sign must comply with the specifications for an arrow board in the California MUTCD .
Each impact attenuator vehicle must have .
Inverted V chevron pattern placed across the entire rear of the attenuator composed of alternating inchwide nonreflective black stripes and inchwide yellow retroreflective stripes sloping at degrees .
Type II flashing arrow sign .
Flashing or rotating amber light .
Operable way communication system for maintaining contact with workers .C Construction Do not use an impact attenuator vehicle until authorized .
Monitor the placement and use of the attenuator vehicle on a regular basis and adjust the use of the attenuator to match changing field conditions as construction progresses .
After placing the components of a stationary traffic control system you may place the impact attenuator vehicle in advance of the work area or at another authorized location to protect traffic and workers .
Secure objects including equipment tools and ballast on impact attenuator vehicles to prevent their loosening upon impact by an errant vehicle .
Do not use a damaged attenuator in the work .
Replace any attenuator damaged from an impact during work activities .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED .
FLASHING ARROW SIGNS .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing flashing arrow signs .
.B Materials A flashing arrow sign must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL Flashing Arrow Sign Requirements Type Panel size min inches Number of panel lights min Legibility distancea min miles I x II x aThe legibility distance is the distance that a flashing arrow sign must be legible at noon on a cloudless day and during the hours of darkness by persons with vision or vision corrected to .
A flashing arrow sign must be finished with commercialquality nonreflective black enamel and must be equipped with yellow or amber lamps that form arrows or arrowheads .
Each lamp must be equipped with a visor and the lamps must be controlled by an electronic circuit that provides from to complete operating cycles per minute for each of the displays and modes specified .
The control must be capable of dimming the lamps by reducing the voltage to percent for nighttime use .
Type I signs must have both manual and automatic photoelectricdimming controls .
Dimming in both modes must be continuously variable over the entire dimming range .
A flashing arrow sign must be capable of operating in the following display modes .
Pass left display .
Pass right display .
Simultaneous display .
Caution display or alternating diamond A flashing arrow sign must be capable of operating in the flashing arrow mode or the sequential mode .
In the flashing arrow mode all lamps forming the arrowhead and shaft must flash on and off simultaneously .
In the sequential mode either arrowheads or arrows must flash sequentially in the direction indicated .
In the simultaneous display mode the lamps forming both the right and left arrowheads and the lamps forming the arrow shaft or center lamps for Type I signs must flash simultaneously .
For Type II signs the lamps forming the right and left arrowhead but not the center lamp may be illuminated continuously the lamps forming the shaft and the center lamp of the arrowheads must flash on and off simultaneously .
In the caution display mode a combination of lamps not resembling any other display or mode must flash .
Each flashing arrow sign must be .
Mounted on a truck or trailer .
Capable of operating when the vehicle is moving .
Capable of being placed and maintained in operation at locations described A Type II flashing arrow sign must be controllable by the operator of the vehicle while the vehicle is in motion .
The bottom of the flashing arrow sign must be a minimum of feet above the roadway when mounted .
The trailer for a flashing arrow sign must be equipped with devices to level and plumb the sign and a supply of electrical energy capable of operating the sign .
.C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
PORTABLE FLASHING BEACONS .A General Section .
includes specifications for placing portable flashing beacons .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .B Materials Each portable flashing beacon must have .
Standard and base .
Lighting unit .
Flasher unit .
Battery power source The components must be assembled to form a complete selfcontained flashing beacon that can be delivered to the job site and placed into immediate operation .
The lens for the beacon lighting unit must have a visible diameter of inches .
The lens must be glass or plastic complying with ANSI D. for a yellow traffic signal lens .
The beacon lighting unit must be equipped with a visor and backplate except a visor is not required during hours of darkness .
The visor must be at least inches long .
The flasher unit must be capable of flashing from to flashes per minute with a dwell time from to milliseconds .
The standard must be adjustable to allow variable mounting of the lighting unit from to feet measured from the bottom of the base to the center of the lens and be capable of being secured at the desired height .
The standard must be securely attached to the base and have a length of multiconductor neoprenejacketed cable long enough for the full vertical height .
The base must be large enough to accommodate at least two V automotivetype storage batteries and a shape and weight such that the beacon will not roll if struck by a vehicle or pushed over .
The lamp must be rated at W for operation on V battery current .
The flashing beacon must be weatherproof and must be capable of operating a minimum of hours between battery recharging and other routine maintenance .
The standard and base must be finished with applications of commercialquality enamel matching color no .
of FEDSTD .
The interior of the visor and the front face of the backplate must be finished with applications of commercialquality nonreflective black enamel .
.C Construction Remove portable flashing beacons from the traveled way at the end of each nights work .
You may store the flashing beacon at selected central locations within the highway where designated by the Engineer .
Moving portable flashing beacons from location to location if ordered after initial placement is change order work .
.D Payment The payment quantity for flashing beacon portable is the number of portable flashing beacon locations with each location counting as measurement unit. . PORTABLE CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGNS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for placing portable changeable message signs .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals If requested submit a certificate of compliance for each PCMS .
Submit your cell phone number before starting activities that require a PCMS .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Each trailermounted PCMS must consist of a controller unit a power supply and a structural support system .
The unit must be assembled to form a complete selfcontained PCMS that can be delivered to the job site and placed into immediate operation .
The sign unit must be capable of operating in an ambient air temperature from to degrees F and must be unaffected by unauthorized mobileradio transmissions .
The trailer must be capable of being leveled and plumbed .
The text displayed on a sign must not scroll or travel horizontally or vertically across the face of the message panel .
The sign panel must be capable of displaying a line message with at least characters per line .
The characters must be at least inches in height where the useable shoulder area is at least feet wide .
To prevent encroachment onto the traveled way where the useable shoulder area is less than feet wide you may use a smaller message panel with at least inchhigh characters .
The message displayed on the sign must be visible from a distance of feet and legible from a distance of feet at noon on a cloudless day by persons with vision or vision corrected to .
The sign face must be nonreflective black and protected from the glare of the sun by a method that does not interfere with the clarity of the sign message .
The sign must be raised and lowered by means of a powerdriven lifting mechanism .
Matrix signs must provide a complete alphanumeric selection .
Matrixtype signs using lamps must be equipped with an automaticdimming mode that automatically compensates for the influence of temporary light sources or abnormal lighting conditions .
The sign must have or more manual dimming modes of different lamp intensities .
During the hours of darkness matrix signs not using lamps must be either internally or externally illuminated .
The controller must be an all solidstate unit containing the necessary circuitry for the storage of at least preprogrammed messages .
The controller must be installed at a location that allows the operator to perform all functions from a single position .
The controller must have a keyboard entry system that allows the operator to generate an infinite number of additional messages in addition to the preprogrammed stored messages .
The keyboard must be equipped with a security lockout feature to prevent unauthorized use of the controller .
The controller must have .
Nonvolatile memory that stores keyboardcreated messages during periods when the power is not activated .
Variable display rate that allows the operator to match the information display to the speed of approaching traffic The flashingoff time must be adjustable from within the control cabinet .
.C Construction Place a PCMS as far from the traveled way as practicable where it is legible to approaching traffic without encroaching on the traveled way .
Where the vertical roadway curvature restricts the sight distance of approaching traffic place the sign on or before the crest of the curvature where it is most visible to the approaching traffic .
Where the horizontal roadway curvature restricts the sight distance of approaching traffic place the portable sign at or before the curve where it is most visible to approaching traffic .
Where practicable place a sign behind guardrail or Type K temporary railing .
Make a taper consisting of traffic cones placed feet apart to delineate the location of a PCMS except where the sign is placed behind guardrail or Type K temporary railing .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL When in full operation the bottom of a sign must be at least feet above the ground and the top of the sign must be not more than .
feet above the ground .
Operate the PCMS under the manufacturers instructions .
Display only messages shown or ordered .
Repeat the entire message continuously in not more than phases of at least seconds per phase .
Approaching drivers must be able to read the entire message at least times before passing the sign at the posted speed limit .
Use more than sign to comply with this requirement if necessary .
You must be available by cell phone during activities that require a sign .
Be prepared to change the displayed message immediately upon request .
You may operate the sign with a hour timer control or remote control if authorized .
After the initial placement move a sign from location to location as directed by the Engineer .
When not in use move unprotected signs to an area at least feet from the edge of the traveled way or remove them from the job site away from traffic .
.D Payment Not Used .
TEMPORARY SIGNAL SYSTEMS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing temporary signal systems including installing temporary traffic signals lighting and flashing beacons for traffic control .
Temporary signal systems must comply with section .
The system must operate on a continuous hour basis unless traffic is controlled by flaggers .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Generators A generator system to power a temporary signal system must have an operating generator and backup generator .
In the event of a failure to supply voltage for the system the backup generator must start automatically and transfer the system load upon reaching the operating voltage .
The system must have enough fuel storage to operate when it is unattended .
If a generator to back up commercial power is specified in the special provisions the generator must have an automatic transfer switch .
Each generator must .
Be Vac or Vac Hz .
kW minimum continuousduty type .
Be powered by a gasoline LPG or diesel engine operating at approximately rpm with an automatic oil feed .
Be equipped to provide automatic startstop operation with a V starting system .
Have generator output circuits that have overcurrent protection with a maximum setting of A .B Automatic Transfer Switches An automatic transfer switch must provide the following functions .
Line voltage monitoring in the event of a power outage that signals the generator to start .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
Engine start delay adjustable from to seconds to prevent starting if the power outage is only momentary and an engine stop delay adjustable from to minutes to allow the generator set to run unloaded to cool before shut down . .
Transfer delay from to seconds to allow the generator to stabilize before connecting to the load and retransfer delay from to minutes to allow the line voltage to stabilize. . LoadNo Load switch to allow a test with or without load. . NormalTest switch that will start and run the generator in the Test position .
Normal position must return the generator to automatic operation . .
Battery charger powered by the normal line voltage . .
Generator voltage sensor that signals for a transfer if the generator output is ready .
The automatic transfer switch must be .
Rated at A for Vac .
wire .
Single phase .
Compatible with the generator furnished The switch must have a mechanical interlock to prevent an application of power to the load from both sources and to prevent backfeeding from the generator to the line .
.C Construction .C General Use one of the following methods to provide power to the temporary signal system .
Commercial power from an existing utility company .
Generator system Do not use electrical power from existing highway facilities unless authorized .
Do not use power from private parties to provide power to the temporary signal system .
If the temporary signal system is out of operation provide flaggers to maintain traffic control until the traffic signals are returned to service .
.C Commercial Power Commercial power must be Vac or Vac .
Make arrangements with the utility company for providing service .
Protect the power source in a locked enclosure .
Provide keys to all locks to the Engineer .
.D Payment Not Used .
TEMPORARY FLASHING BEACON SYSTEMS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing temporary flashing beacon systems .
A temporary flashing beacon system must comply with section .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Generators A generator system to power a temporary flashing beacon system must comply with section .B .
.B Sign Panels The sign panels installed on a temporary flashing beacon system must be stationarymounted construction area signs complying with section ..
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .C Construction Relocate each system during the progress of the work such that the systems are located at the ends of the pavement at the end of each work shift .
Use commercial power from an existing utility company or generator system to provide power to the temporary flashing beacon system .
Do not use power from a private party to provide power to a temporary flashing beacon system .
Commercial power must be Vac or Vac .
Make arrangements with the utility company for providing service .
Protect the power source in a locked enclosure .
Provide keys to all locks to the Engineer .
.D Payment Not Used .
AUTOMATED WORK ZONE INFORMATION SYSTEMS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing automated work zone information systems .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance Assign an onsite system coordinator .
The coordinator must be available locally to service maintain and relocate system components as necessary .
The coordinator must be accessible while the system is deployed .
If the system fails to perform as specified perform any necessary remedial work and replace any failed components within hours of notification of a system or component failure .
.B Materials .B General The AWIS must be a proven system that has been successfully deployed and operated in actual work zones or congested areas .
The system must acquire traffic data throughout the work zone and automatically display predetermined information to motorists without operator intervention after system initialization .
Realtime information must be displayed to motorists using a PCMS .
The sign must comply with section ..
The system must be controlled either locally or remotely by a dedicated controller or computer .
Authorized users must be able to both locally and remotely override motorist information messages .
Traffic sensors must not require adjustments after the initial deployment .
.B General System Function Requirements The general system functions of the AWIS must be capable of .
Preventing any unauthorized users or systems from gaining access to the PCMSs through an industry authentication and encryption standard level of security. . Providing current operational status locally and remotely .
Operational status must include current traffic data and messages communications system and power status. . Delivering notifications either by telephone voice or text messages to alert support staff of trouble conditions . .
Generating trouble alerts for conditions such as low roadside equipment power or voltage system communications failure low speed traffic detected and excessive delay detected .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
Adjusting the thresholds of reduced speed and congestioninduced delay at which the system initiates a trouble alert . .
Allowing programming of the hours during which the trouble condition alerting subsystem initiates notification to authorized users . .
Measuring periodically and automatically the power levels of all equipment .
Alert support staff locally and remotely via a telephone message in time to provide supplemental power before the system ceases to operate . .
Displaying preprogrammed messages based on the time of day and day of week .
.B Motorist Information Message Requirements The AWIS must be capable of .
Displaying predetermined speed delay diversion and closure messages to motorists when user adjustable thresholds are exceeded. . Updating its speed and delay advisory messages at least once per minute .
The actual message updates must be consistent with traffic conditions . .
Selecting messages for each PCMS independently based on the traffic conditions downstream of the sign. . Recording motorist information messages in a commaseparated values file with time and date stamps including message overrides with user ID . .
Displaying default messages when traffic conditions system algorithms and user parameters do not dictate that an advisory message should be displayed . .
Displaying separate independent default messages on each PCMS. . Analyzing traffic parameters in work zones in which there are multiple speed limits .
The following parameters for the selection and presentation of information messages must be adjustable by the user .
Message update frequency .
Minimum delay necessary to trigger a delay advisory message .
Persistence of delay before a delay message is displayed .
Level of delay required to trigger a diversion message .
Change in delay needed to cause a delay advisory message update .
Change in downstream speed at which a speed advisory message update occurs .B System Communication Requirements The wireless communications subsystem of the AWIS must .
Operate independently of the public cellular phone system for receiving data to ensure reliable communications .
Communicate independent of the line of sight or distance .
Incorporate an error detection and correction mechanism to ensure the integrity of all traffic condition data and motorist information messages .
Configure automatically during system initialization .B Traffic Data Acquisition Requirements The AWIS must collect accurate traffic data using a speed measurement technique with an accuracy of mph allowing specific information messages .
The system must collect data during reduced visibility conditions including precipitation fog darkness excessive dust and road debris .
The system must archive the data with time and date stamps and aggregate the data in operator definable time increments accessible to the Engineer in a commaseparated values file .
.B User Interface The system must have a user interface to control the AWIS PCMS communications .
The interface must be software compatible with a Windows environment or a web service accessed by a web browser .
Provide any software on a CD or other Engineerauthorized datastorage device for installation at the Departments Transportation Management Center .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL The user interface must at a minimum provide the user with a list of AWIS PCMSs in the field location information for each AWIS PCMS and a realtime onboard display of the message in the field .
Control options must at a minimum provide the user the ability to change the onboard messages and flash rate .
.C Construction Obtain authorization for the message content and the threshold used for triggering the message before displaying any message on a PCMS .
Provide complete setup and support for the AWIS PCMS communications .
.D Payment Not Used .
PORTABLE TRANSVERSE RUMBLE STRIPS Reserved ..
RESERVED MAINTAINING TRAFFIC .
GENERAL .A General Section .
includes general specifications for maintaining traffic through construction work zones .
If local authorities regulate traffic notify them at least business days before the start of job site activities .
Cooperate with the local authorities to handle traffic through the work zone and to make arrangements to keep the work zone clear of parked vehicles .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Furnishing and operating pilot cars if ordered is change order work .
.D Payment Not Used .
TRAFFIC CONTROL SYSTEMS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for providing a traffic control system to close traffic lanes shoulders ramps and connectors .
A traffic control system for a closure includes the temporary traffic control devices described as part of the traffic control system .
Temporary traffic control devices must comply with section .
.A Definitions designated holidays Designated holidays are shown in the following table Designated Holidays Holiday Date observed New Years Day January st Washingtons Birthday rd Monday in February Memorial Day Last Monday in May Independence Day July th Labor Day st Monday in September Veterans Day November th Thanksgiving Day th Thursday in November Christmas Day December th SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL If a designated holiday falls on a Sunday the following Monday is a designated holiday .
If November th falls on a Saturday the preceding Friday is a designated holiday .
.A Submittals .Aa General Submit a request for a minor deviation from the specified work hours .
Your request may be authorized if the Department does not accrue a significant cost increase and the work can be expedited and better serve the traffic .
If a closure is not opened to traffic by the specified time submit a work plan that ensures that future closures will be opened to traffic by the specified time .
Allow business days for review .
Submit closure schedule requests and closure schedule amendments using LCS to show the locations and times of the requested closures .
.Ab Closure Schedules Every Monday by noon submit a closure schedule request for planned closures for the next week .
Except for a project in District the next week is defined as Sunday at noon through the following Sunday at noon .
For a project in District the next week is defined as Friday at noon through the following Friday at noon .
Submit a closure schedule request from days to days before the anticipated start of any job site activity that reduces .
Horizontal clearances of traveled ways including shoulders to lanes or fewer due to activities such as temporary barrier placement and paving .
Vertical clearances of traveled ways including shoulders due to activities such as pavement overlays overhead sign installation or falsework girder erection Submit closure schedule changes including additional closures by noon at least business days before a planned closure .
Cancel closure requests using LCS at least hours before the start time of the closure .
The Department notifies you through LCS of unauthorized closures or closures that require coordination with other parties as a condition for authorization .
.Ac Contingency Plans for Closures Submit a contingency plan for an activity that could affect a closure if a contingency plan is specified in the special provisions or if a contingency plan is requested .
If a contingency plan is requested submit the contingency plan within business day of the request .
The contingency plan must identify the activities equipment processes and materials that may cause a delay in the opening of a closure to traffic .
The plan must include .
List of additional or alternate equipment materials or workers necessary to ensure continuing activities and ontime opening of closures if a problem occurs .
If the additional or alternate equipment materials or workers are not on the job site specify their location the method for mobilizing these items and the required time to complete mobilization. . General timescaled logic diagram displaying the major activities and sequence of the planned activities .
For each activity identify the critical event that will activate the contingency plan .
Submit revisions to a contingency plan at least business days before starting the activity requiring the contingency plan .
Allow business days for review .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .B Materials Not Used .C Construction .C General Work that interferes with traffic is limited to the hours when closures are allowed .
Do not reduce an open traffic lane width to less than feet .
If traffic cones or delineators are used for temporary edge delineation the side of the base of the cones or delineators nearest to traffic is considered the edge of the traveled way .
Do not simultaneously close consecutive ramps in the same direction of travel servicing consecutive local streets unless authorized .
Notify the Engineer of delays in your activities caused by the denial of either an authorized closure or a closure schedule request for the specified time frame allowed for closures .
Discuss the contingency plan for any activity that could affect the closure schedule with the Engineer at least business days before starting the activity requiring the plan .
If you do not open a closure to traffic by the specified time suspend work and submit a work plan .
No further closures are allowed until your work plan has been authorized .
If the Engineer orders you to remove a closure before the time designated in the authorized closure schedule any delay caused by this order is an excusable delay .
The Engineer may reschedule a closure that was canceled due to unsuitable weather .
.C Lane Closure System Training The Department provides LCS training .
Request the LCS training at least days before submitting the st closure request .
The Department provides the training within days after your request .
The training may be web based .
For webbased training the Engineer provides you the website address to access the training .
Within business days after completion of the training the Department provides LCS accounts and user IDs to your assigned trained representatives .
Each representative must maintain a unique password and current user information in the LCS .
The Department terminates your LCS accounts after Contract acceptance .
.C Closure Requirements and Charts .Ca General Where or more lanes in the same direction including the shoulders are adjacent to the area where the work is being performed close the adjacent lane under any of the following conditions .
Work is off the traveled way but within feet of the edge of the traveled way and the approach speed is greater than mph .
Work is off the traveled way but within feet of the edge of the traveled way and the approach speed is less than mph Closure of the adjacent traffic lane is not required during any of the following activities .
Work behind a barrier .
Paving grinding or grooving .
Installation maintenance or removal of traffic control devices except for temporary railing .Cb Complete Freeway or Expressway Closure Requirements Reserved SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .Cc HOV Express and Bus Lane Closure Requirements Reserved .Cd City Street Closure Requirements Reserved .Ce Closure Restrictions for Special Events and Venues Reserved .Cf Closure Restrictions for Designated Holidays and Special Days Reserved .Cg Freeway or Expressway Lane Requirement Charts Reserved .Ch Complete Freeway or Expressway Closure Hour Charts Reserved .Ci Complete Connector Closure Hour Charts and Connector Lane Requirement Charts Reserved .Cj Complete Ramp Closure Hour Charts and Ramp Lane Requirement Charts Reserved .Ck Conventional Highway Lane Requirement Charts Reserved .Cl Complete Conventional Highway Closure Hour Charts Reserved .Cm City Street Closure Hour Charts and City Street Lane Requirement Charts Reserved .Cn Concrete Slab and Approach Slab Replacement Closure Hours Table Reserved .Co.Cs Reserved .C .. C Reserved .C Traffic Control System Requirements .Ca General Control traffic using stationary closures .
If components of the traffic control system are displaced or cease to operate or function as specified immediately repair them to their original condition or replace them and place them back in their original locations .
Vehicles equipped with attenuators must comply with section .. Each vehicle used to place maintain and remove components of a traffic control system on a multilane highway must have a Type II flashing arrow sign that must operate whenever the vehicle is used for placing maintaining or removing the components .
For a stationary closure vehicles with a Type II flashing arrow sign not involved in placing maintaining or removing the components must display only the caution display mode .
If a flashing arrow sign is required for a closure activate the sign before the closure is in place .
.Cb Stationary Closures Except for channelizing devices placed along open trenches or excavations adjacent to the traveled way remove the components of the traffic control system for a stationary closure from the traveled way and SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL shoulders at the end of each work period .
You may store the components at authorized locations within the limits of the highway .
If a traffic lane is closed with channelizing devices for excavation work move the devices to the adjacent edge of the traveled way when not excavating .
Space the devices as shown for the lane closure .
.Cc Moving Closures For a moving closure use a PCMS that complies with section .
except the sign must be truck mounted .
The full operational height to the bottom of the sign may be less than feet above the ground but must be as high as practicable .
If you use a flashing arrow sign in a moving closure the sign must be truck mounted .
Operate the flashing arrow sign in the caution display mode if it is being used on a lane twoway highway .
.C Traffic Control System Signs .Ca General Traffic control system signs must comply with section .. .Cb Connector and Ramp Closure Signs Inform motorists of a temporary closing of a connector or a freeway or expressway entrance or exit ramp using .
SCCA Ramp Closed sign for closures of day or less .
SCCA Ramp Closed sign for closures of more than day SCCA and SCCA signs must be stationary mounted at the locations shown and must remain in place and visible to motorists during the connector or ramp closure .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before installing the sign and install the sign from to days before the closure .
.C.C Reserved .D Payment The Department pays for change order work for a traffic control system by force account for increased traffic control and uses a force account analysis for decreased traffic control. . FALSEWORK OPENINGS Reserved .
PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES .A General Section .
includes specifications for providing temporary pedestrian facilities .
Temporary pedestrian facilities must comply with section .. .B Materials Not Used .C Construction If pedestrian traffic is allowed to pass through work areas provide a temporary pedestrian facility through the construction areas within the highway .
Include a protective overhead covering as necessary to ensure protection from falling objects and drippings from overhead structures .
If an activity requires a closure of a walkway provide another walkway nearby off of the traveled way .
Where pedestrian openings through falsework are required provide a temporary pedestrian facility with a protective overhead covering during all bridge construction activities .
.D Payment Not Used SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
BRIDGE CLEANING AND PAINTING ACTIVITIES .A General Section .
includes specifications for maintaining traffic during bridge cleaning and painting activities .
Signs must comply with section .. .B Materials Not Used .C Construction For bridge cleaning and painting activities place the signs shown in the following table in addition to those shown on the plans Sign no .
Sign description Requirement W Road Work Ahead Place portable byinch signs at locations where traffic approaches a bridge with work underway .
If the approach speed is greater than mph the sign must be by inches .
The sign panel base material must not be plywood .
Attach orange sq in flags to each sign .
Cleaning and Painting Operations Place a byinch sign near each W sign .
Use inch high black lettering and include your name address and telephone number on an orange background .
The Engineer determines the exact locations of the signs .
Do not use signs until needed .
Maintain the signs in place during bridge cleaning and painting activities .
Remove the signs at the end of each work shift .
After each days bridge cleaning and painting activities remove obstructions from the roadway to allow for free passage for traffic .
Remove blast cleaning residue from the traveled way before opening the area to traffic .
You may lay supply lines along the top of curbs adjacent to railing posts if the lines do not interfere with traffic .
Remove the lines when work is not in progress .
.D Payment Not Used .
TOLL BRIDGES Reserved ..
RESERVED RESERVED TEMPORARY PAVEMENT DELINEATION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for placing temporary pavement delineation except for delineation on a seal coat project .
Temporary painted traffic stripes and painted pavement markings used for temporary delineation must comply with section .
Temporary signs for nopassing zones must comply with section .. . MATERIALS .A General The following types of temporary pavement delineation must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Temporary pavement markers for long term daynight use days or less .
Temporary pavement markers for short term daynight use days or less SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .
Temporary removable striping and pavement marking tape days or less .
Permanent traffic striping and pavement marking tape .
Channelizers .B Temporary Pavement Markers Temporary pavement markers must be the same color as the lane line or centerline markers being replaced .
Temporary pavement markers must be for longterm day or night use days or less except you may use temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use days or less if you place the permanent pavement delineation before the end of the days .
.C Channelizers Channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation must be orange and surface mounted. . CONSTRUCTION .A General If work activities obliterate pavement delineation place temporary or permanent pavement delineation before opening the traveled way to traffic .
The temporary pavement delineation must consist of a lane line and centerline pavement delineation for traveled ways open to traffic .
On multilane roadways freeways and expressways the temporary pavement delineation must also include edge line delineation for traveled ways open to traffic .
Establish the alignment for temporary pavement delineation including the required lines or markers .
Surfaces to receive an application of paint or removable traffic tape must be dry and free from dirt and loose material .
Do not apply temporary pavement delineation over existing pavement delineation or any other temporary pavement delineation .
Maintain temporary pavement delineation until no longer needed or replace it with a new striping detail of temporary or permanent pavement delineation .
When the Engineer determines the temporary pavement delineation is no longer required for the direction of traffic remove the temporary pavement markers and underlying adhesive and removable traffic tape from the final layer of surfacing and from the pavement to remain in place .
Remove temporary pavement delineation that conflicts with any subsequent or new traffic pattern for the area .
.B Temporary Lane Line and Centerline Delineation If lane lines or centerlines are obliterated and temporary pavement delineation to replace the lines is not shown the minimum lane line and centerline delineation must consist of temporary pavement markers placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals .
For temporary lane line or centerline delineation consisting entirely of temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use days or less do not use the markers for more than days on lanes opened to traffic .
Place the permanent pavement delineation before the end of the days .
If the permanent pavement delineation is not placed within days replace the temporary pavement markers with additional temporary pavement delineation equivalent to the pattern described for the permanent pavement delineation for the area .
If nopassing centerline pavement delineation is obliterated install the following temporary nopassing zone signs before opening lanes to traffic .
W Road Work Ahead sign from to feet in advance of the nopassing zone .
R Do Not Pass sign at the beginning of the nopassing zone and at foot maximum intervals within the nopassing zone .
Wa Next ___ Miles plaque beneath the W sign for continuous zones longer than miles .
R Pass With Care sign at the end of the nopassing zone The Engineer determines the exact location of temporary nopassing zone signs .
Maintain the temporary nopassing zone signs in place until you place the permanent nopassing centerline pavement delineation .
Remove the temporary nopassing zone signs when the Engineer determines they are no longer required for the direction of traffic .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .C Temporary Edge Line Delineation On multilane roadways freeways and expressways open to traffic where edge lines are obliterated and temporary pavement delineation to replace those edge lines is not shown provide temporary pavement delineation for .
Right edge lines consisting of any of the following ..
Solid inchwide traffic stripe tape of the same color as the stripe being replaced .. Traffic cones placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals .. Portable delineators or channelizers placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals .
Left edge lines consisting of any of the following ..
Solid inchwide traffic stripe tape of the same color as the stripe being replaced .. Traffic cones placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals .. Portable delineators or channelizers placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals ..
Temporary pavement markers placed longitudinally at foot maximum intervals You may apply temporary traffic stripe paint of the same color as the stripe being replaced instead of solid inchwide temporary traffic stripe tape where the removal of the temporary traffic stripe is not required .
The Engineer determines the lateral offset for traffic cones portable delineators and channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation .
If traffic cones or portable delineators are used for temporary edge line delineation maintain the cones or delineators during the hours of the day when they are in use .
Cement the bases of channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation to the pavement with hot melt bituminous adhesive as specified in section for cementing pavement markers to pavement .
.D Temporary Traffic Stripe Pavement Marking and Pavement Markers .D General Reserved .D Temporary Traffic Stripe Tape Except where the temporary traffic stripe is used for days or less apply temporary removable traffic stripe tape under the manufacturers instructions and as follows .
Slowly roll the tape with a rubbertired vehicle or roller to ensure complete contact with the pavement surface . .
Apply the tape straight on a tangent alignment and on a true arc on a curved alignment. . Do not apply the tape when the ambient air or pavement temperature is less than degrees F unless otherwise authorized .
For temporary traffic stripe tape used for days or less apply the temporary removable traffic stripe tape under the manufacturers instructions .
.D Temporary Traffic Stripe Paint Apply temporary traffic stripe paint under section .
except you may apply or coats of the temporary traffic stripe paint for new or existing pavement .
You are not required to remove painted temporary traffic stripe that will be covered by paving work .
.D Temporary Pavement Marking Tape Apply temporary removable pavement marking tape as specified for applying temporary removable traffic stripe tape in section .D .
.D Temporary Pavement Marking Paint Apply temporary pavement marking paint under section .
except you may apply or coats of the temporary pavement marking paint .
You are not required to remove of painted temporary pavement markings that will be covered by paving work .
You may use permanent or temporary removable pavement marking tape instead of temporary pavement marking paint .
SECTION TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL .D Temporary Pavement Markers Place temporary pavement markers under the manufacturers instructions .
Cement temporary markers to the surfacing with the manufacturers recommended adhesive except do not use epoxy adhesive in areas where the removal of the pavement markers is required .
You may use retroreflective pavement markers instead of temporary pavement markers for longterm day or night use days or less except to simulate patterns of broken traffic stripe .
Retroreflective pavement markers used for temporary pavement markers must comply with section except the waiting period before placing pavement markers on new asphalt concrete surfacing as specified in section .
does not apply .
Do not use epoxy adhesive to place pavement markers in areas where the removal of the pavement markers is required. . PAYMENT The Department does not pay for additional temporary pavement delineation used to replace temporary pavement markers .
Temporary traffic stripe is measured as specified for traffic stripe in section .
Temporary pavement marking is measured as specified for pavement marking in section .
TEMPORARY PAVEMENT DELINEATION FOR SEAL COATS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for placing temporary pavement delineation for a seal coat project .
Temporary signs for nopassing zones must comply with section .. . MATERIALS Temporary raised pavement markers for seal coat applications must be temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use days or less on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials. . CONSTRUCTION Before applying binder that will obliterate existing traffic stripes place temporary raised pavement markers on the existing traffic stripes except for right edge lines at foot maximum intervals .
Place markers side by side on double traffic stripes with marker placed on each stripe longitudinally at foot maximum intervals .
Place temporary raised pavement markers under the manufacturers instructions .
Before opening the lanes to uncontrolled traffic remove the covers from the temporary raised pavement markers .
If you obliterate nopassing centerline pavement delineation install the following temporary nopassing zone signs before opening lanes to traffic .
W Road Work Ahead sign from to feet in advance of the nopassing zone .
R Do Not Pass sign at the beginning of the nopassing zone and at foot maximum intervals within the nopassing zone .
Wa Next ___ Miles plaque beneath the W sign for continuous zones longer than miles .
R Pass With Care sign at the end of the nopassing zone The Engineer determines the exact location of the temporary nopassing zone signs .
Maintain the temporary nopassing zone signs in place until you place the permanent nopassing centerline pavement delineation .
Remove the temporary nopassing zone signs when the Engineer determines they are no longer required for the direction of traffic .
Maintain temporary pavement delineation until you replace it with the permanent pavement delineation. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED WATER POLLUTION CONTROL GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for preventing controlling and abating water pollution within waters of the State .
Information on forms reports and other documents is in the following Department manuals .
Field Guide to Construction Site Dewatering .
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan SWPPP and Water Pollution Control Program WPCP Preparation Manual .
Construction Site Best Management Practices BMPs Manual .
Construction Site Monitoring Program Guidance Manual You may view these manuals at the Stormwater and Water Pollution Control Information link at the Departments Division of Construction website or purchase them at the Departments Publication Distribution Unit .
A WPCP and a SWPPP must comply with the Departments Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan SWPPP and Water Pollution Control Program WPCP Preparation Manual and must be prepared using the latest template posted on the Construction stormwater website .
.B Definitions active area Area where soildisturbing work activities have occurred at least once within days .
construction phase Phase that includes the highway construction phase for building roads and structures the plant establishment and maintenance phase for placing vegetation for final stabilization and the suspension phase for suspension of work activities or a winter shutdown .
The construction phase starts at the start of job site activities and ends at Contract acceptance .
inactive area Area where soildisturbing work activities have not occurred within days .
qualifying rain event Storm that produces at least .
inch of precipitation with a hour or greater period between rain events .
runon Water that originates offsite and flows onto the job site .
storm event Storm that produces or is forecasted to produce at least .
inch of precipitation within a hour period .
.C Submittals .C General Within hours after the end of a storm event resulting in a discharge a nonstormwater discharge or receiving a written notice or an order from the RWQCB or another regulatory agency submit the following information .
Date time location and nature of the activity and the cause of the discharge notice or order .
Type and quantity of the discharge .
WPC practices in use before the discharge or before receiving the notice or order .
Description of WPC practices and corrective actions taken to manage the discharge or cause of the notice .C Training Records For all employees and subcontractors who will be working at the job site submit WPC training records as informational submittals .
The records must include the training subjects and dates for the initial training ongoing training and tailgate meetings .
Submit records for .
Existing employees within business days of obtaining the SWPPP or WPCP authorization .
New employees within business days of receiving the training SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
Subcontractors employees at least business days before a subcontractor starts work .C ContractorSupport Facilities At least business days before operating any Contractorsupport facility submit .
Plan showing the location and associated WPC practices .
Copy of the notice of intent approved by the RWQCB and the WPCP or SWPPP approved by the RWQCB if you will be operating a batch plant or a crushing plant under the General Industrial Permit .C Water Quality Monitoring .Ca General Section .C applies if a bid item for a water quality monitoring report is shown on the Bid Item List .
.Cb Water Quality Monitor Within days after Contract approval submit the name and qualifications of your water quality monitor .
Include the monitors training and experience in collecting and analyzing water quality samples .
.Cc Water Quality Monitoring Reports Whenever work activities occur in water submit a monthly report of water quality monitoring by the th of the month for the monitoring work conducted during the previous month .
The report must include .
Visual inspection reports for each storm event and nonstormwater discharge .
Each visual inspection report must include .. Name of personnel performing the inspection inspection date and date the inspection report was completed .. Descriptions of storm and weather conditions ..
Locations and observations .
Field inspection reports and sampling results including ..
Description of the analytical methods used reporting units and detection limits ..
Date location time of sampling visual observations photographs and measurements .. Estimate of water flow .. Calibration logs for field monitoring equipment .
Visual inspection reports and sampling results for a storm event that generates visible runoff including ..
Date location and time of visual observations .. Photographs of the areas disturbed by project activities including material disposal areas .. Photographs showing the disturbed soil areas and documenting compliance for erosion control and revegetation measures including soil stabilization and sediment control .
Summary of WQO exceedance reports .
Summary of corrective actions If a WQO is exceeded during work activities in water submit a WQO exceedance report within hours .
The report must include .
Field inspection reports and sampling results including ..
Description of the analytical methods used reporting units and detection limits ..
Date location time of sampling visual observations photographs and measurements .. Estimate of the water flow .
Description of WPC practices and corrective actions taken to manage WQO exceedance .Cd Water Quality Annual Reports Section .Cd applies if a bid item for a water quality annual report is shown on the Bid Item List .
Submit a water quality annual report for each reporting period from July st to June th .
If construction occurs through June th submit the report no later than July th for the previous reporting period .
If construction ends before June th submit the report within days after Contract acceptance .
The report must be in an authorized format and include SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
Projects description location and receiving waters .
Water quality monitoring information such as .. Summary and evaluation of sampling and analysis results and laboratory reports .. Analytical methods reporting units and detection limits for analytical parameters .. Summary of corrective actions ..
Identification of corrective actions or compliance activities that were not implemented .. Summary of any exceedances .. Names of individuals performing water quality inspections and sampling ..
Logistical information for inspections and sampling including the location date time and precipitation ..
Visual observations and sample collection records .
Photographs documenting Contract compliance for ..
Disturbed soil areas created by work activities ..
Erosion control and revegetation measures including soil stabilization and sediment control practices ..
Completed work .
Records of training and meetings for water quality permit compliance Submit copies of the water quality annual report .
Allow days for review .
If revisions are required the Engineer notifies you of the date the review stopped and provides comments .
Submit a revised report within business days of receiving the comments .
The Departments review resumes when the complete report is resubmitted .
Submit an electronic copy on a readonly CD DVD or other Engineerauthorized datastorage device and printed copies of the authorized water quality annual report .
Include the signed certifications from the water quality monitor and the WPC manager .
.C.C Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Regulatory Requirements Comply with the Departments general permit issued by the SWRCB for Order No .
DWQ NPDES No .
CAS National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NPDES Statewide Storm Water Permit and Waste Discharge Requirements WDRS for State of California Department of Transportation .
The Departments general permit governs stormwater and nonstormwater discharges from the Departments properties facilities and activities .
For the Departments general permit go to the Caltrans Program link on the Storm Water Program page of the SWRCB website .
Discharges from manufacturing facilities such as batch plants and crushing plants must comply with the general waste discharge requirements for Order No .
DWQ NPDES General Permit No .
CAS issued by the SWRCB for Discharges of Storm Water Associated with Industrial Activities Excluding Construction Activities General Industrial Permit .
For the General Industrial Permit go to the SWRCB website .
For a batch plant and crushing plant outside a job site or within a job site that serves one or more contracts obtain coverage under the General Industrial Permit before operating a batch plant to manufacture concrete HMA or other material or a crushing plant to produce rock or aggregate .
.D Training Employees must receive initial WPC training before starting work at the job site .
For your project managers supervisory personnel subcontractors and employees involved in WPC work .
Provide stormwater training in the following subjects .. WPC rules and regulations ..
Implementation and maintenance of Temporary soil stabilization Temporary sediment control SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Tracking control Wind erosion control Material pollution prevention and control Waste management Nonstormwater management .
Conduct weekly training meetings covering ..
Deficiencies and corrective actions for WPC practices .. WPC practices required for work activities during the week .. Spill prevention and control .. Material delivery storage usage and disposal ..
Waste management .. Nonstormwater management procedures Training for personnel who collect water quality samples must include .
Review of the sampling and analysis plan and the Construction Site Monitoring Program Guidance Manual .
Health and safety review .
Sampling simulations .D Water Pollution Control Manager .Da General Assign a WPC manager to implement the WPCP or SWPPP .
.Db Qualifications The WPC manager must .
Comply with the requirements provided in the Construction General Permit for .. QSP if the project requires a WPCP .. QSD if the project requires a SWPPP .
Complete the stormwater management training described at the Stormwater and Water Pollution Control Information link at the Departments Division of Construction website .Dc Responsibilities The WPC manager must .
Be the primary contact responsible for WPC work .
Oversee WPC work including ..
Maintenance of WPC practices ..
Inspections of WPC practices identified in the SWPPP or WPCP ..
Inspections and reports for visual monitoring ..
Preparation and implementation of the rain event action plans .. Sampling and analysis ..
Preparation and submittal of NAL exceedance reports Violation reports for the receiving water monitoring trigger SWPPP annual certification Annual reports WPCpractice status reports .
Oversee and enforce hazardous waste management practices under section including spill prevention and control measures .
Have the authority to .
Mobilize crews to make immediate repairs to WPC practices .
Stop construction activities damaging WPC practices or causing water pollution .
Ensure that all employees have current WPC training and provide training if collecting water quality samples is delegated .
Implement the authorized SWPPP or WPCP .
Revise the SWPPP or WPCP if required .
Be at the job site within hours of being contacted SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .D Quality Control .Da General Section .D applies if a bid item for a water quality monitoring report is shown on the Bid Item List .
Projectspecific WQOs for work activities in water are specified in the special provisions .
Assign a water quality monitor to collect water samples and record water quality data .
The water quality monitor must have the same qualifications as the WPC manager including the requirements for a QSP and must have training and experience in collecting and analyzing water quality samples .
The water quality monitor may be the same person as the WPC manager .
The water quality monitor must be responsible for generating and submitting water quality reports .
The water quality monitor must notify the Engineer within hours of an unauthorized discharge .
The water quality monitor must inspect the job site and receiving waters after each storm event and nonstormwater discharge .
The inspection of a nonstormwater discharge must include observation of .
Receiving waters .. hours before starting work in water including the installation of any clearwater diversion .. At least times daily whenever work occurs in water including the installation operation and removal of any clear water diversion .. For the presence of floating and suspended materials sheen on the surface discoloration turbidity and odors. . Job site for the presence of authorized and unauthorized nonstormwater discharges and their sources .
Unauthorized discharges to surface waters include ..
Soil silt and sand .. Bark sawdust and slash .. Rubbish and debris .. Cement concrete and concrete washings .. Oil and petroleum products .. Welding slag .. Other organic or earthen materials Retain each visual inspection report at the job site .
.Db Water Quality Sampling and Analysis Take water quality samples each day a construction activity has the potential to mobilize sediment or alter background conditions within waters of the State .
Take water quality samples of surface water when .
Conducting inwater work .
Work activities result in materials reaching receiving waters .
Work activities result in the creation of a visible plume in receiving waters Comply with the equipment manufacturers instructions for sample collection analysis methods and equipment calibration .
At least hours before starting inwater work .
Establish locations for water quality sampling .. Upstream of the effluent discharge point or location of inwater work by no more than feet .. At the effluent discharge point including the location of inwater work .. Downstream of the effluent discharge point or location of inwater work between and feet .
Take water quality samples to document background conditions for upstream effluent and downstream locations .
Test for each water quality objective shown in the table titled Water Quality Objectives. . Estimate water flow .
During inwater work including the installation of a clear water diversion take water quality samples SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
At least times daily for each water quality objective .
At upstream effluent and downstream locations If a water quality objective is exceeded the water quality monitor must notify the Engineer by phone or electronic media within minutes and .
Conduct water quality sampling every hour until measurements comply with water quality objectives .
Measure the distance from the effluent location to the downstream extent of the exceedance .
Obtain photographs of the tributary upstream downstream and at the location of inwater work .
If WPC practices are installed repaired or modified to control the source of the exceedance monitor the activity and document with samples photographs and a brief summary You are not required to collect samples .
During dangerous weather conditions such as flooding or electrical storms .
Outside of normal working hours If downstream samples show levels outside of the acceptable range and indicate a possible water quality objective exceedance assess the WPC practices site conditions and surrounding influences to determine the probable cause for the increase .
Retain calibration logs water quality sampling documentation and analytical results at the job site .
.Dc Reserved .D.D Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Monitor the NWSs forecast daily at its website .
Install facilities and devices used for WPC practices before performing other job site activities .
Install soil stabilization and sediment control materials for WPC practices in all active areas or before any storm event .
Repair or replace facilities and devices used for WPC practices within hours of discovering any damage .
You may request or the Engineer may order changes to the WPC work .
Changes may include additional or new WPC practices .
Additional WPC work is change order work .
Retain a printed copy of the authorized WPCP or SWPPP at the job site .
.B ContractorSupport Facilities Use WPC practices to protect stormwater systems or receiving waters from the discharge of potential pollutants from any Contractorsupport facility .
Contractorsupport facilities include .
Staging areas .
Storage yards for equipment and materials .
Mobile operations .
Batch plants for concrete and HMA .
Crushing plants for rock and aggregate .
Other facilities installed for your convenience such as haul roads If you obtain or dispose of material at a noncommercially operated borrow or disposal site prevent water pollution due to erosion at the site during and after completion of your activities .
Upon completion of your work leave the site in a condition such that water will not collect or stand in it .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .C Inspections Use the Stormwater Site Inspection Report form for documenting inspections .
Inspect WPC practices identified in the SWPPP or WPCP .
Before a forecasted storm event .
After a qualifying rain event that produces runoff .
At hour intervals during extended storm events .
On a predetermined schedule of at least once a week Inspect the following work activities and areas daily .
Storage areas for hazardous materials and waste as specified in section .
Hazardous waste disposal and transporting activities as specified in section .
Hazardous material delivery and storage activities .
Demolition sites within feet of storm drain systems and receiving waters Inspect vehicles and equipment at the job site daily for leaks and spills .
Verify that operators are inspecting vehicles and equipment each day of use .
Inspect the following work activities and areas daily if the activity occurs daily or weekly if the activity occurs weekly .
Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities .
Vehicle and equipment maintenance and fueling areas .
Pile driving areas for leaks and spills .
Temporary concrete washouts .
Paved roads at job site access points for street sweeping .
Dewatering work .
Temporary ATS .
Work over water .D Deficiencies If the Engineer or you identify a deficiency in the implementation of the authorized WPCP or SWPPP immediately correct the deficiency unless a later date is authorized but before precipitation occurs .
The Department may correct the deficiency if you fail to correct it immediately by the agreed date or before the onset of precipitation .
The cost of this work is deducted .
.E.H Reserved .
PAYMENT The Department does not pay for the cleanup repair removal disposal or replacement of WPC practices due to improper installation or your negligence .
The Department does not pay for WPC practices at Contractorsupport facilities and noncommercially operated borrow or disposal sites .
WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PROGRAM .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for preparing a water pollution control program .
Preparing a water pollution control program includes developing and implementing the WPCP providing a WPC manager conducting WPC training and monitoring inspecting and correcting WPC practices .
If the Department determines that the project qualifies for an erosivity waiver the conditions for the waiver are specified in the special provisions .
The erosivity waiver and Rfactor are described in the NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities Order No .
DWQ NPDES No .
CAS .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Within days after Contract approval submit copies of your WPCP .
You may assign a QSP other than the WPC manager to develop the WPCP .
The WPCP must .
Show the location of disturbed soil areas water bodies and water conveyances .
Describe the work involved in the installation maintenance repair and removal of temporary WPC practices .
Show the locations and types of WPC practices that will be used for .. Stormwater and nonstormwater in Contractorsupport facilities outside the job site but related to work activities including Staging areas Storage yards Access roads .. Activities or mobile activities related to all NPDES permits .
Show the locations and types of temporary WPC practices that will be used in the work for each type of construction phase .
Show the locations and types of WPC practices that will be installed permanently under the Contract .
Include a schedule showing when .. Work activities will be performed that could cause the discharge of pollutants into stormwater .. WPC practices including soil stabilization and sediment control associated with each construction phase will be implemented .
Include a copy of each permit obtained by the Department such as the Department of Fish and Game permits US Army Corps of Engineers permits RWQCB certifications aerially deposited lead variance from DTSC aerially deposited lead variance notification and RWQCB waste discharge requirements for reuse of aerially deposited lead Allow business days for review .
After the Engineer authorizes the WPCP submit an electronic copy on a readonly CD DVD or other Engineerauthorized data storage device and printed copies of the authorized WPCP .
If a RWQCB requires review of the authorized WPCP the review is specified in the special provisions and the Engineer submits the authorized WPCP to the RWQCB for review and comment .
If the Engineer orders changes to the WPCP based on the RWQCBs comments submit a revised WPCP within business days .
Do not start job site activities until the WPCP is authorized .
Submit a revised WPCP if .
Changes in work activities could affect the discharge of pollutants .
WPC practices are added as change order work .
WPC practices are added at your discretion .
Changes in the quantity of disturbed soil are substantial .
Objectives for reducing or eliminating pollutants in stormwater discharges have not been achieved .
Project receives a written notice or order from the RWQCB or any other regulatory agency .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
CONSTRUCTION Manage work activities such that you reduce the discharge of pollutants to surface waters groundwaters and municipalseparate storm sewer systems .
Monitor and inspect WPC practices at the job site .
Notify the Engineer within hours whenever you .
Identify discharges into receiving waters or drainage systems that are causing or could cause water pollution .
Receive a written notice or order for the project from the RWQCB or any other regulatory agency Continue WPCP implementation during any suspension of work activities .
You must submit a SWPPP and pay all associated costs if you do any of the following .
Disturb ac or more of soil on a project without an erosivity waiver .
Disturb more than ac of soil on a project with an erosivity waiver .
Fail to comply with the schedule for soildisturbing activities for a project with an erosivity waiver and the delay voids the erosivity waiver .
PAYMENT The Department pays you for prepare water pollution control program as follows .
Total of percent of the item total upon authorization of the WPCP .
Total of percent of the item total upon Contract acceptance STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for preparing a stormwater pollution prevention plan for projects that will disturb ac or more of soil .
Preparing a stormwater pollution prevention plan includes developing and implementing the plan providing a WPC manager conducting WPC training and monitoring inspecting and correcting WPC practices .
Except for projects in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit the Department establishes an environmental risk level for each project .
The projects risk level is specified in the special provisions .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit the documents shown with an X for the projects risk level in the following table SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Submittal Requirements Document Risk level Risk level Risk level Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit SWPPP X X X X Construction Site Monitoring Program X X X Xa Job site monitoring reports X X X X Sampling and analysis plan X X X X Sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants X X X X Sampling and analysis plan for pH and turbidity X X X NAL reports X X X Receiving water monitoring trigger reports X Rain Event Action Plan X X X Annual Certification X X X X Stormwater Annual Report X X X X aFor a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit this program is referred to as the Construction Site Monitoring and Reporting Program .
.C Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan .Ca General Within days of Contract approval submit copies of your SWPPP .
You may assign a QSD other than the WPC manager to develop the SWPPP .
The SWPPP must .
Describe the work involved in the installation maintenance repair and removal of temporary and permanent WPC practices .
Include maps showing ..
Locations of disturbedsoil areas .. Water bodies and conveyances ..
Locations and types of WPC practices that will be used for each Contractorsupport facility ..
Locations and types of temporary WPC practices that will be used in the work for each construction phase ..
Locations and types of WPC practices that will be installed permanently under the Contract .. Water quality sampling locations ..
Locations planned for the storage and use of potential nonvisible pollutants .. Receivingwater sampling locations .
Include a Construction Site Monitoring Program or Construction Site Monitoring and Reporting Program as applicable .
Include a schedule showing when .. Work activities will be performed that could cause the discharge of pollutants into stormwater .. WPC practices including soil stabilization and sediment control associated with each construction phase will be implemented .
Include a copy of each permit obtained by the Department such as the Department of Fish and Game permits US Army Corps of Engineers permits RWQCB certifications aerially deposited lead variance from DTSC aerially deposited lead variance notification and RWQCB waste discharge requirements for aerially deposited lead reuse .
Include training records for project personnel If revisions are required the Engineer notifies you of the date when the review stopped and provides comments .
Submit a revised SWPPP within days of receiving the comments .
The Departments review resumes when a complete SWPPP has been resubmitted .
Submit an electronic copy on a readonly CD DVD or other Engineerauthorized data storage device and printed copies of the authorized SWPPP .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL If the RWQCB requires review of the authorized SWPPP the Engineer submits it to the RWQCB for review and comment .
If the Engineer orders changes to the SWPPP based on the RWQCBs comments submit a revised SWPPP within days .
Do not start job site activities until the SWPPP is authorized and a waste discharge ID number is issued .
Submit a revised SWPPP annually before July th and any time .
Changes in work activities could affect the discharge of pollutants .
WPC practices are added as change order work .
WPC practices are added at your discretion .
Changes in the quantity of disturbed soil are substantial .
Objectives for reducing or eliminating pollutants in stormwater discharges have not been achieved .
You receive a written notice of a permit violation for the project from the RWQCB or any other regulatory agency .Cb Construction Site Monitoring Program .Cbi General Submit a construction site monitoring program with your SWPPP .
The program must be prepared by a QSD .
For all projects submit .
Visual monitoring procedures .
Sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants .
Sampling and analysis plan for nonstormwater discharges .
Sampling and analysis plan for monitoring required by the RWQCB For a risk level project also submit a sampling and analysis plan for pH and turbidity .
For a risk level project also submit .
Sampling and analysis plan for pH and turbidity .
Sampling and analysis plan for receivingwater monitoring .
Sampling and analysis plan for any temporary ATS For a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit the program must include all of the requirements for a risk level project and .
Watershed monitoring option .
QC procedures .
Reporting requirements and record retention .
Noncompliance reporting .
Annual report .
Final report Change the program as needed to reflect the current job site activities .
.Cbii Site Inspection Reports Submit a Stormwater Site Inspection Report as an informational submittal within hours of completing a weekly inspection .
The WPC manager must oversee the preparation of this report .
The report must include the location and quantity of installed WPC practices and disturbed soil .
.Cbiii Visual Monitoring Reports Submit a copy of the visual monitoring report on a Stormwater Site Inspection Report form for each storm event and nonstormwater discharges .
The visual monitoring report must include .
Name of personnel performing the inspection inspection date and date the inspection report is completed .
Storm and weather conditions SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
Location of any of the following ..
Floating and suspended material sheen on the surface discoloration turbidity odor and source of observed pollutants for flowing and contained stormwater systems .. Nonstormwater discharges and their sources .
Corrective action taken For each storm event the monitoring report must include .
Date time and rain gauge reading .
Visual observations ..
Within business days before the predicted storm for Spills leaks or uncontrolled pollutants in drainage areas Proper implementation of WPC practices Leaks and adequate freeboard in storage areas .. Every hours during the storm event for Effectiveness of WPC practices WPC practices needing maintenance and repair ..
Within business days after a qualifying rain event for Stormwater discharge locations Evaluation of design implementation effectiveness and locations of WPC practices including locations where additional WPC practices may be needed For nonstormwater discharges the monitoring report must cover each of the following periods .
January through March .
April through June .
July through September .
October through December Retain a copy of the visual monitoring reports at the job site as part of the SWPPP .
.Cbiv Sampling and Analysis Plan Submit a sampling and analysis plan that complies with the Departments Construction Site Monitoring Program Guidance Manual .
The sampling and analysis plan must describe .
Sampling equipment and sample containers . .
Preparation of samples. . Collection and holding times. . Field measurement methods. . Analytical methods. . Quality assurance and quality control . .
Sample preservation and labeling. . Collection documentation including the names of personnel collecting samples and their training . .
Shipment of samples. . Chain of custody. . Data management and reporting. . Precautions from the construction site health and safety plan including procedures for collecting samples during precipitation .
List the conditions under which you are not required to collect samples such as ..
Dangerous weather ..
Flooding or electrical storms .. Times outside of normal working hours .
Procedures for collecting and analyzing at least samples for each day of each qualifying rain event for a risk level or risk level project . .
Procedures for collecting effluent samples at all locations where the stormwater is discharged off the job site .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL The sampling and analysis plan must identify the Statecertified laboratory that will perform the analyses .
For a list of Statecertified laboratories go to the SWRCBs website .
Submit a revised plan if discharges or sampling locations change because of changed work activities or knowledge of site conditions .
.Cbv Sampling and Analysis Plan for Nonvisible Pollutants Submit a sampling and analysis plan for monitoring nonvisible pollutants .
The sampling and analysis plan must identify potential nonvisible pollutants present at the job site associated with any of the following .
Construction materials and wastes .
Existing contamination due to historical site usage .
Application of soil amendments including soil stabilization materials with the potential to change pH or contribute toxic pollutants to stormwater The sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants must include sampling procedures for the following conditions if observed during a stormwater visual inspection .
Include a procedure for collecting at least sample for each storm event for .
Materials or wastes containing potential nonvisible pollutants not stored under watertight conditions .
Materials or wastes containing potential nonvisible pollutants stored under watertight conditions at locations where a breach leak malfunction or spill occurred and was not cleaned up before the precipitation .
Chemical applications occurring within hours before precipitation or during precipitation that could discharge pollutants to surface waters or drainage systems including applications of fertilizer pesticide herbicide methyl methacrylate concrete sealant or nonpigmented curing compound .
Applied soil amendments including soil stabilization materials that could change pH levels or contribute toxic pollutants to stormwater runoff and discharge pollutants to surface waters or drainage systems unless independent test data is available to indicate acceptable concentrations of nonvisible pollutants in the material .
Stormwater runoff from an area contaminated by the historical usage of the site that could discharge pollutants to surface waters or drainage systems The sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants must .
Include sampling procedures and a schedule for ..
Sample collection during the first hours of rain events that generate runoff .. Each nonvisible pollutant source .. Uncontaminated control sample .
Identify the locations for sampling downstream and collecting control samples and the reasons for selecting those locations .
Select locations for control samples where the sample does not come in contact with materials wastes or areas associated with potential nonvisible pollutants or disturbed soil areas .
.Cbvi Sampling and Analysis Reports .CbviA General Submit an electronic copy on a readonly CD DVD or other Engineerauthorized data storage device and a printed copy of water quality analysis results and the QC report within hours of field sampling and within days of laboratory analysis .
The QC report must include an evaluation of whether the downstream samples show levels of the tested parameter that are higher than the control sample .
The evaluation must include .
Sample ID number .
Contract number .
Constituent .
Reported value .
Analytical method .
Method detection limit SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
Reported limit Retain a copy of the water quality sampling and analysis results with the SWPPP at the job site .
.CbviB Numeric Action Level Exceedance Reports If a NAL is exceeded notify the Engineer and submit an exceedance report within hours after the conclusion of a storm event .
The report must include .
Field sampling results and inspections including .. Analytical methods reporting units and detection limits ..
Date location time of sampling visual observations and measurements ..
Quantity of precipitation from the storm event .
Description of WPC practices and corrective actions taken to manage exceedance of the NAL .CbviC ReceivingWater Monitoring Trigger Reports If a receivingwater monitoring trigger is exceeded notify the Engineer and submit a monitoring trigger report within hours after the conclusion of a storm event .
The report must include .
Field sampling results and inspections including .. Analytical methods reporting units and detection limits ..
Date location time of sampling visual observations and measurements .
Quantity of precipitation from the storm event .
Description of the WPC practices and corrective actions .CbviD.CbviF Reserved .Cbvii.Cbx Reserved .C Rain Event Action Plan For a risk level or risk level project submit a rain event action plan at least hours before a forecasted storm event if the NWS predicts a storm event with at least a percent probability of precipitation within hours .
For a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit submit a rain event action plan at least hours before a forecasted storm event if the NWS predicts a storm event with at least a percent probability of precipitation in the project area within hours for construction activities occurring .
From May through October .
During periods when construction is conducted under a variance to the land disturbance prohibition of the permit The rain event action plan must include .
Site location .
Project risk level .
Contact information including hour emergency phone numbers for .. WPC manager ..
Erosion and sediment control providers or subcontractors .. Stormwater sampling providers or subcontractors .
Storm information .
Description of .. Construction phase including active and inactive areas ..
Active areas and activities ..
Subcontractors and trades on the job site .. Prestorm activities including Responsibilities of the WPC manager Responsibilities of the crew and crew size Stabilization for active and inactive areas Stockpile management Corrective actions taken for deficiencies identified during prestorm visual inspections .. Activities to be performed during storm events including Responsibilities of the WPC manager SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Responsibilities of the crew and crew size WPC practices for maintenance and repair .
Flood contingency measures Have the rain event action plan at the job site at least hours before a forecasted storm event .
Retain a printed copy of each rain event action plan at the job site as part of the SWPPP .
.C Stormwater Annual Report Submit copies of a stormwater annual report before July th for the preceding construction period from July st through June th or within days after Contract acceptance if construction ends before June th .
For a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit submit the stormwater annual report before October st for the preceding construction period from October th through October th or within days after Contract acceptance if construction ends before October th .
The stormwater annual report must include .
Project information such as a description of the project and work locations .
Stormwater monitoring information including .. Summary and evaluation of sampling and analysis results and laboratory reports .. Analytical methods reporting units and detections limits for analytical parameters .. Summary of the corrective actions taken ..
Identification of the corrective actions taken and compliance activities not implemented .. Summary of violations .. Names of the individuals performing stormwater inspections and sampling ..
Logistical information for inspections and sampling including location date time and precipitation ..
Visual observations and sample collection records .
Documentation of training for individuals responsible for ..
Permit compliance ..
Installation inspection maintenance and repair of WPC practices .. Development and revision of the SWPPP Allow days for review .
If revisions are required the Engineer notifies you of the date the review stopped and provides comments .
Submit a revised report within business days of receiving the comments .
The Departments review resumes when a complete report has been resubmitted .
Submit an electronic copy on a readonly CD DVD or other Engineerauthorized data storage device and printed copies of the authorized stormwater annual report signed by the WPC manager .
.C Annual Certification Submit an annual certification of compliance as described in the Departments Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan SWPPP and Water Pollution Control Program WPCP Preparation Manual before July th of each year .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Regulatory Requirements Except for a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit discharges of stormwater from the project must comply with NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities Order No .
DWQ NPDES No .
CAS referred to herein as Permit .
For a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit discharges of stormwater from the project must comply with the NPDES General Permit for General Waste Discharge Requirements and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity in SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit counties of Alpine El Dorado and Placer Order No .
RT and NPDES No .
CAG .
The Lake Tahoe regional general permit may be viewed at the website for the SWRCB Storm Water Program Lahontan Region General Permits .
.D Water Quality .Da General Assign trained personnel to collect water quality samples .
The personnel must comply with the equipment manufacturers instructions for the collection of samples analytical methods and equipment calibration .
Samples taken for laboratory analysis must comply with water quality sampling procedures and be analyzed by a Statecertified laboratory under CFR part Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants .
For a risk level or risk level project take samples for pH and turbidity from representative and accessible locations upstream and downstream of the discharge point .
For multiple discharge points obtain samples from a single upstream and a single downstream location .
If the receiving water monitoring trigger for turbidity is exceeded for a risk level project take samples and analyze the suspended sediment concentration under ASTM D at a minimum detection limit of mgL .
.Db Numeric Action Levels For a risk level or risk level project test the receiving water under the test methods and at the detection limits for the NALs shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Detection limit min NAL Turbidity max NTU Field test with calibrated portable instrument pH Field test with calibrated portable instrument .
.. For a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit test the receiving water under the test method and at the detection limits for the NALs shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Detection limit min NAL pH Field test with calibrated portable instrument .
..
The daily average sampling limits must be within the specified range .
.Dc ReceivingWater Monitoring Triggers For a risk level project test the receiving water under the test methods and at the detection limits for the monitoring triggers shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Detection limit min Monitoring trigger Turbidity max NTU Field test with calibrated portable instrument pH Field test with calibrated portable instrument .
..
The storm event daily average for storms up to the year hour storm must not exceed the receiving water monitoring trigger for turbidity .
The daily average sampling results must not exceed the receivingwater monitoring trigger for pH .
.Dd Numeric Effluent Limitations For a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit test the receiving water under the test methods and at the detection limits for the NALs shown in the following table SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Quality characteristic Test method Detection limit min NEL Turbidity max NTU Field test with calibrated portable instrument The storm event daily average for storms up to the year hour storm must not exceed the NEL for turbidity .
.D Water Quality Control For a risk level or risk level project collect water samples .
During a storm event for .. Each nonvisible pollutant source and a corresponding uncontaminated control sample .. All locations identified on the rain event action plan .
During a qualifying rain event for .. Each nonvisible pollutant source and a corresponding uncontaminated control sample .. Turbidity pH and other constituents as required .. All locations identified on the rain event action plan Collect at least samples for each day of a qualifying rain event .
Collect samples during normal working hours and the first hours of each storm event .
Collect receiving water samples for a risk level project and if a direct discharge to receiving waters occurs .
If a downstream sample shows an increased level of turbidity pH or other constituent assess WPC practices site conditions and surrounding influences to determine the probable cause for the increase .
You may request or the Engineer may order laboratory analysis of stormwater samples .
If ordered laboratory analysis of stormwater samples is change order work .
.D.D Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Obtain install and maintain a rain gauge at the job site .
Observe and record precipitation daily .
For a project that requires a rain event action plan implement the plan including crew mobilization at least hours before precipitation occurs .
Continue SWPPP implementation during any suspension of work activities. . PAYMENT For a project with original working days or less the Department pays for prepare stormwater pollution prevention plan as follows .
Total of percent of the item total upon authorization of the SWPPP .
Total of percent of the item total upon Contract acceptance For a project with more than original working days the Department pays for prepare stormwater pollution prevention plan as follows .
Total of percent of the item total upon authorization of the SWPPP .
Total of percent of the item total upon work completion .
Total of percent of the item total upon Contract acceptance The Department does not pay for the preparation collection laboratory analysis and reporting of stormwater samples for nonvisible pollutants if WPC practices are not implemented before precipitation or if you fail to correct a WPC practice before precipitation .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL The Department pays .
for each authorized rain event action plan .
for each authorized stormwater annual report The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the quantity of .
Rain event action plan .
Storm water sampling and analysis day .
Storm water annual report JOB SITE MANAGEMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for performing job site management work .
Job site management work includes spill prevention and control material management waste management nonstormwater management and dewatering activities .
Temporary linear sediment barriers must comply with section .
.B Definitions minor spill Spill of oil gasoline paint or other materials in such small quantities that can easily be controlled by a first responder upon discovery of the spill .
semisignificant spill Spill of oil gasoline paint or other materials in quantities that can be controlled by a first responder with help from other personnel .
significant or hazardous spill Spill of oil gasoline paint or other materials in quantities that can not be controlled by job site personnel .
.C Submittals At least days before the start of dewatering activities submit a dewatering and discharge work plan .
The dewatering and discharge work plan must include .
Title sheet and table of contents .
Description of dewatering and discharge activities detailing the locations quantity of water equipment and discharge point .
Estimated schedule for dewatering and the discharge start and end dates of intermittent and continuous activities .
Discharge alternatives such as dust control or percolation .
Visual monitoring procedures with inspection log .
Copy of the approval to discharge into a sanitary sewer system For material used or stored within the job site submit the following documents as informational submittals .
SDS at least business days before material is used or stored .
Monthly inventory records Submit approval from the local health agency city county and sewer district before discharging from a sanitary or septic system directly into a sanitary sewer system .
Submit a discharge notification upon discovery of a spill or discharge of materials into a body of water .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Implement effective housekeeping practices for handling storing using and disposing of materials to prevent pollution .
Limit potential pollutants at their source before they come in contact with stormwater .
.B Spill Prevention and Control .B General Keep material or waste storage areas clean well organized and equipped with enough cleanup supplies for the material being stored .
Implement spill and leak prevention procedures for chemicals and hazardous substances stored on the job site .
If you spill or your equipment or materials leak chemicals or hazardous substances at the job site you are responsible for all associated cleanup costs and related liability .
Prevent spills from entering stormwater runoff before and during cleanup activities .
Do not bury the spill or wash it with water .
Immediately report spills to the WPC manager .
As soon as it is safe contain and clean up spills of petroleum materials and sanitary and septic waste substances listed in CFR parts and .
Comply with section for a spill or leak that produces hazardous waste .
.B Minor Spills Clean up a minor spill as follows .
Contain the spread of the spill . .
Recover the spilled material using absorbents. . Clean the contaminated area . .
Promptly dispose of the contaminated material and absorbents .
.B Semisignificant Spills Immediately clean up a semisignificant spill as follows .
Contain the spread of the spill. . On a paved or other impervious surface encircle and recover the spilled material with absorbents. . On soil construct an earthen dike and dig up the contaminated soil for disposal. . During precipitation cover the spill with mil plastic sheeting or other material to prevent contamination of the runoff . .
Promptly dispose of the contaminated material and absorbents .
.B Significant or Hazardous Spills Immediately notify the Engineer and qualified personnel of a significant or hazardous spill .
Handle the spill as follows .
Do not attempt to clean up the spill until qualified personnel have arrived . .
Obtain the immediate services of a spill contractor or hazardous material team . .
Notify local emergency response teams by dialing and county officials by using the emergency phone numbers retained at the job site . .
Notify the California State Warning Center at . .
Notify the National Response Center at regarding spills of Federal reportable quantities under CFR and . .
Notify other agencies as appropriate including .. Fire department .. Public works department ..
US Coast Guard .. California Highway Patrol .. City police or county sheriffs department .. DTSC .. Department of Conservation Division of Oil Gas and Geothermal Resources SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .. CalOSHA .. RWQCB .B.B Reserved .C Material Management .C General Minimize or eliminate discharge of material into the air storm drain systems and receiving waters while taking delivery of using or storing the following materials .
Hazardous chemicals including acids lime glues adhesives paints solvents and curing compounds .
Soil stabilizers and binders .
Fertilizers .
Detergents .
Plaster .
Petroleum materials including fuel oil and grease .
Asphalt and concrete components .
Pesticides and herbicides Employees trained in emergency spill cleanup procedures must be present during the unloading of hazardous materials or chemicals .
Minimize the use of hazardous materials if practicable .
Perform each of the following activities at least feet from a concentrated flow of stormwater a drainage course or an inlet wherever it is performed within the floodplain or at least feet outside the floodplain .
Stockpiling materials .
Storing piledriving equipment and liquid waste containers .
Washing vehicles and equipment in outside areas .
Fueling and maintaining vehicles and equipment .C Material Storage Store materials in their original containers with the original labels maintained in legible condition .
Immediately replace damaged or illegible labels .
Comply with section .
for the storage of liquids petroleum materials and substances listed in CFR and .
Store bagged or boxed material on pallets .
Protect bagged or boxed material from wind and rain during nonworking days and whenever precipitation is forecasted .
.C Stockpile Management Minimize stockpiling of materials at the job site .
Do not allow soil sediment or other debris from stockpiles to enter storm drains open drainages or watercourses .
Manage stockpiles by implementing WPC practices on .
Active stockpiles before a forecasted storm event .
Inactive stockpiles according to the WPCP or SWPPP schedule Cover active and inactive soil stockpiles with soil stabilization material or a temporary cover and surround them with a linear sediment barrier .
Cover stockpiles of concrete and asphalt concrete rubble HMA AB or AS with a temporary cover and surround them with a linear sediment barrier .
Place stockpiles of pressuretreated wood on pallets and cover them with an impermeable material .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Place stockpiles of cold mix asphalt concrete on an impervious surface and cover them with an impermeable material .
Protect the stockpile from stormwater runon and runoff .
Repair or replace linear sediment barriers and covers as needed to keep them functioning properly .
If sediment accumulates to of the linear sediment barriers height remove the accumulated sediment .
.C.C Reserved .D Waste Management .D General Manage solid waste under section .
Manage hazardous waste under section .
.D Paint Waste Clean waterbased and oilbased paint from brushes or equipment within a contained area to prevent contamination of soil receiving waters or storm drain systems .
Handle and dispose of paints thinners solvents residues and sludges that can not be recycled or reused as hazardous waste under section .
When thoroughly dry dispose of dry latex paint paint cans used brushes rags absorbent materials and drop cloths as solid waste under section .
.D Concrete Waste Prevent the discharge of concrete and asphalt concrete waste into storm drain systems and receiving waters .
Collect concrete waste including grout dust and debris from demolition saw cutting coring grinding or grooving simultaneously with the wasteproducing activity .
.D Sanitary and Septic Waste Do not bury or discharge wastewater from a sanitary or septic system within the highway .
A sanitary facility discharging into a sanitary sewer system must be properly connected and free from leaks .
Place a portable sanitary facility at least feet away from storm drains receiving waters and flow lines .
Comply with local health agency regulations if using an onsite disposal system .
.D Liquid Waste Prevent jobsite liquid waste from entering storm drain systems and receiving waters .
Liquid wastes include .
Drilling slurries or fluids .
Grease and oilfree wastewater and rinse water .
Dredgings including liquid waste from cleaning drainage systems .
Liquid waste running off a surface including wash and rinse water .
Other nonstormwater liquids not covered by separate permits Store liquid waste in structurally sound leakproof containers such as rolloff bins or portable tanks .
Provide enough liquid waste containers with enough volume to prevent overflow spills and leaks .
Store containers at least feet from moving vehicles and equipment .
Remove and dispose of deposited solids from sediment traps under section unless another method is authorized .
Liquid waste may require testing to determine hazardous material content before disposal .
Dispose of drilling fluids and residue .
If an authorized location is available within the job site fluids and residue exempt under CA Code of Regs g may be dried by evaporation in a leakproof container .
Dispose of the remaining solid waste under section .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .D.D Reserved .E Nonstormwater Management .E General Use water for work activities such that erosion and the discharge of pollutants into storm drain systems and receiving waters are prevented .
Obtain authorization before washing anything at the job site with water that could discharge into a storm drain system or receiving waters .
Immediately report discharges .
Sweep and vacuum paved areas .
Do not wash paved areas with water .
Direct runoff water including water from the repair of a water line from the job site to areas where it can infiltrate into the ground .
Do not allow spilled water to escape the areas used to fill water trucks .
Manage runon to minimize contact with job site water .
.E Illicit Connection and Illegal Discharge Detection and Reporting Before starting work and daily thereafter inspect the job site and its perimeter for the following evidence of illicit connections illegal discharges and dumping .
Debris or trash piles .
Staining or discoloration on pavement or soils .
Pungent odors coming from drainage systems .
Discoloration or an oily sheen on water .
Stains and residue in ditches channels or drain boxes .
Abnormal water flow during dry weather .
Excessive sediment deposits .
Nonstandard drainage junction structures .
Broken concrete or other disturbances at or near junction structures If evidence of an illegal connection discharge or dumping is discovered immediately notify the Engineer .
Do not take further action unless ordered .
Assume that unlabeled or unidentifiable material is hazardous .
.E Vehicle and Equipment Cleaning Limit vehicle and equipment cleaning or washing at the job site except for the safety and protection of the equipment and as needed to comply with PLACs .
Notify the Engineer before cleaning vehicles and equipment at the job site with soap solvents or steam .
Contain and recycle or dispose of resulting waste under section or section .D whichever is applicable .
Do not use diesel to clean vehicles or equipment .
Minimize the use of solvents .
Clean or wash vehicles and equipment in a structure equipped with disposal facilities .
You may wash vehicles in an outside area if the area is .
Paved with concrete or asphalt concrete .
Surrounded by a containment berm .
Equipped with a sump to collect and dispose of wash water Use as little water as practicable when washing vehicles and equipment .
Hoses must be equipped with a positive shutoff valve .
Discharge the liquid from wash racks to a recycling system or to another authorized system .
Remove liquids and sediment as necessary .
.E Vehicle and Equipment Fueling and Maintenance If practicable perform maintenance on vehicles and equipment offsite .
If fueling or maintenance must be performed at the job site obtain authorization for an assigned area or areas for these activities before using them .
Minimize mobile fueling and maintenance activities .
Perform fueling and maintenance activities on level ground in areas protected from stormwater runon and runoff .
Use containment berms or dikes around fueling and maintenance areas .
Keep enough absorbents and spill kits in the fueling or maintenance area and on fueling trucks to handle potential spills .
Dispose of spillcleanup material and kits immediately after use .
Use drip pans or absorbent pads during fueling or maintenance .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Do not leave fueling or maintenance areas unattended during fueling and maintenance activities .
Fueling nozzles must be equipped with an automatic shutoff control and vapor recovery where required by the Air Quality Management District .
Secure nozzles in an upright position when not in use .
Do not top off fuel tanks .
Recycle or properly dispose of used batteries and tires .
If leaks can not be repaired immediately remove the vehicle or equipment from the job site .
.E Material and Equipment Used Over Water Place drip pans and absorbent pads under vehicles and equipment used over water .
Keep enough spill cleanup material with the vehicles and equipment to handle potential spills .
Place drip pans or plastic sheeting under vehicles and equipment on docks barges or other surfaces over water whenever the vehicles or equipment will be idle for more than hour .
Install watertight curbs or toe boards on barges platforms docks or other surfaces over water to contain material debris and tools .
Secure any material or debris to prevent spills or discharge into the water due to wind .
Report discharges to receiving waters immediately upon discovery .
.E Structure Removal Over or Adjacent to Water Do not allow demolished material to enter storm drain systems and receiving waters .
Use authorized covers and platforms to collect debris .
Use attachments on equipment to catch debris during small demolition activities .
Empty debriscatching devices daily and handle debris under section .D .
.E Paving Sealing Saw Cutting Grooving and Grinding Activities Prevent the following materials from entering storm drain systems and receiving waters .
Cementitious material .
Asphaltic material .
Aggregate or screenings .
Saw cutting grooving and grinding residue .
Pavement chunks .
Shoulder backing .
Methacrylate resin .
Sandblasting residue Cover drainage inlets and use linear sediment barriers to protect downhill receiving waters until paving saw cutting grooving and grinding activities are completed and excess material has been removed .
Cover drainage inlets and manholes during the application of seal coat tack coat slurry seal or fog seal .
Whenever precipitation is forecasted limit paving saw cutting and grinding to places where runoff can be captured .
Do not start seal coat tack coat slurry seal or fog seal activities when precipitation is forecasted during the application and curing period .
Do not grind or groove pavement during precipitation .
Use a vacuum to remove slurry immediately after it is produced .
Do not allow the slurry to run onto lanes open to traffic or off the pavement .
Collect the residue from grooving and grinding activities with a vacuum attachment on the grinding machine .
Do not leave the residue on the pavement or allow it to flow across the pavement .
You may stockpile material removed from existing roadways under section .C if authorized .
Do not coat asphalt trucks and equipment with substances that contain soap foaming agents or toxic chemicals .
When paving equipment is not in use park the paving equipment over drip pans or plastic sheeting with absorbent material to catch drips .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .E Thermoplastic Striping and Pavement Markers Do not preheat transfer or load thermoplastic within feet of drainage inlets or receiving waters .
Do not unload transfer or load bituminous material for pavement markers within feet of drainage inlets or receiving waters .
Collect and dispose of bituminous material from the roadway after removing markers .
.E Pile Driving Keep spill kits and cleanup materials at pile driving locations .
Park pile driving equipment over drip pans absorbent pads or plastic sheeting with absorbent material .
Protect pile driving equipment by parking it on plywood and covering it with plastic if precipitation is forecasted .
Store pile driving equipment on level ground and protect it from stormwater runon when not in use .
Use vegetable oil instead of hydraulic fluid if practicable .
.E Concrete Curing Do not overspray chemical curing compounds .
Minimize the drift by spraying as close to the concrete as practicable .
Do not allow runoff of curing compounds .
Cover drainage inlets before applying the curing compound .
Minimize the use and discharge of water by using wet blankets or similar methods to maintain moisture when concrete is curing .
.E Concrete Finishing Collect and dispose of water and solid waste from highpressure water blasting and sand and solid waste from sandblasting .
Before sandblasting cover drainage inlets within feet of the sandblasting .
Minimize the drift of dust and blast material by keeping the nozzle close to the surface of the concrete .
If the character of the blast residue is unknown test for hazardous materials and dispose of it .
Inspect the containment structures for concretefinishing waste for damage before each day of use and before forecasted precipitation .
Remove the liquid and solid waste from the containment structures after each work shift .
.E.E Reserved .F Sweeping Sweep by hand or mechanical methods such as vacuuming .
Do not use mechanical kick brooms .
Sweep paved roads at construction entrance and exit locations and paved areas within the job site .
During clearing and grubbing activities .
During earthwork activities .
During trenching activities .
During pavementstructure construction activities .
When vehicles are entering and leaving the job site .
After soildisturbing activities .
After observing offsite tracking of material Monitor paved areas and roadways within the project .
Sweep within .
hour if sediment or debris is observed during activities requiring sweeping .
hours if sediment or debris is observed during activities not requiring sweeping Remove collected material including sediment from paved shoulders drain inlets curbs and dikes and other drainage areas .
You may stockpile collected material at the job site .
Dispose of collected material at least once per week if stockpiled .
You may dispose of sediment within the job site collected during sweeping activities .
Protect the disposal areas against erosion .
Keep dust to a minimum during street sweeping activities .
Use water or a vacuum whenever dust generation is excessive or sediment pickup is ineffective .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .G Dewatering Dewatering consists of discharging accumulated stormwater groundwater or surface water from excavations or temporary containment facilities .
Perform dewatering work as specified for the work items involved such as a temporary ATS or dewatering and discharge .
If dewatering and discharging activities are not specified for a work item and you perform dewatering activities .
Conduct dewatering activities under the Departments Field Guide for Construction Site Dewatering . .
Ensure any dewatering discharge does not cause erosion scour or sedimentary deposits that could impact natural bedding materials . .
Discharge the water within the project limits .
Dispose of the water if it can not be discharged within project limits due to site constraints or contamination. . Do not discharge stormwater or nonstormwater that has an odor discoloration other than sediment an oily sheen or foam on the surface .
Immediately notify the Engineer upon discovering any such condition .
.H.J Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used TEMPORARY SOIL STABILIZATION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for placing temporary soil stabilization materials .
Movein and moveout for temporary erosion control includes .
Moving onto the job site when the Engineer determines an area is ready to receive temporary soil stabilization materials .
Setting up all required personnel and equipment .
Moving out all personnel and equipment when work in that area is complete .
MATERIALS .A General Tackifier fiber seed and straw must comply with the specifications for the same materials in section .
except section .
does not apply .
Fiber for temporary hydraulic mulch tacked straw and hydroseed must be at least percent wood fiber .
The remaining percentage must be cellulose fiber alternate fiber or a combination of these fibers .
.B Erosion Control Blankets An erosion control blanket must comply with the specifications for RECPs in section .O except section .
does not apply .
An erosion control blanket classified as longterm and nondegradable must be Class RSP fabric .
.C Mulch Temporary mulch must comply with section .E .
.D Cementitious Binder Cementitious binder must be .
Calcium sulfate hemihydrate .
At least percent pure .
Functional for at least days .
Miscible with water and fiber .
Nontoxic to aquatic organisms .
Free from growth or germinationinhibiting factors SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
Nonflammable .E Soil Binder Soil binder must comply with the material specifications for tackifier .
.F Temporary Covers A temporary cover must be a geosynthetic temporary cover plastic sheeting or a combination of both .
Plastic sheeting must be a milthick singleply geomembrane material complying with ASTM D. Restrainers for securing the cover fabric or plastic sheeting to a slopes surface must be one of the following types .
Gravelfilled bags roped together and spaced not more than feet apart . .
Wooden board and steel restrainer .
The wooden board must be by inches feet long and made from fir or pine .
Steel reinforcing bars must be spaced not more than feet apart along the wooden board. . Other authorized type .
Rope must be at least inch in diameter and be biodegradable or nondegradable .
Biodegradable rope must be made from sisal manila or other natural fiber .
Nondegradable rope must be made from nylon polypropylene or other geosynthetic fiber .
The linear sediment barrier must comply with section .
.G GravelFilled Bags A gravelfilled bag must .
Be a geosynthetic bag .
Have inside dimensions from to inches long and from to inches wide .
Have a bound opening sewn with yarn bound with wire or secured with a closure device .
Weigh from to pounds when filled with gravel Gravel for a gravelfilled bag must be from to inch in diameter and must be clean and free of clay balls organic matter and other deleterious materials .
.H.J Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General The Engineer authorizes the areas to receive soil stabilization materials by approving the placement of stakes or other suitable markers in increments of ac or less .
Place temporary soil stabilization material within hours after an area is ready to receive the material or before a forecasted storm event .
Do not use a hydraulically applied material whenever .
Precipitation occurs .
Water is standing on or moving across the soil surface .
Soil is frozen .
Air temperature is below degrees F during the tackifiers curing period unless allowed under the tackifier manufacturers instructions and authorized .B Temporary Erosion Control Blankets Place a temporary erosion control blanket as specified for RECPs in section .O .
.C Temporary Mulch Spread temporary mulch as specified for spreading mulch in section .E .
If an application rate is not shown spread mulch to a uniform thickness of inches .
.D Temporary Hydraulic Mulch Apply temporary hydraulic mulch as specified for hydromulch in section .D .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL If application rates are not shown apply temporary hydraulic mulch at the following rates .
Fiber at lbac .
Tackifier under the manufacturers instructions for the slope soil and wind conditions .E Temporary Bonded Fiber Matrix Hydraulic Mulch Apply temporary bonded fiber matrix hydraulic mulch as specified for bonded fiber matrix in section .H .
If an application rate is not shown apply temporary bonded fiber matrix hydraulic mulch at the rate of lbac .
.F Reserved .G Temporary Cementitious Binder Hydraulic Mulch Apply temporary cementitious binder hydraulic mulch as specified for hydromulch in section .D .
If application rates are not shown apply temporary cementitious binder hydraulic mulch at the following rates .
Fiber at lbac .
Cementitious binder at lbac .H Temporary Tacked Straw Apply temporary tacked straw as specified for straw in section .G .
If application rates are not shown apply temporary tacked straw at the following rates .
Straw at .
tonsac .
Fiber at lbac .
Tackifier at the manufacturers instructed rate for the slope soil and wind conditions .I Temporary Hydroseed Apply temporary hydroseed as specified for hydroseed in section .D .
If application rates are not shown for fiber and tackifier apply temporary hydroseed at the following rates .
Seed at the rate shown .
Fiber at lbac .
Tackifier at the manufacturers instructed rate for the slope soil and wind conditions .J Temporary Soil Binder Apply temporary soil binder as specified for hydromulch in section .D .
If application rates are not shown apply temporary soil binder at the manufacturers instructed rate for the slope soil and wind conditions .
.K Temporary Covers Install temporarycover fabric as follows .
Place the fabric ..
Loosely on the slope with the longitudinal edges perpendicular to the slope contours .. On the upper portion of the slope to overlap the fabric on the lower portion of the slope .. On the side facing the prevailing wind to overlap the fabric on the downwind side of the slope .
Anchor the perimeter edge of the fabric in key trenches . .
Overlap the edges of the fabric by at least feet. . Place restrainers at the overlap area and along the toe of the slope .
Space the restrainers a maximum of feet on center between the overlaps . .
If anchor restraints are used ensure that the leg of the steel reinforcing bar pierces the fabric and holds the wooden lath firmly against the surface of the slope .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Install a temporary linear sediment barrier to protect excavation and embankment slopes from runon and concentrated flows of stormwater .
Place the barrier parallel with the slope contour at the toe of the slope .
Angle the last feet of the barrier upslope at the downhill end of the run .
If you remove a temporary cover to perform other work replace and resecure it within hour of stopping work .
Maintain a temporary cover to minimize the exposure of slopes and prevent material movement beyond the linear sediment barrier .
Relocate and secure restrainers to keep the temporary cover in place .
If a temporary cover breaks free immediately resecure it .
Repair or replace a temporary cover if any of the following occurs .
Covered area becomes exposed or exhibits visible erosion .
Erosion occurs between the joints or beneath the linear sediment barrier .
Temporary cover becomes detached torn or unraveled .L.N Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for temporary soil stabilization bid items paid for by the area is the area measured parallel with the ground surface not including the additional quantity used for overlaps .
The Department determines the cost for maintaining soil stabilization measures under section .
and pays you of that cost .
TEMPORARY SEDIMENT CONTROL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for installing temporary sediment control .
Temporary linear sediment barriers must comply with section . . MATERIALS .A General An erosion control blanket must comply with section .O except section .
does not apply .
Fiber rolls rope stakes gravelfilled bags and foam barriers must comply with section .. .B Rigid Plastic Barriers A rigid plastic barrier must .
Have an integrated filter .
Have a formed outer jacket of perforated HDPE or polyethylene terephthalate .
Have a flattened tubularshaped cross section .
Be made from virgin or recycled materials .
Be free of biodegradable filler materials that degrade the physical or chemical characteristics of the completed filter core or outer jacket .
Have a length of at least feet per unit .
Have the ability to interlock separate units into a long barrier such that water does not flow between the units .
Comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grab tensile strength of outer jacket material min lbsq in each direction ASTM Da Break strength of outer jacket lbsq in ASTM Da Permittivity of filter core min sec ASTM D . Flow rate of filter core gpm per sq ft ASTM D Filter core aperture size max microns UV stability of outer jacket and filter core min percent tensile strength after hours xenonarc lamp and water spray weathering method ASTM D aYou may use other appropriate test method for the specific polymer .
For an inlet with a curb opening but no grate the rigid plastic barrier must be sized to fit the opening and have .
Horizontal flap of at least inches with an underseal gasket to prevent underflows .
Highflow bypass .
Vertical height of at least inches after installation For a grated inlet without a curb opening the rigid plastic barrier must be sized to fit the inlet and .
Cover the grate by at least inches on each side and have an underseal gasket to prevent underflows .
Have a highflow bypass .
Have a vertical height of at least .
inches after installation For a grated inlet with a curb opening the rigid plastic barrier must be sized to fit and have .
Horizontal flap that covers the grate by at least inches on the sides away from the curb opening and must have an underseal gasket to prevent underflows .
Highflow bypass .
Section that covers at least inches vertically above the flow line of the curb opening after installation .C Sediment Filter Bags Each sediment filter bag must be sized to fit the catch basin or drainage inlet and have a highflow bypass .
A sediment filter bag may include a metal frame .
If the sediment filter bag does not have a metal frame and is deeper than inches it must include lifting loops dump straps and a restraint cord to keep the sides of the bag away from the walls of the catch basin .
.D.F Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Remove sediment deposits if the sediment exceeds inch in depth from the surface of an erosion control blanket .
Remove sediment from a Type sediment trap of a temporary inlet if the volume has been reduced by approximately .
Remove sediment from a sediment filter bag if it becomes full or if the restraint cords are no longer visible .
Empty a sediment filter bag .
Without a metal frame by placing no .
steel reinforcing bars through the lifting loops and lifting the filled bag from the drainage inlet .
With a metal frame by lifting the metal frame from the drainage inlet Rinse the sediment filter bag before replacing it at the drainage inlet .
Do not allow the rinse water to enter a drainage inlet or waterway .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL If you place the removed sediment within the job site stabilize the sediment deposits to prevent erosion .
.B Temporary Check Dams Before placing a temporary check dam remove obstructions including rocks clods and debris greater than inch in diameter from the ground .
If a temporary check dam is to be placed in the same area as an erosion control blanket install the blanket before placing the dam .
Place a temporary check dam approximately perpendicular to the centerline of the ditch or drainage line .
Install the dam with enough spillway depth to prevent flanking of a concentrated flow around its ends .
Install a Type or Type dam if the ditch is unlined and a Type dam if the ditch is lined with concrete or asphalt concrete .
For a Type temporary check dam .
Secure the fiber rolls with rope and notched wood stakes. . Drive the stakes into the soil until the notch is even with the top of the fiber roll. . Lace rope between the stakes and over the fiber roll .
Knot the rope at each stake . .
Tighten by driving the stakes further into the soil and forcing the fiber roll against the surface of the ditch or drainage line .
Place a Type temporary check dam as a single layer of gravelfilled bags placed endtoend to eliminate gaps .
If you need to increase the height of the dam add more layers of gravelfilled bags .
Stack the bags in the upper row to overlap the joints in the lower row .
Stabilize the rows by adding more rows of bags in the lower layers .
.C Temporary Drainage Inlet Protection Provide temporary drainage inlet protection around drainage inlets as changing conditions require .
The drainage inlet protection must be Type Type Type A Type B Type A Type B Type Type A Type B or a combination of these as needed for the surrounding conditions .
For drainage inlet protection in paved or unpaved areas .
Prevent runoff ponds from encroaching onto the traveled way or overtopping the curb or dike .
Use a linear sediment barrier to redirect runoff and control ponding. . Clear the area around each drainage inlet of obstructions including rocks clods and debris greater than inch in diameter before installing the drainage inlet protection . .
Install the linear sediment barrier upslope of the existing drainage inlet and parallel with the curb dike or flow line to prevent sediment from entering the drainage inlet .
If gravelfilled bags are used for Type A and Type B temporary drainage inlet protection place the gravelfilled bags endtoend to eliminate gaps .
Stack the bags such that the upper row overlaps joints in the lower row .
Arrange the bags to create a spillway by removing or more gravelfilled bags from the upper layer .
Place fiber rolls over the erosion control blanket for Type A temporary drainage inlet protection .
Place the barrier to provide a tight joint with the curb or dike .
Cut the cover fabric or jacket to ensure a tight fit .
If a rigid sediment barrier is used for Type A or Type B temporary drainage inlet protection at a grated inlet without a curb opening place the barrier using a gasket to prevent runoff from flowing under the barrier .
Secure the barrier to the pavement with nails and adhesive gravelfilled bags or a combination of both .
Install a sediment filter bag for Type temporary drainage inlet protection as follows .
Remove the drainage inlet grate. . Place the sediment filter bag in the opening . .
Replace the grate to secure the sediment filter bag in place .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .D Reserved .E Temporary Fiber Rolls Install a temporary fiber roll as specified for installing fiber rolls in section .P .
.F Temporary Gravel Bag Berms Install a temporary gravel bag berm under section .C .
.F Rigid Plastic Barriers Secure a rigid plastic barrier to .
Pavement with inch concrete nails with inch washers and solventfree adhesive gravelfilled bags or a combination of both .
Soil with inch nails with inch washers and wood stakes .G.J Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for temporary sediment control bid items paid for by the length is the length measured along the centerline of the installed material .
The payment quantity for temporary fiber roll does not include the additional quantity used for overlaps .
The Department does not pay for the relocation of temporary drainage inlet protection during work progress .
The Department determines the cost for maintaining sediment control measures under section .
and pays you of that cost .
TEMPORARY TRACKING CONTROL .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for limiting and removing sediment and debris tracked onto roadway surfacing .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Do not allow soil sediment or other debris that is tracked onto the surfacing to enter storm drains open drainage facilities and watercourses .
Remove any material tracked onto the surfacing within hours .
.D Payment Not Used .
STREET SWEEPING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for sweeping streets .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals At least business days before starting clearing and grubbing earthwork or any other activity with the potential for tracking sediment or debris submit the number and type of street sweepers that will be used on the project for each activity .
Keep and submit records of street sweeping activities including sweeping times sweeping locations and the quantity of collected material .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Not Used .C Construction Use one of the following types of street sweepers .
Mechanical sweeper followed by a vacuumassisted sweeper .
Vacuumassisted dry waterless sweeper .
Regenerativeair sweeper Street sweeping does not void the requirements for residue collection included in other work activities such as grooving grinding or asphalt concrete planing .
Sweep streets as specified for sweeping in section .F except use a street sweeper .
At least street sweeper must be at the job site at all times when street sweeping work is required .
The street sweeper must be in good working order .
.D Payment Not Used .
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION ROADWAYS AND ENTRANCES .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing temporary construction roadways and entrances .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals For a construction entrance submit details for alternatives at least business days before installation .
You may propose alternatives for the sump and corrugated steel panels or eliminate the sump if authorized .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .B General Fabric for a temporary construction entrance must be Class RSP fabric .
Fabric for temporary construction roadway must be Class RSP fabric .
.B Rock Use Type A rock for a Type temporary construction entrance .
Type A rock must comply with .
Quality characteristics for rock material in section . . Sizes shown in the following table Square screen size inches Percentage passing Percentage retained Use Type B rock for a Type temporary construction entrance .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Type B rock must be no .
railway ballast complying with the AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering .
Do not use blast furnace slag .
Use Type A or Type B rock for a temporary construction roadway .
.B Corrugated Steel Panels Each corrugated steel panel must .
Be pressed or shop welded .
Have a slot or hook for connecting the panels together .C Construction Prepare the location for a temporary construction entrance or roadway as follows .
Remove vegetation to the ground level and clear away debris. . Grade the ground to a uniform plane. . Grade the ground surface to drain . .
Remove sharp objects that could damage the fabric . .
Compact the top .
feet of the soil to at least a percent relative compaction .
Construct a temporary construction entrance or roadway as follows .
Position the fabric along the length of the entrance or roadway . .
Overlap the sides and ends of the fabric by at least inches . .
Spread rock over the fabric in the direction of traffic. . Cover the fabric with rock within hours. . Keep a inch layer of rock over the fabric to prevent damage from the spreading equipment .
Do not drive on the fabric until the rock is spread .
Repair fabric damaged during rock spreading by placing new fabric over the damaged area .
The new fabric must be large enough to cover the damaged area and provide at least an inch overlap on all edges .
Maintain a temporary construction entrance or roadway to minimize the generation of dust and tracking of soil and sediment onto public roads .
Place additional rock if dust or sediment tracking increases .
Repair a temporary construction entrance or roadway if .
Fabric is exposed .
Depressions develop in the surface .
Rock is displaced For a Type temporary construction entrance place rock under the corrugated steel panels .
Use at least corrugated steel panels for each entrance .
Couple the panels together to prevent movement .
If using a sump install the sump within feet of each temporary construction entrance .
.D Payment The Department determines the cost for maintaining a temporary construction entrance or roadway under section .
and pays you of that cost .
The Department does not pay for the relocation of temporary construction entrances or roadways during work progress .
TEMPORARY ACTIVE TREATMENT SYSTEMS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for providing a temporary active treatment system for the treatment and discharge of uncontaminated groundwater and accumulated stormwater from excavations or other areas requiring dewatering .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL You may discharge into a publicly owned treatment works instead of using a temporary active treatment system .
If uncontaminated groundwater stormwater or both are discharged to a publicly owned treatment works obtain a municipal batch discharge permit .
The Department does not pay for obtaining the municipal batch discharge permit or for discharging the water .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit records for the delivery and removal of ATS components .
.C Active Treatment System Plan Within days of Contract approval submit copies of the ATS plan .
The plan must include .
Title sheet. . Table of contents. . Certification and approval sheet described in the Departments Stormwater Prevention Plan SWPPP and Water Pollution Control Program WPCP Preparation Manual. . Amendment log and format described in the Departments Stormwater Prevention Plan SWPPP and Water Pollution Control Program WPCP Preparation Manual . .
Description and schedule of the discharge activities . .
Discharge alternatives including .. Reuse of treated water for job site activities such as dust control irrigation fill compaction or concrete batch plant activities .. Percolation ..
Discharge into storm sewers ..
Discharge into surface waters .
Treatment system description and components . .
Anticipated flow rates. . Operation and maintenance manual for the equipment . .
Monitoring sampling and reporting plan including QA and QC. . Health and safety plan. . Spill prevention plan. . Fieldrecorded data visual inspection calibration procedures and examples of logs. . Descriptions of measuring equipment. . Shop drawings showing ..
Section and plan views of stormwater effluent treatment systems ..
Location of sampling points for water quality measurements .. Flow path and placement of pipes hoses pumps holding tanks and other equipment used to convey water .. General position of treatment components relative to excavations or other areas requiring dewatering .. Point of stormwater discharge .
Daily inspection report form. . Municipal batch discharge permit from a publicly owned treatment works if required. . Coagulanthandling work plan if you use chemical coagulants inline flocculants or both in the treatment system .
The coagulanthandling work plan must include ..
Description of WPC practices to prevent accidental spillage overfeeding into the treatment system or other mishandling of coagulant agents ..
Monitoring plan for all coagulants flocculants or both ..
Description of the coagulation and flocculating agents including chemical and trade names ..
Determination of acute or chronic toxicity for aquatic organisms conforming to EPA methods for the agents ..
Monitoring plan to detect a residual agent at concentrations at or below the established acute toxicity levels for freshwater and marine conditions for that agent SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Allow days for review .
If revisions are required the Engineer notifies you of the date the review stopped and provides comments .
Submit a revised ATS plan within days of receiving the comments .
The Departments review resumes when a complete plan has been resubmitted .
Submit an electronic copy on a readonly CD DVD or other Engineerauthorized data storage device and printed copies of the authorized ATS plan .
Allow days for the Engineer to submit the plan to the SWRCB and the RWQCB .
If the Engineer requests revisions based on comments from the SWRCB or RWQCB submit a revised plan within business days .
.C Inspection Reports If the ATS discharges treated effluent submit a daily inspection report within hours .
The daily inspection report must include .
Discharge volumes .
Water quality monitoring records .
Discharge point information that includes ..
Date and time ..
Weather conditions including wind direction and velocity ..
Presence or absence of water fowl or aquatic wildlife .. Color and clarity of the effluent discharge ..
Erosion or ponding downstream of the discharge point .. Photographs labeled with the time date and location .C Notice of Discharge Reports If observations and measurements confirm that a residual chemical or water quality standard is exceeded submit the notice of discharge within hours after exceeding the limits .
The notice of discharge must include documentation of the reasons for exceeding the water quality standard and any corrective work performed to prevent a recurrence .
.C Numeric Effluent Limitation Violation Reports If a NEL is exceeded for a risk level project notify the Engineer and submit a violation report within hours .
The report must include .
Field sampling results and inspections including .. Parameters analytical methods reporting units and detection limits ..
Date location time of sampling visual observations and measurements ..
Quantity of precipitation of the storm event .
Description of WPC practices and corrective actions taken to manage NEL exceedance For a project in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit the NEL violation report must be submitted within hours .
The analytical results less than the method detection limits must be reported as less than the method detection limits .
.C.C Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Regulatory Requirements The design installation operation and monitoring of the temporary ATS and monitoring of the treated effluent must comply with Attachment F of NPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction and Land Disturbance Activities Order No .
DWQ NPDES No .
CAS .
For a project within the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit the design installation operation and monitoring of the temporary ATS and monitoring of the treated effluent must comply with Attachment E of the NPDES General Permit for General Waste Discharge Requirements and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity in the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit counties of Alpine El Dorado and Placer Order No .
RT and NPDES No .
CAG .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL For a project within the Lake Tahoe Hydrologic Unit the discharger must perform toxicity testing that complies with the following if operating a temporary ATS in batchtreatment mode .
Discharger must initiate acute toxicity testing on effluent samples from each batch before discharge .
Send bioassays to a laboratory certified by the Department of Public Health ELAP .
The laboratory must test for whole effluent toxicity under test E. .
Conduct acute toxicity tests as outlined for a hour acute test in Methods for Measuring the Acute Toxicity of Effluents and Receiving Water to Freshwater and Marine Organisms USEPAR for fathead minnow Pimephales promelas .
The acute toxicity for rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss may be used as a substitute for testing fathead minnows . .
Toxicity tests must comply with QA criteria and test acceptability criteria in the most recent versions of the EPA test method for whole effluent toxicity .
.D Training Provide training to each ATS operator .
The training must .
Be specific to the operation of the ATS and liquid coagulants for stormwater discharges in the State including .. Coagulation basics including chemistry and physical processes .. System design and operating principles .. Control systems .. Coagulant selection such as jar testing and dose determination .. Handling and safety measures for the toxicity of coagulants ..
Monitoring sampling and analysis ..
Reporting and recordkeeping ..
Emergency response .
Consist of a formal class with a certificate testing and certificate renewal requirements .
Provide a minimum of hours of classroom and hours of field training .D Equipment Calibration Calibrate the flow meter and devices for taking water quality measurements under the manufacturers instructions and in the presence of the Engineer .
.D Quality Control Water discharged from a temporary ATS must comply with the NELs for discharge effluents and the receiving waters .
Test the water discharged from an ATS under the test methods shown in the following table Numeric Effluent Limitations Quality characteristic Test method Detection limit min Requirement Turbidity min NTU EPA .
or field test with calibrated portable instrument for daily flowweighted average for any single sample pH Field test with calibrated portable instrument .
Lower NEL .
Upper NEL .
The residual chemical for the coagulant must be less than percent of the maximum allowable threshold concentration for the most sensitive species .
Take water quality measurements to verify the limit requirements for the receiving waters and discharge effluent for .
Discharges of water lasting more than hours within a hour period as follows ..
If the discharge could affect the receiving body of water in a stormwater drainage system take measurements at the background and receivingwater sampling locations not more than hour before discharging the treated water .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ..
Perform startupphase sampling to minutes after measurable runoff occurs during a storm .
Startupphase sampling includes stormwater runoff background and receiving water measurements taken during the first days of discharge .
Take samples at regular intervals during the storm .
Take at least samples for each discharge lasting hours or more .
The time between sampling must not exceed hours .
.. Take regularphase samples at least twice daily .
Regularphase sampling includes effluent background and receiving water measurements that occur after the rd day of activities .
Take samples at regular intervals .
..
If the receiving body of water noticeably changes in color or clarity take additional effluent background and downstream measurements .
..
If an initial measurement shows that the water quality limits have been exceeded take an additional measurement from minutes to hour after the initial measurement .
..
If the nd test confirms the limits were exceeded revert to the startupphase sampling requirements before resuming regularphase sampling .
.. For cofferdam maintenance dewatering you may discontinue regularphase monitoring after days if the effluent and receiving water measurements are consistently below the water quality limits. . Discharges of water lasting hours or less within a hour period as follows ..
If the discharge could affect the receiving body of water in a stormwater drainage system take measurements at the background and receiving watersampling locations not more than hour before discharging the treated water .
.. Take effluent background and receiving water measurements from to minutes after initiating the discharge .
Continue to take measurements every hour .
..
If an initial measurement shows that the water quality limits have been exceeded take an additional measurement not more than minutes after the initial measurement .
..
If the receiving body of water noticeably changes in color or clarity take additional effluent background and downstream measurements. . All other discharges of water as follows .. Measure the stormwater effluent turbidity and pH at the end of the outfall or inline sampling port .
.. Measure the receiving water turbidity pH and dissolved oxygen at a point within the mixing zone and a point within feet downstream of the discharge point .
.. Measure the natural background turbidity dissolved oxygen and pH at a location that is from to feet upstream of the discharge point .
If another job site activity is being performed measure at least feet upstream of the discharge point .
..
If the discharge is made into a surface body of water or into a stormwater drainage system that produces an observable effect on a surface body of water monitor the receiving water .
For receiving water deeper than feet take depthaveraged measurements by taking samples from points within the water column and averaging the following measurements .
inches below the surface .
Mid depth .
inches above the bottom For receiving water less than feet deep take the measurement inches below the surface. . MATERIALS .A General An ATS must be designed for the site conditions and anticipated flow rate and must include a treatment system a collection and conveyance system and a discharge method and location .
The ATS must be capable of capturing and treating within a hour period a volume equal to the runoff from a year hour storm event using a watershed coefficient of ..
Monitoring equipment must be interfaced with the control system of the ATS to provide shutoff or recirculation whenever effluent readings do not comply with the turbidity and pH limits .
The control system must default to recirculation or shutoff during a power failure or catastrophic event .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL The control system must control the amount of the coagulant flocculant or both to prevent overdosing .
.B Treatment System The treatment system must be capable of removing sediment and turbidityproducing suspended solids .
Primary and secondary treatment may be required or the design of the treatment system may require combined use of the various treatment components in series to achieve effective treatment .
The treatment system must have components to .
Remove sediment and turbidityproducing suspended solids .
Components may include desilting basins settling tanks sediment traps gravity bag filters sand media filters pressurized bag filters cartridge filters chemical coagulants and inline flocculants temporary holding tanks or any combination necessary to provide primary and secondary treatment . .
Adjust the pH or dissolved oxygen by ..
Addition of sulfuric phosphoric citric or nitric acid under the suppliers specifications for the treatment of water with high pH .
You may use hydrochloric acid if the water is dechlorinated before discharge .
.. Filtration through a limestone bed or the addition of sodium hydroxide for the treatment of water with a low pH .
.. Aeration for the treatment of water with low dissolved oxygen .
.C Collection and Conveyance System The collection and conveyance system must include pumps and piping to convey the water from the point of dewatering or stormwater capture to the treatment system and to the point of discharge .
Pumps and piping must comply with section .
.D Monitoring Equipment Monitoring equipment for the ATS must record data at least once every minutes and cumulative flow data daily .
The recording system must have the capacity to record a minimum of days of continuous data. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Discharge treated water .
To control dust in an active area .
To land where the grade allows sheet flow and the soil allows infiltration .
Such that it does not ..
Cause erosion and scour .
If scour occurs repair the damage and install an energy dissipater .
.. Impact the natural bedding and aquatic life .
Maintain the ATS to provide proper functioning and prevent leaks .
Repair or replace the any component of the dewatering equipment that is not functioning properly .
Remove sediment from the storage or treatment cells as necessary to ensure the cells maintain their required water storage capability .
Sediments removed from the uncontaminated areas during maintenance of the treatment system must be dried distributed uniformly and stabilized at a location within the project limits where authorized .
Relocate the ATS as needed .
.B Monitoring .B General While operating the ATS monitor .
Influent and effluent turbidity .
Influent and effluent pH .
Residual chemical .
Effluent flow rate and flow volume SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Use a flow meter to measure all discharges from treatment activities .
.B Corrective Measures If observations and measurements determine the water quality limits are exceeded immediately stop the discharge notify the Engineer and start corrective measures to change repair or replace the equipment and procedures used to treat the water .
After the Engineer inspects and authorizes your corrective measures resume treatment and discharge activities under the startupphase sampling requirements before resuming regularphase sampling. . PAYMENT Not Used TEMPORARY CONCRETE WASHOUTS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for installing temporary concrete washouts .
You may use any of the following systems for a temporary concrete washout .
Temporary concrete washout facility .
Portable temporary concrete washout .
Temporary concrete washout bin .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals At least business days before starting concrete activities submit an informational submittal that includes .
Location of each concrete washout .
Name and location of the offsite disposal site to receive the concrete waste .
Copy of the permit issued by the RWQCB for the offsite commercial disposal site .
Copy of the permit issued by the state or local agency with jurisdiction over a disposal site located outside of the State Retain and submit tracking records for the disposal of concrete waste as an informational submittal .
Submit a certificate of compliance for the fabric bag for gravelfilled bags and the plastic liner .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General The sign for a concrete washout must comply with section .B except the sign panel may be plywood .
The sign panel must be at least by feet .
The sign legend must read Concrete Washout in at least inchhigh black letters on a white background .
.B Temporary Concrete Washout Facilities Stakes for a temporary concrete washout facility must comply with section .C .
Straw bales for a temporary concrete washout facility must comply with section .H .
Gravelfilled bags for a temporary concrete washout facility must comply with section .G .
The plastic liner for a temporary concrete washout facility must be .
New singleply polyethylene sheeting without seams or overlapping joints .
At least mils thick SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
Free of holes punctures tears or other defects .C Portable Temporary Concrete Washouts A portable temporary concrete washout must be a commercially available watertight container with enough capacity to contain all liquid and concrete waste generated by washout activities without seepage or spills and be .
At least gallons in capacity . .
Labeled for exclusive use as a concrete waste and washout facility .
Concrete Washout must be stenciled in inchhigh black letters on a white background with the top of the letters placed inches from the top of the container .
.D Temporary Concrete Washout Bins A temporary concrete washout bin must be a commercially available watertight container with enough capacity to contain all liquid and concrete waste generated by washout activities without seepage or spills and be .
At least cubic yards in capacity .
Rolloff type with or without folding steel ramps .
Labeled for exclusive use as a concrete waste and washout facility .E.G Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Place a concrete washout at the job site .
Before starting concrete placement activities .
In the immediate area of concrete work where authorized .
No closer than feet from any storm drain inlet open drainage facility ESA or watercourse .
Away from traffic or public access areas Install a concrete washout sign adjacent to each concrete washout location .
Use a concrete washout to collect .
Washout from concrete delivery trucks .
Slurries containing concrete or asphalt from saw cutting coring grinding grooving and hydrodemolition .
Concrete waste from mortar mixing stations Do not fill a concrete washout higher than inches below the upper rim .
Dispose of concrete waste within business days after a concrete washout becomes full .
Dispose of concrete waste from a concrete washout at a plant licensed to receive solid concrete waste liquid concrete waste or both .
Relocate a portable temporary concrete washout or bin as needed for concrete work .
The Department does not pay for relocating a portable temporary concrete washout or bin .
Secure a portable temporary concrete washout or bin to prevent spilling concrete waste when relocating or transporting it within the job site .
If you spill concrete waste clean up the spilled material and place it back into the concrete washout unit. . PAYMENT Not Used TEMPORARY LINEAR SEDIMENT BARRIERS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for installing temporary linear sediment barriers .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for .
Fiber rolls .
Silt fence fabrics .
Sediment filter bags .
Foam barriers .
Fabric for gravelfilled bags If you substitute steel wire staples with an alternative attachment device submit a sample of the device at least business days before its installation .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Stakes ropes and staples must comply with section .R except section .
does not apply .
.B Fiber Rolls A fiber roll must comply with section .P except a fiber roll for a large sediment barrier must .
Have a diameter from to inches .
Be at least feet long .
Weigh at least .
lbft .C Posts Each post must comply with the specifications for a post for a highvisibility fence except .
Post length must be at least feet except for a temporary reinforced silt fence that must have a post length of at least .. feet for a Type installation .. feet for a Type installation .
Steel is not allowed for a post for a temporary large sediment barrier .D HighVisibility Fabric The highvisibility fabric must comply with the specifications for fabric for a highvisibility fence .
.E Wire Mesh Wire mesh for a temporary reinforced silt fence must .
Comply with section .E .
Be fabricated from at least gauge horizontal and vertical wires welded at each intersection .
Have a maximum opening of inches wide by inches high .
Be supplied in foot rolls .F Wire Wire for guy wires and tie wires for a temporary reinforced silt fence must be gauge iron or steel .
.G Anchors Anchors for a temporary reinforced silt fence must be fabricated from no .
steel reinforcing bar .
.H Straw Bales Straw for a straw bale must comply with section .H .
A straw bale must be SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
At least inches wide inches high inches long and weigh at least lb . .
Composed entirely of vegetative matter except for the binding material . .
Bound by wire nylon or polypropylene string .
Do not use jute or cotton binding .
Baling wire must be at least gauge .
Nylon or polypropylene string must be approximately .
inch in diameter with lb of breaking strength .
.I Foam Barriers A foam barrier must have .
Urethane foamfilled core .
Geosynthetic fabric cover and flap .
Triangular circular or square cross section .
Vertical height of at least inches after installation .
Horizontal flap at least inches in width .
Length of at least feet per unit .
Ability to interlock separate units into a long barrier such that water will not flow between units The geosynthetic fabric cover and flap for a foam barrier must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grab breaking load in each direction inch grip min lb ASTM D Apparent elongation in each direction min ASTM D Water flow rate average roll value gpmsq ft ASTM D Permittivity min sec ASTM D . Apparent opening size max average roll value US standard sieve size ASTM D UV resistance min percent retained grab breaking load at hours ASTM D .J Gravelfilled Bags Gravelfilled bags for a temporary gravel bag berm must comply with section .G .
.K.M Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Before installing a temporary linear sediment barrier remove obstructions including rocks clods and debris greater than inch in diameter from the ground .
Maintain a temporary linear sediment barrier to provide sedimentholding capacity and to reduce concentrated flow velocities .
Repair or adjust the barrier if rills or other evidence of concentrated runoff occur beneath the barrier .
Repair or replace split torn or unraveled material .
Add or replace posts stakes or fasteners as needed to prevent sagging or slumping .
Reattach any barrier that becomes detached or dislodged from the pavement .
Repair a split or torn rigid plastic barrier with gauge galvanized steel wire or UVstabilized cable ties from to inches in length .
Remove sediment deposits trash and other debris as needed or ordered .
Remove sediment deposits if the sediment exceeds of the height above the ground behind a barrier .
If you place the removed sediment deposits within the job site stabilize the sediment deposits to prevent erosion .
Place gravelfilled bags behind Type K temporary railing if used within a shoulder area .
SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .B Temporary Fiber Rolls Install temporary fiber rolls as specified for installing fiber rolls in section .P .
.C Temporary Gravel Bag Berms Place gravelfilled bags endtoend to eliminate gaps in a temporary gravel bag berm .
Place the bags approximately parallel with the slope contour .
Angle the last feet upslope at the downhill end of the run .
Stack the bags such that the upper row overlaps the joints in the lower row .
Add layers of gravelfilled bags to increase the height of a temporary gravel bag berm if needed .
Stack the bags in the upper row to overlap the joints in the lower row .
Stabilize the rows by adding rows of bags in the lower layers .
.D Temporary Large Sediment Barriers Install a temporary large sediment barrier as follows .
Place a single row of fiber rolls endtoend approximately parallel with the slope contour .
For any foot section of fiber roll do not allow the fiber roll to vary by more than percent from level. . Place the fiber rolls in a furrow that is from to inches deep . .
Secure the fiber rolls with wood stakes feet apart. . Place a stake inches from each end of each fiber roll. . Drive the stakes into the soil such that the top of the stakes are less than inches above the top of the fiber rolls . .
Angle the last feet upslope at the downhill end of the run .
.E Temporary Reinforced Silt Fences Place a temporary reinforced silt fence parallel with the slope contour .
For any foot section of reinforced silt fence do not allow the elevation at the base of the fence to vary by more than of the fence height .
Install a temporary reinforced silt fence as follows .
Dig a inchdeep trench. . Place the wire mesh and the bottom of the silt fence fabric in the trench. . Place posts on the downhill side of the fabric and wire mesh . .
Attach the silt fence fabric to the wire mesh with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners along the length of the fence at not more than foot horizontal spacing and from top to bottom at not more than inch vertical spacing. . Backfill the trench with soil by hand or mechanical tamping to secure the silt fence fabric and the wire mesh in the trench . .
Attach guy wires and anchors at each post .
Install at least anchors and guy wires at angle points and end posts .
Connect sections of temporary reinforced silt fence as follows .
Join separate sections to form reaches not more than feet without openings . .
Secure the end posts of each section by wrapping the tops of the posts with at least wraps of gauge tie wire .
If temporary reinforced silt fence Type is shown attach highvisibility fabric to the steel posts with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners .
.F Temporary Silt Fences Construct a temporary silt fence with silt fence fabric posts and fasteners assembled at the job site or with prefabricated silt fence .
If prefabricated silt fence is used attach the fabric to the posts by inserting the posts into the sewn pockets .
If the fence is assembled at the job site .
Fasten the fabric to the posts with staples or nails if wood posts are used .
Fasten the fabric to the posts with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners if steel posts are used .
Space the fasteners no more than inches apart SECTION WATER POLLUTION CONTROL Place a temporary silt fence parallel with the slope contour .
For any foot section of temporary silt fence do not allow the base elevation of the fence to vary by more than of the height of the fence above the ground .
Install a temporary silt fence as follows .
Place the bottom of the fabric in a inchdeep trench . .
Secure it with the posts placed on the downhill side of the fabric. . Backfill the trench with soil and compact by hand or mechanical methods to secure the fabric in the trench .
Connect sections of a temporary silt fence as follows .
Join separate sections to form reaches not more than feet without openings . .
Secure the end posts of each section by wrapping the tops of the posts with at least wraps of gauge tie wire .
You may install the silt fence by mechanically pushing the silt fence fabric vertically into the soil .
Mechanically installed fabric must not slip out of the soil or allow sediment to pass under it .
.G Temporary Straw Bale Barriers Install a temporary straw bale barrier as follows .
Place a single row of straw bales endtoend and parallel with the slope contour .
For any foot section of straw bale barrier do not allow it to vary by more than percent from level. . Place straw bales in a trench or key them into the slope .
Place the bales such that the binding wire or string does not come in contact with the soil .
Use wood or metal posts as stakes . .
Secure each straw bale with stakes .
The st stake in each bale must be driven toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together. . Drive the stakes into the soil such that the top of the stake is less than inches above the top of the straw bale . .
Angle the last feet upslope at the downhill end of the run .
.H Temporary Foam Barriers Secure a foam barrier to .
Pavement with inch concrete nails inch washers and solventfree adhesive gravelfilled bags or a combination of both .
Soil with inch nails and inch washers Secure the barrier with nails at the connection points where barriers overlap .
Do not pierce the barriers core with nails .
.I Temporary Earthen Berms Construct a temporary earthen berm with native soil or selected material at least inches high by inches wide .
Compact it by hand or mechanical methods .
.J.L Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications relating to environmental compliance and environmental resource management. . ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA If an ESA is shown the boundaries shown are approximate .
The Department marks the exact boundaries on the ground .
Do not enter an ESA unless authorized .
If an ESA is breached immediately .
Stop all work within feet of the ESA boundary .
Secure the area .
Notify the Engineer If an ESA is damaged the Department determines the necessary remediation and the party to perform the work .
The Department deducts the cost for this work .
RESERVED CULTURAL RESOURCES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications relating to cultural resources. . DEFINITIONS archaeological monitoring area Area within or near construction limits where access is allowed but work is subject to archaeological monitoring .
archaeological resources Remains of past human activity including historic and prehistoric material such as tools and tool fragments hearth and food remains structural remains and human remains. . ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES .A General If archaeological resources are discovered within or near construction limits do not disturb the resources and immediately .
Stop all work within a foot radius of the discovery .
Secure the area .
Notify the Engineer The Department investigates the discovery .
Do not move archaeological resources or take them from the job site .
Do not resume work within the radius of discovery until authorized .
If ordered furnish resources to assist in the investigation or recovery of archaeological resources .
This work is change order work .
.B Archaeological Monitoring Area If an archaeological monitoring area is shown within near or straddling the job site the boundaries shown are approximate .
The Department assigns an archaeological monitor to observe work activities within the archaeological monitoring area .
Do not work within the area unless the archaeological monitor is present .
The Engineer and the archaeological monitor will conduct a field review with you at least business days before the start of job site activities .
The Department marks the exact boundaries of the archaeological monitoring area on the ground .
If a highvisibility fence is shown install it or other authorized enclosure to protect the area and define its SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP boundaries before starting other job site activities .
Submit a schedule showing the days and hours that work will be performed in an archaeological monitoring area at least business days before starting work in the monitoring area .
Submit an updated schedule at least business days before any changed work day . .
HISTORIC STRUCTURES Reserved ..
RESERVED COMMUNITY IMPACTS AND ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE Reserved NATIVE AMERICAN CONCERNS Reserved AESTHETICS Reserved BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications relating to biological resources. . DEFINITIONS listed species Species listed as threatened or endangered under the federal Endangered Species Act of USC et seq .
California Endangered Species Act Fish Game Code .
or both .
listed salmonid Salmon steelhead or trout that are listed as a threatened or endangered species under the federal Endangered Species Act or listed or proposed as a threatened or endangered species under the California Endangered Species Act .
nongame birds Birds identified in the Fish and Game Code as nongame birds .
permitted biological activities Monitoring surveying or other practices that require a take permit and projectspecific permission from the US Fish and Wildlife Service or NOAA Fisheries or a take permit or memorandum of understanding from the Department of Fish and Wildlife .
protective radius Minimum distance between construction activities and a regulated species .
regulated species Species protected by one or a combination of the following .
Federal Endangered Species Act of USC et seq. . California Endangered Species Act Fish Game Code . .
Fish Game Code .
National Environmental Policy Act USC et seq. . California Environmental Quality Act Pub Res Code et seq. . Other law or regulation governing activities that affect species or their habitats regulated fish Listed fish species that are protected by law or regulation .
routine biological activities Biological monitoring surveying or other activity that does not require a take permit from the US Fish and Wildlife Service or NOAA Fisheries or a take permit or memorandum of understanding from the Department of Fish and Wildlife .
serviceapproved biologist Biologist whose activities must be approved by a state or federal agency as provided in PLACs .
take Legal definition regarding harm to listed species as defined in USC and Fish Game Code .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP take permit Permit granted by the US Fish and Wildlife Service or the NOAA Fisheries that allows take of federallisted species under USC or by the Department of Fish and Wildlife that allows take of statelisted species under Fish Game Code .
temporary wetland protection mat Device placed temporarily on a wetland to minimize damage to the soils and habitat . .
SPECIES PROTECTION .A General Section .A applies if species protection areas and requirements are specified in the special provisions .
Protect regulated species and their habitat that occur within or near the job site .
Upon discovery of a regulated species immediately .
Stop all work within a foot radius of the discovery .
Notify the Engineer .B Bird Protection Protect migratory and nongame birds their occupied nests and their eggs .
The Department anticipates nesting or attempted nesting from February to September .
The federal Migratory Bird Treaty Act USC CFR and Fish Game Code and protect migratory and nongame birds their occupied nests and their eggs .
The federal Endangered Species Act of USC and and the California Endangered Species Act Fish Game Code .
prohibit the take of listed species and protect occupied and unoccupied nests of threatened and endangered bird species .
The Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act USC prohibits the destruction of bald and golden eagles and their occupied and unoccupied nests .
If you find an injured or dead bird or discover migratory or nongame bird nests that may be adversely affected by construction activities immediately .
Stop all work within a foot radius of the discovery .
Notify the Engineer The Department investigates the discovery .
Do not resume work within the radius of the discovery until authorized .
If ordered perform one or a combination of the following protection measures .
Install exclusion devices .
Use nestingprevention measures .
Remove and dispose of partially constructed and unoccupied nests of migratory or nongame birds on a regular basis to prevent their occupation These protection measures are change order work .
Prevent nest materials from falling into waterways .
.C Fish Protection Protect all life stages of anadromous fish in streams and conduct work activities to allow free passage of anadromous migratory fish .
Ensure work activities do not produce sound in streams that causes unauthorized take of listed species .
Pump screens must comply with the Juvenile Fish Screen Criteria for Pump Intakes developed by the NOAA Fisheries .
Electrofishing for salmonids must comply with Guidelines for Electrofishing Waters Containing Salmonids Listed Under the Endangered Species Act published by the NOAA Fisheries .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .D ContractorSupplied Biologist .D General Section .D applies if a bid item for a Contractorsupplied biologist is shown on the Bid Item List .
The Contractorsupplied biologist monitors work activities for the protection of regulated species .
The Contractorsupplied biologist must .
Monitor regulated species within the project area .
Ensure that construction activities do not result in the take of regulated species .
Ensure that construction activities comply with PLACs .
Immediately notify the Engineer of any take of regulated species .
Prepare submit and sign notifications and reports All reports must include .
Description of the implementation of PLAC requirements .
Names of the biologists conducting biological activity .
Dates and times of monitoring .
Locations and activities monitored .
Representative photographs .
Findings .
Recommended protective measures if regulated species are observed .
Name of the biologist who prepared the report .
Signature of the biologist certifying the accuracy of the report Submit the name resume and statement of qualifications for a Contractorsupplied biologist within days after Contract approval .
If the submittal is incomplete the Department provides comments .
Submit a revised statement of qualifications within days of receiving comments .
If required under PLACs the Department sends the biologists statement of qualifications to regulatory agencies for review .
Biologists who perform specialized activities must have field experience working with the regulated species or performing the specialized task .
All projectspecific authorizations must be current and valid from start of work until work completion .
Do not start work until the Contractorsupplied biologist is authorized .
.D Natural Resource Protection Plan Section .D applies if a bid item for a natural resource protection plan is shown on the Bid Item List .
The plan must describe your measures for protecting biological resources and complying with environmental laws regulations and PLACs .
The plan must be prepared and signed by a Contractorsupplied biologist knowledgeable of the regulated species and their habitats .
Submit your plan within days after Contract approval .
If the submittal is incomplete the Department provides comments .
Submit a revised plan within days of receiving comments .
The natural resource protection plan must include .
List of species and habitats addressed in the plan .
List of protocols for species protection surveys with full protocols in an appendix .
Protection measures for regulated species expected at the job site .
Protective radii for encounters with regulated species .
Implementation plan and monitoring schedule for protection measures .
Monitoring duties .
Justification for each instance where protection measures and an implementation plan are not necessary for a regulated species .
Schedule for inspecting protection measures .
Schedule for maintaining protection measures .
Schedule for submittal of monitoring reports .
Response plan for encounters with regulated species SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP Content and schedule for the biological resource information program .
Location and schedule of fence installation and removal including identification of the species or habitats to be protected within each ESA or species protection area .
Protection measures required within each species protection area .D Biological Resource Information Program Reserved .
WETLAND PROTECTION Prevent permanent damage and minimize temporary damage to wetlands when any motorized equipment or vehicles cross the wetlands .
You may use temporary wetland protection mats to cross wetlands if allowed by regulatory agencies .
..
RESERVED PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications relating to paleontological resources. . DEFINITIONS paleontological resources Fossils and the deposits they are found in .
Fossils are evidence of ancient life preserved in sediments and rock .
Examples of paleontological resources are the remains of animals animal tracks plants and other organisms .
Archaeological resources are not paleontological resources .
Fossils found within an archaeological resource are generally considered archaeological not paleontological resources .
paleontological resources mitigation Monitoring for fossils and salvage or inplace stabilization if fossils are found . .
DISCOVERY OF UNANTICIPATED PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES If unanticipated paleontological resources are discovered at the job site do not disturb the resources and immediately .
Stop all work within a foot radius of the discovery .
Secure the area .
Notify the Engineer The Department investigates the discovery and modifies the dimensions of the secured area if needed .
Do not move paleontological resources or take them from the job site .
Do not resume work within the radius of discovery until authorized. . PALEONTOLOGICAL RESOURCES MITIGATION Reserved RESERVED NOISE AND VIBRATION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for controlling noise and vibration . .
NOISE CONTROL Control and monitor noise resulting from work activities .
Do not exceed dBA Lmax at feet from the job site from p.m. to a.m .
RESERVED AIR QUALITY .
GENERAL Section includes specifications relating to air quality .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL Comply with airpollutioncontrol rules regulations ordinances and statutes that apply to work performed under the Contract including those provided in Govt Code Pub Cont Code .
Do not dispose of material by burning. . AIR MONITORING Reserved ..
RESERVED SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for managing solid waste .
Dispose of or recycle solid waste from the job site .
Do not allow litter trash or debris to accumulate anywhere on the site including storm drain grates trash racks and ditch lines .
Pick up and remove litter trash and debris from the job site at least once a week .
The WPC manager must monitor solid waste storage and disposal procedures .
If practicable recycle nonhazardous waste and excess material .
If recycling is not practicable dispose of the material .
Furnish enough closedlid dumpsters of sufficient size to contain the solid waste generated by work activities .
When waste reaches the fill line empty the dumpsters .
Dumpsters must be watertight .
Do not wash out dumpsters at the job site .
Furnish additional containers and more frequent pickup during the demolition phase of construction .
Solid waste includes .
Brick .
Mortar .
Timber .
Metal scraps .
Sawdust .
Pipe .
Electrical cuttings .
Nonhazardous equipment parts .
Styrofoam and other packaging materials .
Vegetative material and plant containers from highway planting .
Litter and smoking material including litter generated by the public .
Other trash and debris Furnish and use trash containers in the jobsite yard field trailers and locations where workers gather for lunch and breaks . .
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL AND RECYCLING REPORT Submit a solid waste disposal and recycling report between January and for each year work is performed under the Contract at any time during the previous calendar year .
Show the types and amounts of projectgenerated solid waste taken to or diverted from landfills or reused on the project from January to December of the previous calendar year .
Submit a final solid waste disposal and recycling report within business days after Contract acceptance .
Show the types and amounts of projectgenerated solid waste taken to or diverted from landfills or reused on the project from January to Contract acceptance .
For each failure to submit a completed report the Department deducts .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP ..
RESERVED HAZARDOUS WASTE AND CONTAMINATION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications relating to hazardous waste and contamination .
If hazardous waste is or will be generated on the job site the WPC manager must be knowledgeable of proper handling and emergency procedures for hazardous waste under CFR .diii and must have successfully completed training under CA Code of Regs ..
The WPC manager must .
Oversee and enforce hazardous waste management practices .
Inspect hazardous waste storage areas daily including temporary containment facilities and satellite collection locations .
Oversee hazardous waste transportation activities on the job site .
DISCOVERY OF UNANTICIPATED ASBESTOS AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES Upon discovery of unanticipated asbestos or a hazardous substance immediately stop working in the area of discovery and notify the Engineer if .
You reasonably believe the substance is asbestos as defined in Labor Code .
or a hazardous substance as defined in Health Safety Code and . . Its presence is not described in the Contract . .
The substance has not been made harmless . .
HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT Handle store and dispose of hazardous waste under CA Code of Regs Div .. Use the following storage procedures .
Store hazardous waste and potentially hazardous waste separately from nonhazardous waste at the job site. . Store hazardous waste using metal containers approved by the US Department of Transportation for the transportation and temporary storage of hazardous waste. . Store hazardous waste in sealed covered containers labeled with the contents and accumulation start date under CA Code of Regs Div .. Labels must comply with the provisions of CA Code of Regs Div .. . and ..
Immediately replace damaged or illegible labels . .
Handle the containers such that no hazardous waste is spilled. . Store hazardous waste away from storm drains watercourses moving vehicles and equipment. . Furnish containers with enough storage volume at convenient satellite locations for collection of hazardous waste .
When full or no longer needed immediately move the containers to secure temporary containment facilities. . Store hazardous waste and potentially hazardous waste in secure temporary containment enclosures within secondary containment facilities .
The secondary containment facilities must be impervious to the stored materials for a minimum contact time of hours .
Locate the temporary enclosures away from public access .
Acceptable secure enclosures include a locked chainlink fenced area or a lockable shipping container located on the job site until disposal as authorized. . Design and construct secondary containment facilities with the capacity to contain the greater of .
Precipitation from a hourlong year storm and percent of the aggregate volume of all containers .
Entire volume of the largest container within the facility .
Cover secondary containment facilities during nonworking days and if a storm event is predicted .
Secondary containment facilities must be adequately ventilated. . Keep secondary containment facilities free of accumulated rainwater or spills .
After a storm event or a spill or leak collect the accumulated liquid and place it into storage drums within hours .
Handle these liquids as hazardous waste unless testing determines them to be nonhazardous. . Do not store incompatible wastes such as chlorine and ammonia in the same secondary containment facility .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .
Provide enough separation between storage containers to allow for cleanup of spills or emergency response access .
Keep storage areas clean organized and equipped with supplies appropriate for cleaning up the hazardous wastes being stored . .
Inspect storage areas at least daily and before and after a storm event. . Repair or replace perimeter controls containment structures covers and liners as needed .
Do not .
Overfill storage containers .
Spill hazardous waste or potentially hazardous waste .
Mix hazardous wastes .
Allow hazardous waste or potentially hazardous waste to accumulate on the ground Dispose of hazardous waste within days of the start of generation .
Use a hazardous waste manifest and a transporter registered with the DTSC to transport the waste to an appropriatelypermitted hazardous waste facility .
The transporter must have completed the California Highway Patrols Biennial Inspection of Terminals Program. . DUST CONTROL Excavation transportation and handling of material containing hazardous waste or contamination must result in no visible dust migration .
When clearing grubbing and performing earthwork operations in areas containing hazardous waste or contamination provide a water truck or tank on the job site. . STOCKPILING .A General Do not stockpile material containing hazardous waste or contamination unless ordered .
Stockpiles containing hazardous waste or contamination must not be placed where affected by surface runon or runoff .
Cover stockpiles with a minimum milsthick plastic sheeting or foot of nonhazardous material .
Do not place stockpiles in ESAs .
Stockpiled material must not enter storm drains inlets or waters of the State .
.B Liner Reserved .
CONTRACTORGENERATED HAZARDOUS WASTE .A General You are the generator of hazardous waste produced from materials you bring to the job site .
Manage this waste as hazardous waste under section .
if it is produced from the following substances .
Petroleum materials .
Asphalt materials .
Concrete curing compound .
Pesticides .
Acids .
Paints .
Stains .
Solvents .
Wood preservatives .
Roofing tar .
Road flares .
Lime .
Glues and adhesives .
Materials classified as hazardous waste under CA Code of Regs Div .
If concentrations of hazardous waste constituents are unknown use a laboratory certified by the SWRCBs ELAP to analyze a minimum of discrete representative samples of the waste .
Determine whether it is a hazardous waste and the safe and lawful methods for storage and disposal .
Perform sampling and analysis under US EPA Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste PhysicalChemical Methods SW and CA Code of Regs Div ..
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP Use your own generators EPA Identification Number and sign hazardous waste manifests for the hazardous waste you generate .
Within hours of transporting Contractorgenerated hazardous waste submit a copy of the Uniform Hazardous Waste Manifest .
.B ContractorGenerated Contaminated Soil Identify contaminated soil resulting from spills or leaks by looking for discoloration or differences in soil properties .
Immediately notify the Engineer of spills or leaks .
Clean spills and leaks as ordered .
Sample soil with evidence of contamination and send the samples for analysis to a laboratory certified by the SWRCBs ELAP .
You are the generator of hazardous waste produced by spills and leaks that you cause .
If the soil is determined to be a hazardous waste handle and dispose of it under section ..
Prevent the flow of water including groundwater from mixing with contaminated soil by using one or a combination of the following measures .
Berms .
Cofferdams .
Grout curtains .
Freeze walls .
Concrete seal course If water mixes with contaminated soil and becomes contaminated sample the water and send the samples for analysis to a laboratory certified by the SWRCBs ELAP .
If analysis demonstrates that the water is a hazardous waste manage and dispose of it under section .. . DEPARTMENTGENERATED HAZARDOUS WASTE .A General If the Department is the generator of hazardous waste produced from work activities manage this hazardous waste under section .. .B Storage of DepartmentGenerated Hazardous Waste Labels on storage containers must comply with CA Code of Regs .
and .. Mark labels with .
Date the hazardous waste was generated .
Hazardous Waste .
Composition and physical state of the hazardous waste e.g .
asphalt grindings with thermoplastic or paint .
Toxic .
Name address and telephone number of the Engineer .
Contract number .
Name of the contractor or subcontractor Handle the storage containers such that no hazardous waste is spilled .
You are the generator of hazardous waste produced from your spills of Departmentgenerated hazardous waste .
.C Transport and Disposal of DepartmentGenerated Hazardous Waste Dispose of hazardous waste at a California disposal site operating under a DTSC permit .
The Engineer provides the Departments EPA Identification Number for hazardous waste disposal .
The Engineer signs the hazardous waste manifests .
Notify the Engineer business days before the manifests are to be signed .
The Department does not consider you the generator of hazardous waste and you are not obligated for further cleanup removal or remedial action for Departmentgenerated hazardous waste handled and disposed of under .
Section SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .
State and federal laws and regulations governing hazardous waste .
County and municipal ordinances and regulations governing hazardous waste Within business days of transporting Departmentgenerated hazardous waste submit documentation of proper disposal from the receiving landfill. . MATERIAL CONTAINING HAZARDOUS WASTE CONCENTRATIONS OF AERIALLY DEPOSITED LEAD .A General Section .
applies if management of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of ADL is specified in the special provisions .
Section .
includes specifications for hazardous waste management while excavating stockpiling transporting placing and disposing of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of ADL .
Excavate reuse and dispose of material containing ADL under the rules and regulations of the following agencies .
US Department of Transportation .
US EPA .
California Environmental Protection Agency .
CDPH .
DTSC .
CalOSHA .
California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery .
California Air Resources Board .B Definitions Type Y material California hazardous waste that may be reused under a variance from the DTSC if the contaminated soil is placed at least feet above the maximum historic elevation of the water table and covered with at least foot of nonhazardous soil .
This material contains ADL in average concentrations of .
mgL or less extractable lead and mgkg or less total lead .
The average concentrations are calculated using the percent upper confidence limit .
The extractable lead concentrations are determined by a modified waste extraction test using deionized water as the extractant .
Type Y material California hazardous waste that may be reused under a variance from the DTSC if the contaminated soil is placed at least feet above the maximum historic elevation of the water table and protected from infiltration by pavement that will be maintained by the Department .
This material contains ADL in average concentrations between .
and mgL extractable lead and between mgkg and mgkg total lead .
The average concentrations are calculated using the percent upper confidence limit .
The extractable lead concentrations are determined by a modified waste extraction test using deionized water as the extractant .
Type Z material Departmentgenerated California hazardous waste that must be disposed of at a California Class I disposal facility .
Type Z material is either .
Surplus material that contains ADL in average concentrations greater than or equal to mgkg total lead or .
mgL soluble lead .
The average concentrations are calculated using the percent upper confidence limit .
The soluble lead is tested using the California Waste Extraction Test. . Material that contains ADL in average concentrations greater than mgkg total lead or mgL extractable lead .
The average concentrations are calculated using the percent upper confidence limit .
The extractable lead concentrations are determined by a modified waste extraction test using deionized water as the extractant .
Type Z material Departmentgenerated federal hazardous waste that must be disposed of at a California Class I disposal site .
This material contains ADL in average concentrations greater than .
mgL soluble lead using a percent upper confidence limit as tested under the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .C Site Conditions Concentration data and sample location maps for ADL are included in the Information Handout .
.D Submittals .D General Reserved .D Excavation and Transportation Plan Within days of Contract approval submit copies of an excavation and transportation plan for material containing hazardous waste concentrations of ADL .
If the plan requires revisions the Department provides comments .
Submit a revised plan within days of receiving comments .
The Engineer may allow construction to proceed while minor revisions or amendments are being completed .
The excavation and transportation plan must comply with .
DTSC regulations .
Variance regarding the use of material containing ADL .
CalOSHA regulations .
Requirements for the design and development of a sampling plan statistical analysis and reporting of test results under US EPA SW Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste Volume II Field Manual PhysicalChemical Chapter section .
.D Burial Location Report Reserved .D Bill of Lading Submit copies of the bills of lading as an informational submittal upon placement of Type Y or Y material in its final location .
.E Dust Control Prevent visible dust migration during excavation transportation placement and handling of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of ADL under section .. .F Air Monitoring Reserved .G Material Management Reserved .H Surveying Type Y or Y Material Burial Locations Survey the bottom and top perimeters of each location where you bury Type Y or Type Y material .
The survey must be performed by or under the direction of one of the following .
Land surveyor licensed under the Bus Prof Code Ch starting with .
Civil engineer licensed before January under the Bus Prof Code Ch starting with Survey points to identify each burial location horizontally and vertically within the specified accuracies and to create closed polygons of the bottom and top perimeters of the burial location .
If needed to adequately define the polygon survey additional points .
Establish the position of the bottom and top perimeters before placing subsequent layers of material that obstruct the location .
Report each burial location in California state plane coordinates in US survey feet within the appropriate zone of the California Coordinate System of CCS and in latitude and longitude .
Reference horizontal positions to CCS epoch .
or later National Geodetic Survey NGS or California Spatial Reference Center CSRC published epoch to an accuracy of feet horizontally .
Identify the survey points to an accuracy of foot vertically .
Reference the top and bottom elevations of the burial SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP locations to North American Vertical Datum of NAVD .
Report the accuracy of spatial data in US survey feet under Federal Geographic Data Committee FGDCSTD ..
The Department does not pay for .
Stockpiling of material containing ADL unless the stockpiling is ordered .
Sampling and analysis unless it is ordered .I Material Transportation Before traveling on public roads remove loose and extraneous material from surfaces outside the cargo areas of the transport vehicles .
Place tarpaulins or other cover over the cargo as described in the authorized excavation and transportation plan .
You are responsible for costs due to spillage of material containing ADL during transport .
Transportation routes for Type Y or Type Y material must only include the highway .
.J Disposal Transport and dispose of material containing hazardous waste levels of lead under federal and state laws and regulations and county and municipal ordinances and regulations .
Laws and regulations that govern this work include .
Health Safety Code et seq .
CA Code of Regs et seq .
CA Code of Regs The Department does not pay for additional sampling and analysis required by the receiving landfill . .
MINIMAL DISTURBANCE OF MATERIAL CONTAINING HAZARDOUS WASTE CONCENTRATIONS OF AERIALLY DEPOSITED LEAD .A General Section .
applies if minimal disturbance of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of ADL is specified in the special provisions .
Section .
includes specifications for handling and managing material containing hazardous waste concentrations of ADL when there is a minimal disturbance .
Compliance with CA Code of Regs is not required where there is minimal disturbance of hazardous waste concentrations of ADL .
Hazardous waste concentrations of ADL are typically found within the top feet of material in unpaved areas of the highway .
Management of this material exposes workers to health hazards that must be addressed in your lead compliance plan .
.B Material Management Handling of material containing ADL must result in no visible dust migration .
Use dust control measures .
A means of controlling dust must be available at all times when handling material in work areas containing ADL at hazardous waste concentrations .
Separate material from vegetation .
The resulting soil must remain on the job site .
Surplus material from the areas containing hazardous waste concentrations of ADL must remain in the area of disturbance .
Do not dispose of surplus material outside the highway . .
NATURALLY OCCURRING ASBESTOS Reserved .
DEPARTMENTGENERATED CONTAMINATED SOIL Reserved SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .
REMOVAL OF YELLOW TRAFFIC STRIPE AND PAVEMENT MARKING WITH HAZARDOUS WASTE RESIDUE .A General Section .
applies if the removal of existing yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking that will produce hazardous waste residue is specified in the special provisions .
Section .
includes specifications for removing handling and disposing of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking .
The residue from the removal of this material is a Departmentgenerated hazardous waste .
Residue from the removal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contains lead chromate .
The average lead concentration is at least mgl soluble lead or mgkg total lead .
When applied to the roadway the yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contained as much as .
percent lead .
Residue produced from the removal of this yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contains heavy metals in concentrations that exceed thresholds established by the Health Safety Code and CA Code of Regs .
For bidding purposes assume the residue is not regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act USC et seq .
The work associated with the disposal of hazardous waste residue identified by test results to be regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act is change order work .
Removal of existing yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking exposes workers to health hazards that must be addressed in your lead compliance plan .
Yellow thermoplastic and yellow paint may produce toxic fumes when heated .
.B Submittals .B General Reserved .B Work Plan Submit a work plan for the removal containment storage and disposal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking .
The work plan must include .
Objective of the operation .
List of removal equipment .
Procedures for the removal and collection of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking residue including dust .
Type of hazardouswaste storage containers .
Description of storage location and how it will be secured .
Hazardous waste sampling protocol and QA requirements and procedures .
Qualifications of sampling personnel .
Name and address of the analytical test laboratory certified by the SWRCBs ELAP for all analyses to be performed .
Name of the hazardous waste transporter and the transporters .
DTSC registration certificate .
Proof of compliance with the California Highway Patrol Biennial Inspection of Terminals Program .
Name and address of the disposal site that will accept the hazardous waste residue If ordered submit a revised work plan within business days of notification .
.B Analytical Test Results Submit analytical test results of the residue and chain of custody documentation before .
Requesting the Engineers signature on the waste profile document for the disposal facility .
Requesting the generators EPA Identification Number for disposal from the Engineer .
Removing the residue from the job site SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .B Disposal Documentation Submit documentation of proper disposal from the receiving landfill within business days of transporting residue from the job site .
.C Removal When grinding or other authorized methods are used to remove yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking that produces a hazardous waste residue .
Immediately contain and collect the residue including dust .
Use a HEPA filterequipped vacuum attachment operated concurrently with the removal operations or other equivalent approved method for collection of the residue .D Sampling and Testing of Residue Hazardous waste residue from the removal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking must be tested as required by the disposal facility and including .
Total lead by US EPA Method B .
Total chromium by US EPA Method B . Soluble lead by the California Waste Extraction Test .
Soluble chromium by the California Waste Extraction Test .
Soluble lead by the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure .
Soluble chromium by the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure From the first gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than gal are produced a minimum of randomly selected samples must be taken and analyzed individually .
Samples must not be composited .
From each additional gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than gal are produced a minimum of additional random sample must be taken and analyzed .
Use chain of custody procedures consistent with chapter of US EPA Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste PhysicalChemical Methods SW while transporting samples from the job site to the analytical laboratory .
Before performing the analyses the laboratory must homogenize each sample .
The homogenization process must not include grinding of the samples .
The aliquot taken from the sample must be .
Obtained in an amount large enough for all analyses to be performed .
Homogenized a nd time .
Used for the total and soluble analyses after the nd homogenization .E Transport and Disposal of Residue Request the generators EPA Identification Number when the Engineer accepts waste characterization test results documenting that the residue is a hazardous waste .
The Engineer signs the manifests as the hazardous waste generator within business days of receiving and accepting the analytical test results and receiving your request for the generators EPA Identification Number .
If test results demonstrate that the residue is a nonhazardous waste and the Engineer accepts this determination dispose of the residue at an appropriately permitted CA Class II or CA Class III facility .
The Department does not adjust payment for the disposal of nonhazardous residue at CA Class II or Class III facility. . DISTURBANCE OF EXISTING PAINT SYSTEMS ON BRIDGES .A General Section .
applies if disturbance of the existing paint system on a bridge is specified in the special provisions .
Section .
includes specifications relating to the disturbance of an existing paint system on a bridge .
Any work that disturbs the existing paint system exposes workers to health hazards which must be addressed in your lead compliance plan and produces SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .
Debris containing heavy metals in amounts that exceed the thresholds established in CA Code of Regs and CA Code of Regs .
This debris is a Departmentgenerated hazardous waste . .
Toxic fumes when heated .
Grime and detritus already on the bridge before the start of work may also contain lead .
Consider the grime and detritus part of the existing paint system .
The Department is the hazardous waste generator if the Engineer accepts waste characterization test results demonstrating that the debris is a hazardous waste .
Contain all debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed .
If containment measures are inadequate to contain and collect debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed stop work until .
Revised debris containment and collection plan has been authorized .
Released material has been collected and contained In areas without exposed soil the concentrations of heavy metals in the work area must not increase when the existing paint system is disturbed .
Any visible increase in the concentrations of heavy metals must be removed .
Handle store transport and dispose of debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed under applicable federal state and local hazardous waste laws .
.B Submittals .B General Reserved .B Debris Containment and Collection Plan Submit a debris containment and collection plan .
The plan must .
Identify materials equipment and methods to be used when the existing paint system is disturbed .
Include shop drawings of .
Containment systems complying with section .C .
Components that provide ventilation air movement and visibility for worker safety .
Include the name and location of the analytical laboratory that will perform the analyses .
Identify the hazardous waste transporter that will haul the debris and provide documentation of .
Current DTSC registration .
Compliance with the California Highway Patrols Biennial Inspection of Terminals Program .
Include the name and location of the disposal facility that will accept the hazardous waste Allow days for review .
If required submit a revised debris containment and collection plan .
.B Air Monitoring Reports Reserved .B Soil Sampling Results for Debris Containment Verification Reserved .B Waste Characterization Test Results Submit waste characterization test results and chain of custody documentation for the debris before .
Requesting the Engineers signature on the waste profile document for the disposal facility .
Requesting the generators EPA Identification Number for disposal .
Removing the debris from the job site .B Disposal Documentation Submit documentation from the receiving landfill or recycling facility confirming proper disposal within business days of transporting debris from the project .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .C Safety and Health Protection Measures Comply with CA Code of Regs including .. Supply clean protective work clothing for Department personnel .
Whenever there is possible exposure to heavy metals or silica dust .
During application of paint undercoats Replace protective work clothing as needed .
Do not start any work activities with the potential for lead exposure until the Engineer inspects and authorizes protective work clothing and washing facilities .
Protective work clothing remains your property upon completion of the Contract .
.D Work Area Monitoring Reserved .E Debris Storage Debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed must not be temporarily stored on the ground .
Before the end of each work shift remove accumulated debris from the containment system .
Store the debris as hazardous waste .
.F Debris Waste Characterization Perform waste characterization testing on the debris as required by Department and the disposal facility .
From the first gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than gal are produced a minimum of randomly selected samples must be taken and analyzed individually .
Samples must not be composited .
From each additional gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than gal are produced a minimum of additional random sample must be taken and analyzed .
Use chain of custody procedures consistent with chapter of US EPA Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste PhysicalChemical Methods SW while transporting samples from the job site to the analytical laboratory .
The laboratory must be certified by the SWRCBs ELAP for all analyses to be performed .
Before performing the analyses the laboratory must homogenize each sample .
The homogenization process must not include grinding of the samples .
A sample aliquot must be .
Obtained in an amount large enough for all analyses to be performed .
Homogenized a nd time .
Used for the total and soluble analyses after the nd homogenization .G Debris Transport and Disposal .G General For bidding purposes assume the debris is a hazardous waste .
.G Hazardous Waste Debris Request the generators EPA Identification Number when the Engineer accepts waste characterization test results documenting that the debris is a hazardous waste .
Use a hazardous waste manifest and a transporter whose vehicles have current DTSC registration certificates when transporting hazardous waste .
The Engineer provides the generators EPA Identification Number and signs the manifests as the hazardous waste generator within business days of accepting the waste characterization test results and receiving your request for the generators EPA Identification Number .
.G Nonhazardous Waste Debris If waste characterization test results demonstrate that the debris is a nonhazardous waste and the Engineer accepts the results dispose of the debris at an appropriately permitted CA Class II or CA Class III facility or recycle it .
Make all arrangements with the operator of the disposal facility and comply with the facilitys requirements .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP You may dispose of nonhazardous debris at a facility equipped to recycle the debris if .
Copper slag abrasive blended by the supplier with a calcium silicate compound is used for blast cleaning .
You make all arrangements with the recycling facilitys operator and perform any facilityrequired testing of the debris The Department does not adjust payment for disposal of nonhazardous debris at a recycling facility . .
TREATED WOOD WASTE .A General Section .
applies if treated wood waste is shown on the Bid Item List .
Section .
includes specifications for handling storing transporting and disposing of treated wood waste .
Manage treated wood waste under CA Code of Regs Div .
Ch .
.B Submittals Within business days of disposing of treated wood waste submit as an informational submittal a copy of each completed shipping record and weight receipt .
.C Training Provide training to personnel who handle or may come in contact with treated wood waste .
Training must include .
Requirements of CA Code of Regs .
Procedures for identifying and segregating treated wood waste .
Safe handling practices .
Requirements of CA Code of Regs Div .
Ch .
Proper disposal methods Maintain training records for years .
.D Storage of Treated Wood Waste Until disposal store treated wood waste using the following methods .
Raise the waste on blocks above a foreseeable runon elevation and protect it from precipitation for no more than days. . Place the waste on a containment surface or pad protected from runon and precipitation for no more than days. . Place the waste in waterresistant containers designed for shipping or solid waste collection for no more than year. . Place the waste in a storage building as defined in CA Code of Regs Div .
Ch .aC .
Prevent unauthorized access to treated wood waste using a secure enclosure such as a locked chain linkfenced area or a lockable shipping container located within the job site .
Resize and segregate treated wood waste at a location where debris including sawdust and chips can be contained .
Collect and manage the debris as treated wood waste .
Identify treated wood waste and accumulation areas using waterresistant labels that comply with CA Code of Regs Div .
Ch .. Labels must include .
The words Caltrans District and the district number .
The words Construction Contract and the contract number .
District office address .
Engineers name address and telephone number .
Contractors contact name address and telephone number .
Date placed in storage SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP .E Transport and Disposal of Treated Wood Waste Dispose of treated wood waste within .
days of generation if stored on blocks .
days of generation if stored on a containment surface or pad .
year of generation if stored in a waterresistant container or within days after the container is full whichever is shorter .
year of generation if stored in a storage building as defined in CA Code of Regs Div .
Ch .aC Before transporting treated wood waste obtain agreement from the receiving facility that it will accept the waste .
Protect shipments of the waste from loss and exposure to precipitation .
For projects generating lb or more of treated wood waste request a generators EPA Identification Number from the Engineer at least business days before the st shipment .
Each shipment must be accompanied by a shipping record such as a bill of lading or invoice that includes .
The words Caltrans District and the district number .
The words Construction Contract and the contract number .
District office address .
Engineers name address and telephone number .
Contractors name contact person and telephone number .
Receiving facilitys name and address .
Description of the waste e.g .
treated wood waste with preservative type if known or unknownmixture .
Project location .
Estimated weight or volume of the shipment .
Date of transport .
Date of receipt by the treated wood waste facility .
Weight of shipment measured by the receiving facility .
Generators US EPA Identification Number for projects generating lb or more of treated wood waste The shipping record must be by inches and a part carbon or carbonless form to provide copies for the Engineer transporter and treated wood waste facility .
Dispose of treated wood waste at an approved California disposal site operating under a RWQCB permit that includes acceptance of treated wood waste . .
DISPOSAL OF ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT REQUIRING SPECIAL HANDLING Reserved ..
RESERVED OTHER AGENCY REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications relating to other agencies environmental regulations and PLACs. . STATE PARKS Section .
includes specifications for working in areas under the jurisdiction of State Parks .
Comply with the State Parks regulations and PLACs .
Protect natural and cultural features within the park. . STATE RECLAMATION BOARD Section .
includes specifications for working in areas under the jurisdiction of the State Reclamation Board .
Comply with the State Reclamation Boards regulations and PLACs .
SECTION ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP Submit proposed changes to the PLAC requirements for transmittal to the State Reclamation Board .
Do not implement these changes until the Engineer receives written approval from the State Reclamation Board .
RESERVED EXISTING FACILITIES .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for performing work on existing facilities .
Performing work on existing facilities includes abandoning adjusting modifying obliterating reconstructing relaying relocating remodeling removing repairing resetting or salvaging a facility .
Do not perform work on an existing facility until the facility is no longer needed .
Reconstructed facilities must comply with the design of and be equal to the best parts of the existing facilities .
Reconstruction work must comply with the specifications for new work of similar character. . MATERIALS Materials for adjusting facilities to grade must be similar in character to the existing materials. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Backfill trenches holes depressions and pits caused by performing work on an existing facility .
In an unsurfaced area backfill with embankment material under section .
In a surfaced area backfill with material equal to or better than the surrounding material .
Grade backfilled areas to drain and blend in with the surrounding area .
Clean earth and other foreign material including concrete from material to be salvaged or incorporated into the work .
Dispose of removed facilities not to be salvaged or incorporated into the work .
If you damage a facility or a portion of a facility to remain in place repair or replace it .
The repair or replacement must be equal or better in quality than the original portion .
Repair or replace materials to be salvaged or incorporated into the work that are lost or damaged during work activities .
The repair or replacement must be equal or better in quality than the original portion .
Instead of this repair or replacement the Department may deduct the repair or replacement cost .
Replace material from existing facilities described to be reused in the work if the Engineer determines the material is unsuitable .
Furnishing the replacement material is change order work .
If you damage a part of a loop conductor specified to remain in place including the part leading to the adjacent pull box replace the entire loop detector and any adjacent loops damaged during the replacement .
Break the floors of structures within the roadway that are not required to be removed such that water will not be entrapped .
Where abrasive blasting is performed within feet of a lane open to traffic remove residue with a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the blast cleaning equipment .
.B Removing Concrete Where concrete is described to be removed remove the concrete to a depth of at least feet below finished grade .
Concrete removal includes removal of any steel embedded in the concrete .
Before removing a portion of a monolithic concrete element make a inchdeep saw cut to a true line along the limits of removal on faces of the element that will be visible in the completed work .
Protect existing reinforcement to be incorporated into the new work from damage .
Where new concrete is to join existing concrete remove enough concrete to allow splicing of new reinforcement .
SECTION EXISTING FACILITIES Thoroughly remove all material adhering to the existing reinforcement before embedding it in new concrete .
Instead of disposing of removed concrete you may .
Incorporate it in adjacent embankments if it is ..
Broken into parts at most inches in greatest dimension ..
Buried at least feet below the finished grade and slope lines ..
Buried at least feet from trees or highway facilities .. Not buried where piling is to be constructed .
Place it at authorized locations such that it will not present an unsightly appearance from the highway .C Salvaging Facilities Tag the bundles packages and individually salvaged material .
Show the following information on the tags .
Name or description of the material .
Type or model number .
Dimensions .
Quantity if more than Haul salvaged material directly to the location specified in the special provisions and stockpile it .
If authorized you may temporarily stockpile salvaged material at the job site .
Replace any salvaged material that is lost before it is stockpiled at the location specified in the special provisions .
.D.K Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used TEMPORARY FACILITIES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing temporary facilities .
Constructing temporary facilities includes placing temporary devices. . MATERIALS You may use used materials for temporary facilities if the used materials comply with the specifications for new materials. . CONSTRUCTION Maintain temporary facilities until they are no longer needed .
Excavate and backfill as necessary to remove temporary facilities .
Backfill with materials of equal or better quality and to a comparable density of the surrounding materials and grade the surface to match the existing grade and cross slope .
Dispose of temporary facilities when they are no longer needed. . PAYMENT Not Used MISCELLANEOUS TEMPORARY FACILITIES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for constructing miscellaneous temporary facilities .
Miscellaneous temporary facilities include temporary facilities that apply to multiple sections or are not closely associated with other sections .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
TEMPORARY PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing temporary pedestrian facilities .
Temporary pedestrian facilities must comply with the California MUTCD Part Chapter D Pedestrian and Worker Safety .
Lighting must comply with the specifications for falsework lighting in section .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit shop drawings and supporting calculations for temporary pedestrian facilities with a protective overhead covering .
Shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
SECTION TEMPORARY FACILITIES .A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .B General The walkway must be surfaced with asphalt concrete commercialquality concrete or wood .
The surface must be skid resistant and free of irregularities .
Hand railings must be SS lumber and painted white .
The protective overhead covering of a temporary pedestrian facility must be plywood at least inch thick or wood planking with a nominal minimum thickness of inches .
.B Design Requirements Design a temporary pedestrian facility with a protective overhead covering to support all imposed loads .
The design load and maximum allowable stresses for a temporary pedestrian facility with protective overhead covering must comply with section .B .
The minimum design live load for a temporary pedestrian facility with a protective overhead covering must be psf for the entire structure .
.C Construction Construct handrails on each side of a temporary pedestrian facility as necessary to protect pedestrian traffic from hazards due to work activities or adjacent vehicular traffic .
The minimum width between the inside face of the handrails must be inches .
The clear height of the facility measured from the floor surface to the canopy overhead must be at least feet .
Provide adequate lighting at all times .
Extend overhead protection for pedestrians at least feet beyond the edge of the bridge deck .
Illuminate all pedestrian openings through falsework .
Maintain a temporary pedestrian facility in good condition and keep it clear of obstructions .
.D Payment Not Used .
HIGHVISIBILITY FENCES .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing highvisibility fences .
A highvisibility fence is shown on the Bid Item List as a temporary fence Type ESA .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for the highvisibility fabric .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Highvisibility fabric must be manufactured from polypropylene polyethylene or a combination of both .
Identify store and handle the fabric under ASTM D. The fabric must be orange contain UV inhibitors and have a width of at least inches and openings from by inch to by inches .
The minimum roll weight for a byfoot roll of fabric must be lb .
SECTION TEMPORARY FACILITIES The minimum tensile strength of the fabric must be lb when tested under ASTM D. Posts must be either wood or steel .
Each wood post must .
Be untreated fir redwood cedar or pine and cut from sound timber .
Be straight and free from loose or unsound knots or other defects that would make it unfit for use .
Have a cross section of at least by inches .
Have a length of at least feet .
Have a pointed bottom end Each steel post must have .
U T L or other crosssectional shape that resists failure from lateral loads . .
Weight of at least lbft . .
Length of at least feet . .
Pointed bottom end. . Safety cap attached to the exposed end .
The cap must be orange or red plastic and fit snugly to the post .
.C Construction Install posts at a maximum foot centertocenter spacing .
Embed each post in the ground at least inches .
Attach fabric to wood posts with nails or staples .
Attach fabric to steel posts with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners at a maximum spacing of inches .
Maintain posts in a vertical position .
Reattach any detached fabric .
Replace any damaged fabric .
.D Payment Not Used .
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION MATS .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section .A includes general specifications for constructing temporary construction mats .
A temporary construction mat is shown on the Bid Item List as a temporary wetland protection mat .
.Ab Definitions Reserved .Ac Submittals Submit a schedule for the placement and removal of the mats .
Include the location mat type and placement and removal dates for each location .
Describe the method of installing and removing the mats .
.Ad Quality Assurance Reserved .A Materials A temporary construction mat must be manufactured for use as a temporary roadway to protect the ground without ground preparation and to prevent permanent damage and minimize temporary damage to a wetland .
SECTION TEMPORARY FACILITIES .A Construction The mats must provide a continuous cover over the wetlands .
Seal openings around any columns or other obstacles .
Obtain authorization for the seals .
Mats must be free from soil seeds or other organic or hazardous material before entering the work area .
Conduct temporary installation activities on the mats or outside of wetlands .
Do not install mats whenever the National Weather Service predicts at least a percent probability of precipitation within hours .
Clean debris from the mats daily .
Inspect the mats and immediately replace or repair damaged or broken mats .
When no longer needed move mats to a washout location and clean them before removing them from the job site .
The washout location must be outside of wetlands and ESAs and inside the cleared work area where wash water and other material will not enter any wetlands streams or ESAs .
.A Payment Not Used .B HDPE Mats .B General Section .B includes specifications for constructing HDPE temporary construction mats .
.B Materials An HDPE mat must .
Be made of HDPE .
Be at least feet wide by feet long and inch thick .
Have a loadbearing capacity of at least tons .B Construction Not Used .B Payment Not Used .C.G Reserved .
JOB SITE WATER CONTROL .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for controlling water to provide a dry working area at the job site .
.A Materials Not Used .A Construction Not Used .A Payment Not Used .B WaterFilled Cofferdam Reserved .C.G Reserved RESERVED DIVISION III EARTHWORK AND LANDSCAPE GENERAL GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for grading. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used CLEARING AND GRUBBING .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for clearing and grubbing .
Clearing and grubbing consists of removing objectionable material from the following construction areas .
Highways .
Bridges and other structures .
Roads road approaches streets and ramps .
Material sites .
Ditches and channels .
Areas enclosed by interchange loops and ramps .
Other described areas The Department may salvage materials from improvements before the bid opening date. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Complete the work specified in section .C before clearing and grubbing .
Clear and grub before performing earthwork in an area .
Do not injure standing trees plants and improvements shown to be protected .
Clear and grub the entire length of the job site to the following widths .
feet outside of excavation and embankment slope lines where slopes are not rounded .
Outside limits of slopes where slopes are rounded .
feet outside of structures .
feet outside of slope lines for ditches and channels with a bottom width of less than feet .
feet outside of slope lines for ditches and channels with a bottom width of feet or more If the construction area includes an orchard vineyard or other cultivated area remove all orchard trees vines and other vegetation in the entire highway to rightofway lines .
.B Clearing Clear all construction areas above original ground of all vegetation such as trees logs upturned stumps roots of downed trees brush grass and weeds and other objectionable material including concrete masonry and debris .
SECTION GENERAL Cut tree branches that extend over the roadway and hang within feet of finished grade .
Cut other branches to give each tree a balanced appearance .
Cut off branches close to the trunk under section .C .
.C Grubbing Grub all construction areas to a depth necessary to remove all trees existing stumps roots buried logs and other objectionable material except embankment areas where the grading plane is feet or more above original ground .
In embankment areas where the grading plane is feet or more above original ground cut off trees stumps and roots not more than foot above original ground except remove trees stumps and roots completely where work includes any of the following .
Structure construction .
Pile construction .
Subdrainage trench excavation .
Removal of unsuitable material .
Cutting into slopes of original hillsides old or new fill .D Disposal of Materials Dispose of objectionable materials resulting from clearing and grubbing activities unless the Contract includes a bid item for duff as specified in section .C or you reduce combustible material to chips with a inch maximum thickness and spread them in areas enclosed by interchange loops and ramps or between slope lines and rightofway lines .
Bury the chips or distribute them uniformly by mixing with underlying soil to prevent combustion .
Do not leave objectionable material in or under embankments including dikes .
Accumulation of flammable material is not allowed. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED DUST PALLIATIVES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying dust palliatives .
A dust palliative must be any of the following .
Water .
Dust suppressant .
Dust control binder .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals If a dust suppressant or dust control binder is to be used submit a dust treatment plan at least days before starting job site activities .
The dust treatment plan must include .
Product name and type .
Manufacturers name .
Polymer emulsion type if a synthetic polymer emulsion is used including identification of ..
Individual components greater than percent by volume in blends of polymers with different compositions ..
Additives greater than percent by volume .
SDS .
Proposed methods for applying products .
Application rate per pass total application rate and residual application rate .
Required weather conditions for application including ambient and surface temperatures wind conditions and allowable period before expected precipitation .
Drying time or curing time required before traffic is allowed on the treated surface Submit the manufacturers instructions for the material to be used .
Submit a certificate of compliance for the dust suppressant dust control binders and fibers .
For a dust suppressant include with the certificate of compliance .
Test results verifying compliance with the quality characteristic requirements in section .D .
The results must be from a test conducted within months before the date of the certificate of compliance. . Test results from a test conducted within months before the date of the certificate of compliance verifying compliance with the following environmental requirements ..
Maximum constituent concentration levels .. Organic and inorganic requirements for VOCs SemiVOCs Synthetic precipitation leaching procedure ..
Aquatic toxicity .D Quality Assurance A dust suppressant or dust control binder must comply with US EPA requirements and RWQCB requirements for soil stabilizers .
A dust suppressant must be tested by either an ASTM or AMRLAASHTOaccredited laboratory for compliance with the specified quality characteristic requirements .
A dust suppressant must be tested by an EPAaccredited laboratory for environmental requirements .
Liquid chemical treatments must be tested before dilution .
Solid products must be mixed with water to a percent concentration before testing .
The constituent concentration for each dust suppressant must not exceed the maximum levels shown in the following table SECTION DUST PALLIATIVES Maximum Constituent Concentration Levels Constituent Test method Requirement maximum level ppm Arsenic EPA Method . . Barium .
Cadmium .
Chromium .
Copper .
Lead .
Mercury EPA Method . . Selenium EPA Method . . Zinc .
Phosphorus EPA Method . . Cyanide EPA Method . . A dust suppressant must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Organic and Inorganic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement VOCs EPA Method Set by the CalEPA Air Resources Board and local air district SemiVOCs EPA Method US EPA Target Compound List and Contractrequired quantitation limits Synthetic precipitation leaching procedure EPA Method Set by the RWQCB A dust suppressant must comply with the aquatic toxicity requirements shown in the following table Aquatic Toxicity Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Aquatic toxicitya LC min ppm ASTM E or EPA Method F and EPA Method Aquatic toxicitya rating ASTM E or EPA Method F and EPA Method slightly toxic or better Renewal toxicityb LC min ppm ASTM E Renewal toxicityb rating ASTM E slightly toxic or better aUsing Ceriodaphnia dubia water flea Oncorhynchus mykiss rainbow trout Pimephales promelas fathead minnow and Americamysis bahia mysid shrimp bUsing Ceriodaphnia dubia water flea .
MATERIALS .A General A dust suppressant or a control binder must be either miscible in water or a material that is directly applied to the surface without mixing with water .
.B Dust Suppressants .B General A dust suppressant must be one of the following .
Petroleumbased organic product .
Nonpetroleumbased organic product .
Hygroscopic product .
Synthetic polymer emulsion SECTION DUST PALLIATIVES .B PetroleumBased Organic Products A petroleumbased organic dust suppressant must be an asphalt emulsion petroleum resin base oil mineral oil or synthetic fluid .
An asphalt emulsion must be Grade SSh .
A petroleum resin must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Petroleum Resin Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Residue min ASTM D pH ASTM D .. sp gr at C min ASTM D . Kinematic visc at C min Saybolt Furol secondsa ASTM D Flash point min C ASTM D Particle charge test ASTM D Positive aUse ASTM D to convert the mms value to Saybolt Furol seconds A base or mineral oil must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Base and Mineral Oils Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Base and mineral oil content min sp gr at C min ASTM D .. Brookfield absolute visc at C max cP ASTM D Flash point min C ASTM D A synthetic fluid must comply with CFR and the requirements shown in the following table Synthetic Fluids Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Synthetic fluid content min sp gr at C min ASTM D .. Brookfield absolute visc at C max cP ASTM D Flash point min C ASTM D .B NonpetroleumBased Organic Products A nonpetroleumbased organic dust suppressant must be lignosulfonate plant oil or tall oil pitch rosin .
A lignosulfonate must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Lignosulfonate Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Lignin sulfonate content ready to use min ASTM D Residue total solids content min ASTM D or D Lignin sulfonate content of residue min Reducing sugars content of residue min ASTM D or D pH ASTM D .. sp gr min ASTM D . Brookfield absolute visc at C max cP ASTM D A plant oil must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION DUST PALLIATIVES Plant Oil Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Residue active solids content min ASTM D sp gr min ASTM D . Brookfield absolute visc C cP ASTM D Flash point min C ASTM D A tall oil pitch rosin must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Tall Oil Pitch Rosin Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Rosin acid content min ASTM D Residue active solids content min ASTM D pH ASTM D .. sp gr min ASTM D . Brookfield absolute visc at C cP ASTM D .B Hygroscopic Products A hygroscopic dust suppressant must be calcium chloride calcium chloride flake or magnesium chloride .
Calcium chloride must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Calcium Chloridea Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Calcium chloride content ASTM E Total magnesium chloride max ASTM E . Total alkali chlorides as sodium chloride max ASTM E . Calcium hydroxide content max ASTM E . pH with percent solution ASTM D .. sp gr ASTM D .. aASTM D or AASHTO M Calcium chloride flake must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Calcium Chloride Flakea Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Calcium chloride content min ASTM E Total magnesium as MgCl max ASTM E . Total alkali chlorides as sodium chloride max ASTM E . Calcium hydroxide content max ASTM E . pH with percent solution ASTM D .. Gradation percent passing ASTM C inch sieve No .
sieve No .
sieve aASTM D or AASHTO M Magnesium chloride must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION DUST PALLIATIVES Magnesium Chloride Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Magnesium chloride content ASTM D or ASTM Da Sulfate content as magnesium sulfate max ASTM Da .
Potassium content as potassium chloride max ASTM E . Sodium chloride content max ASTM E . pH with solution ASTM D .. sp gr ASTM D . . aYou may use another appropriate atomic absorption spectrophotometry method such as that in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water by APHAAWWAWPCF .
.B Synthetic Polymer Emulsions A synthetic polymer emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Synthetic Polymer Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Residue active solids content min ASTM D pH ASTM D .. sp gr at C ASTM D .. Brookfield absolute visc max cP ASTM D Polymer film tensile strength dry psi ASTM D Retained coagulum on no .
sieve max ASTM D . Ash content max ASTM D .C Dust Control Binders A dust control binder must comply with the specifications for a tackifier in section .E except section .
does not apply .
Fibers must comply with section .D except section .
does not apply. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Monitor dust conditions and apply a dust palliative for dust control as described and as ordered .
Reapply the dust palliative at any time to control dust .
Apply a dust suppressant to .
Temporary haul roads .
Construction staging material storage and layout areas .
Compacted soil or AB roads or driveways .
Paved surfaces Apply a dust control binder to .
Roughgraded soils .
Completed slopes .
Soil stockpiles unless another practice is already used Do not use a dust suppressant or dust control binder within feet of a wetland or body of water .
.B Equipment Apply dust suppressants that are miscible in water with either a pressuretype water distributor truck equipped with a spray system or a pressuretype asphalt distributor truck as specified in section .B .
Apply dust suppressant flakes to the surface using a spreader or spinner disk .
SECTION DUST PALLIATIVES Apply dust control binders with either a pressuretype water distributor truck equipped with a spray system or hydraulic spray equipment as specified for applying hydromulch in section .D .
.C Mixing and Application Rates Use the mix proportions and application rate for the corresponding dust suppressant as shown in the following table Dust Suppressant Application Dust suppressant Mix proportions Application rate Asphaltic emulsion Grade SSH parts water to part emulsion .. galsq yd Petroleum resin emulsion parts water to part emulsion .. galsq yd Base and mineral oil Apply undiluted .. galsq yd Lignosulfonate part water to part concentrate .
galsq yd Plant oil Apply undiluted .. galsq yd Tall oil pitch rosin parts water to part emulsion for clayey soil and parts water to part emulsion for sandy soil .. galsq yd Calcium chloride solution hygroscopic Apply undiluted .. galsq yd Calcium chloride flakes hygroscopic .. lbsq yd Magnesium chloride hygroscopic Apply undiluted .. galsq yd Synthetic polymer emulsion parts water to part concentrate .
galsq yd Apply hygroscopic dust suppressants under the manufacturers instructions .
Apply calcium chloride flakes to a moist surface .
Allow surfaces treated with a dust suppressant to cure before opening them to traffic .
Adequate cure occurs when moisture is evaporated sheen is gone and tracking is nonextant .
Use the mix proportions and application rate for the corresponding dust control binder as shown in the following table Dust Control Binder Application Dust control binder Mix proportions Application rate Guar to lb per gal of water lbacre Psyllium Enough water to allow for uniform slurry flow lbacre Starch Manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water lbacre Liquid acrylic copolymers and polymersa parts water to part polymer galacre Liquid methacrylate and acrylate polymers Manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water galacre Copolymers of sodium acrylates and acrylamides Manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water lbacre Polyacrylamide and copolymer of acrylamide lb per gal of water lbacre Hydrocolloid polymers Manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water lbacre aMix and handle the polymeric compound in a manner that will not cause foaming .
You may add an antifoaming agent .
Do not allow stormwater runoff from polyacrylamide treated soils unless water passes through .
Sediment basin if the total drainage area is greater than or equal to acres. . Sediment trap or a series of check dams if the total drainage area is less than acres .
Maximize the number of check dams used and space them evenly in the drainage channel such that sediment settlement is maximized .
SECTION DUST PALLIATIVES You may add fibers to dust control binders at a rate of lbacre .
You may reapply dust palliatives at a reduced application rate if authorized. . PAYMENT Not Used EARTHWORK GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for performing earthwork activities .
Performing earthwork activities includes removal of unsuitable material or a buried manmade object if the removal is described .
Complete work specified in section .C before starting earthwork activities .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Unless the material resulting from the excavation is hazardous construct embankments and dikes or backfill structures with it .
If the quantity of excavated material is not sufficient to construct embankments obtain the material under section .
.B Unsuitable Material Excavate and dispose of unsuitable material encountered below the natural ground surface in embankment areas or below the grading plane in excavation areas as ordered .
Notify the Engineer before removing the unsuitable material if .
Removal is not otherwise described .
You request payment for removal as change order work Backfill the space resulting from excavating unsuitable material with material suitable for the planned use .
Place and compact suitable material under section .
.C Grade Tolerance Immediately before placing subsequent layers of material prepare the grading plane such that the grading plane .
Does not vary more than .
foot above or below the grade established by the Engineer where HMA is to be placed . .
Does not extend above the grade established by the Engineer where concrete base or pavement is to be placed . .
Beneath structural approach slabs or the thickened portion of sleeper slabs do no extend above the grade established by the Engineer. . At any point is within .
foot above the grade established by the Engineer if the material to be placed on the grading plane is paid by the cubic yard. . At any point is within .
foot above the grade established by the Engineer if subbase or base material to be placed on the grading plane is paid by the ton .
.D Buried ManMade Objects Remove and dispose of a buried manmade object encountered in an excavation as part of the excavation work .
SECTION EARTHWORK Notify the Engineer before removing the buried manmade object if .
Removal of the object is not otherwise described .
Object could not have been determined by visual inspection .
You request payment for removal of the object as change order work .
PAYMENT Not Used ROADWAY EXCAVATION .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for performing roadway excavation .
Roadway excavation consists of all excavation involved in the grading and construction of the roadway except structure excavation and any excavation paid for as a separate bid item .
Roadway excavation includes .
Excavating and stockpiling the selected material .
Removing the stockpiled material and placing it in its final position .
Removing surcharge material .
Performing the removal of a slide or slipout which is paid for as the type of roadway excavation involved .B Definitions selected material Specific material excavated from a described location on the job site .
Selected material includes top soil .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Excavate to the described or authorized grade .
If you overexcavate backfill with an authorized material and compact it .
Remove pavement within the limits of roadway excavation .
Pavement removal must comply with section and .
Compaction must comply with section .
Construct embankments under section .
.B Surplus Material If a quantity of surplus material is shown the quantity is approximate .
Ensure enough material is available to complete the embankments before placing the material at other locations on the job site or disposing of it .
Obtain authorization before disposing of surplus material or using it for any of the following .
Widening embankments uniformly .
Flattening slopes .
Placing along the roadway or at other locations SECTION EARTHWORK If you can not use surplus material within the highway dispose of it .
If you dispose of any surplus material prematurely and later find a material shortage replace the surplus material with an authorized material .
If an ordered change increases the quantity of excavation or decreases the quantity of embankment such that surplus material must be disposed of disposing of this material is change order work .
.C Deficiency Material If the quantity of acceptable material from excavation is not enough to construct the embankments the quantity of material needed to complete the embankments must consist of local or imported borrow .
Obtain local or imported borrow under section .
If a bid item for imported borrow is not shown on the Bid Item List obtaining imported borrow is change order work .
.D Selected Material If selected material is not used for topsoil or any other specified layer place the selected material in the roadway prism as embankment or structure backfill .
If selected material is used as a specified layer spread and compact it under section .
Topsoil must comply with section .
If practicable and unless processing of material is required haul selected material directly from the excavation to its final position in the roadway prism and compact it in place .
Selected material must remain in place until it can be placed in its final position unless stockpiling of selected material is ordered .
If stockpiling of selected material is ordered excavate and stockpile the selected material until the stockpiled material is to be placed in its final position in the roadway prism .
This work is change order work .
Topsoil placed along the tops of slopes as erosion control is not stockpiled material .
.E Blasting The Department does not allow excessive blasting .
Remove material outside the planned cross section that is shattered or loosened due to blasting .
Suspend blasting activities if any of the following conditions occurs .
Any sign of overshooting .
Endangerment to the public .
Destruction of property or natural features .F Slides and Slipouts Excavate and remove material .
Outside the planned roadway or ditch slope that is unstable and constitutes a potential slide .
From a slide that has come into the roadway or ditch .
Slipped out of new or existing embankments Excavate to the designated lines or slopes either by benching or as ordered .
Use removed material to construct embankments unless otherwise ordered .
Before removal activities if removal of a slide or a slipout is not described you may request the removal to be change order work .
SECTION EARTHWORK If you complete a slope and are ordered to remove unstable or stable material and reslope the area the removal and resloping is change order work .
Repair any damage to the completed work resulting from a slide or slipout as ordered .
Repairing damage to the completed work due to a slide or slipout is paid for as the type of work involved unless otherwise ordered as change order work .
If a slide or slipout is caused by your activities or negligence remove the slide or slipout material and restore the slope .
.G Slopes Construct slopes to the lines and grades established by the Engineer .
Slope tolerances are measured perpendicular to the planned slope .
Any point on the completed excavation slope must be within .
foot of the planned slope unless the excavation is in rock in which case any point on the completed slope must be within feet of the planned slope .
Slopes or portions of slopes must not encroach on the roadbed .
Round the tops of excavation slopes and ends of excavations .
Any point on the completed embankment slope must be within .
foot of the planned slope for slopes within feet of the shoulder grade .
Slopes below feet must be within foot of the planned slope .
If an embankment is constructed of large rock and the size of rocks make it impracticable to construct slopes within foot the Engineer may authorize you to construct slopes more than feet below shoulder grade to within feet of the planned slope .
For median and side slopes with a horizontalvertical or flatter slope .
Completed slopes must be within .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer .
Flowlines must be graded to drain and must be within .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer If the slope is to be cultivated or straw is to be incorporated into the surface remove loose rocks larger than inches in maximum dimension roots and other debris on the surface of the slope before cultivation or incorporation of straw .
Maintain completed slopes .
Repair any slope damage caused by erosion .
.H Ditch Excavation Excavate ditches including channels for changing the course of streams .
Avoid excavating below the grade for the bottom of the ditch or water channel .
If you excavate below grade backfill with suitable material and compact it. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for roadway excavation is the volume of roadway excavation material including volume of material involved in .
Embankment construction unless a separate bid item for constructing embankments is shown on the Bid Item List .
Ditch or channel excavation if the bottom width of the ditch or channel is feet or more .
Local borrow excavation The volume of material for roadway excavation is determined from the average end areas and the distances between them .
If changed conditions or nature of a particular operation make determining the quantities of roadway excavation based on average end areas impractical the payment quantity is the volume determined using a method best suited to obtain an accurate quantity .
SECTION EARTHWORK If the quantities of roadway excavation are determined from average end areas and centerline distances a correction for curvature is not applied to quantities within the roadway prism .
In determining the quantity of material outside the original roadway prism where the roadway centerline is used as a base a correction is made for curvature if the centerline radius is feet or less .
The volume of material removed from a stockpile is determined from measurements of the stockpile before removal .
If the bottom of a ditch or channel is less than feet wide the payment quantity for ditch excavation is the volume determined from average areas and the distances between them .
STRUCTURE EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for performing structure excavation and backfill .
Structure excavation includes .
Excavating foundations for structures including trenches for culverts pipes rods deadmen cutoff walls and other facilities .
Placing structure backfill where compaction of the structure backfill is not required. . Control and removal of water .
Installation and removal of facilities required to complete the work unless specified or allowed to remain in place Structure excavation Type A includes excavation for footings where seal courses are shown .
Structure excavation bridge includes structure excavation not shown on the Bid Item List or plans as any other type of structure excavation .
Structure backfill bridge includes structure backfill not shown on the Bid Item List or plans as any other type of structure backfill .
Structure excavation bridge or structure backfill bridge includes structure excavation or structure backfill for bridges not described by type .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Cofferdams Submit shop drawings for cofferdam construction .
Include construction methods and calculations with the shop drawings .
Shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
For cofferdams on or affecting railroad property allow days for review .
.C Soldier Pile Walls Submit shop drawings for soldier pile wall construction .
Shop drawings must include .
Construction sequence .
Traffic control .
Method of soldier pile installation .
Method of placing lagging .
Excavation lift limits .
Drilling and excavation equipment .
Calculations showing soil stability at all stages of construction SECTION EARTHWORK Shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Allow days for review .
.C Ground Anchor and Soil Nail Walls Submit shop drawings for earthwork for each ground anchor wall and soil nail wall to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of the submittal .
Include in the notification the date and a description of the contents of the submittal .
The shop drawings must include .
Wall construction schedule with construction sequence .
Measures to ensure wall and slope stability during construction .
Provisions for installing verification and proof test nails .
Methods of excavation for the staged lifts and types of excavation equipment .
Excavation lift height and maximum duration of exposure for each wall zone including supporting calculations and provisions to stabilize the exposed excavated face .
Details for measuring the movement of the excavated face and the wall during stability testing and construction .
Space requirements for installation equipment .
Dewatering plan to divert control and dispose of surface and groundwater during construction .
Provisions for discontinuous rows of soil nails Shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Submit copies of shop drawings for initial review .
Allow days for review .
Submit from to copies of final shop drawings as requested by the Engineer for final authorization .
.C Test Results Submit test results of any stability testing performed for ground anchor walls and soil nail walls as an action submittal .
.C Controlled LowStrength Material If you propose using controlled lowstrength material submit a mix design .
Include test data before excavating the trench where controlled lowstrength material is to be used .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Stability Test for Ground Anchor and Soil Nail Walls For soil nail walls wall zones are specified in the special provisions .
For ground anchor walls a wall zone is the entire wall .
If you use an excavation lift height greater than feet or an exposure duration longer than work shift perform stability testing .
Perform the testing before roadway excavation .
Perform at least stability test within the limits of each wall zone .
Excavate a neat face at most feet in front of the final wall face alignment .
The excavated face must .
Have the height shown in the authorized shop drawings. . Be feet long and parallel to the wall alignment with a constant height .
You may excavate ramps outside the foot section for construction access. . Be left open for the proposed exposure time shown in the authorized shop drawings . .
Maintain its integrity without raveling sloughing or measurable displacement throughout the proposed exposure time .
SECTION EARTHWORK After authorization of the test results you may use the proposed excavation height within the tested wall zone for the observed exposure time .
If the Engineer determines the exposed excavated face is not maintaining its integrity you must immediately stabilize the excavated face and perform additional stability testing .
Stability testing does not apply to groundanchored soldier pile walls. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Cofferdam Interior dimensions of cofferdams must provide enough space inside the wales for form construction pile driving and pumping of water from outside the foundation forms .
No shoring is allowed in cofferdams that would induce stress shock or vibration in the permanent structure .
.C Structure Backfill Structure backfill must be free of organic or other unsatisfactory material .
The impervious backfill material must be an authorized earthy material .
The sand equivalent requirement does not apply .
Structure backfill compacted to a relative compaction of at least percent and material placed behind retaining walls must have a sand equivalent value of at least and comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
Except for material placed behind retaining walls structure backfill compacted to a relative compaction of at least percent must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing Structure backfill for crib walls must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables Wall height feet Type of backfill material Thickness of each layer of material before compaction feet C D or E D or E E SECTION EARTHWORK Backfill Gradation material type Sieve size Percentage passing Sand equivalent min Relative compaction min C D No .
E No .
No .
No .
Material from structure excavation not suitable for use as structure backfill may be used to replace imported borrow or other excavated material .
.D Pervious Backfill Material Pervious backfill material must consist of one or any combination of the following materials .
Gravel .
Crushed gravel .
Crushed rock .
Natural sand .
Manufactured sand Pervious backfill material must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
No .
The gradation for sacked pervious backfill material behind wall drain outlets must comply with the gradation specified for by inch primary aggregate in section .Cb .
A weep hole and geocomposite drain alternative must comply with section .
.E Slurry Cement Backfill Slurry cement backfill must be a fluid workable mixture of aggregate cement and water .
The aggregate must be one of the following .
Commercialquality concrete sand .
Excavated or imported material in any combination free of organic material and other deleterious substances and complying with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
The cement must comply with section .B except testing is not required .
The water must be free from oils salts and other impurities that adversely affect the backfill .
SECTION EARTHWORK Proportion slurry cement backfill by weight or volume .
The backfill must contain at least pounds of cement per cubic yard and enough water to produce a fluid workable mix that flows and can be pumped without segregation during placement .
Mix materials thoroughly by machine .
Use a pugmill rotary drum or other authorized mixer .
Mix until cement and water are thoroughly dispersed .
You may use slurry cement backfill as structure backfill for pipe culverts .
.F Culvert Beddings .F General Culvert beddings must be shaped bedding sand bedding or soil cement bedding .
If more than type of bedding is allowed use the same bedding for the entire length of the culvert .
.F Sand Beddings Sand bedding must consist of sand .
Free of clay or organic material .
Suitable for the purpose intended .
Complying with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
.F Soil Cement Beddings Material and mixing requirements for soil cement bedding must comply with the specifications for slurry cement backfill in section .E except .
It must contain at least pounds of cement per cubic yard .
Aggregate must not be commercialquality concrete sand .G Controlled LowStrength Material If authorized controlled lowstrength material may be used as structure backfill for pipe culverts unless the culvert has a diameter or span of more than feet .
Controlled lowstrength material must be a fluid workable mixture of aggregate cement and water .
Cement must be one of the following .
Cement complying with ASTM C . Blended hydraulic cement complying with either of the following .. ASTM C ..
Physical requirements in ASTM C When tested under ASTM D the controlled lowstrength material must have a day compressive strength .
From to psi for pipe culverts with feet or less in height of cover .
Of at least psi for pipe culverts with over feet in height of cover Water must be free of oil salts and other impurities that adversely affect the backfill .
Aggregate must be one of the following .
Commercialquality concrete sand .
Excavated or imported material in any combination free of organic material and other deleterious substances and complying with the gradation requirements shown in the following table SECTION EARTHWORK Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
Mix materials thoroughly by machine .
A pugmill rotary drum or other authorized mixer must be used .
Mix until cement and water are thoroughly dispersed .
Wherever controlled lowstrength material is placed within the travelled way or covered by paving or embankment materials the controlled lowstrength material must achieve a maximum indentation diameter of inches when tested under ASTM D before covering and opening to traffic .
.H Concrete Backfill Concrete backfill encasing steel soldier piles below the lagging must comply with section and contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
.I Lean Concrete Backfill Lean concrete backfill must comply with the specifications for slurry cement backfill in section .E except the aggregate must be commercialquality concrete sand .
.J Filter Fabric Filter fabric must be Class A. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Structure Excavation .B General Remove any material that comes into an excavation from outside the described limits .
Obtain the Engineers acceptance of the completed structure excavation before placing any concrete or masonry .
When embankments must be constructed before culverts are placed construct embankments to the specified height and for a distance on each side of the culvert location times the culvert diameter or height before excavating for and installing culverts .
Where embankments are constructed on a steep slope or at a difficult location the Engineer may modify embankment heights before culverts are installed .
Change order work includes .
If structure excavation is more than .
foot from the depth shown and you request an adjustment for the increased depth .
The Engineer orders an adjustment for a decreased depth .B Soldier Pile Walls Excavate for and construct soldier pile walls in lifts from the top down .
Excavate in a way that minimizes voids requiring backfill behind the lagging .
Do not excavate more than feet below any level of ground anchors that have not been stressed and grouted .
The Engineer determines whether boulders or portions of boulders that interfere with lagging must be removed .
Perform any additional earthwork ordered .
The additional earthwork is change order work .
Complete placing lagging to the full height of the exposed excavation face by the end of the work shift .
SECTION EARTHWORK .B Pier Column Excavation Reserved .B Cofferdams Cofferdams for foundation construction must be carried below the bottom of footings braced and made as watertight as practicable .
You may construct the cofferdam large enough to provide clearance to perform the work .
Right or enlarge a cofferdam tilted or moved out of position during sinking to provide the required clearance and proper pier location .
In tidal waters or in streams that may flood vent cofferdam walls at low water elevation to ensure equal hydrostatic head inside and outside the cofferdam when placing and setting seals .
Cross struts or bracing may extend through foundation concrete if authorized .
Struts or bracing below low water may remain in place except in navigable streams or when specified to be removed .
Remove struts or bracing above low water .
Fill resulting spaces with the same type of concrete as the surrounding concrete .
Remove cofferdams to at least feet below the streambed after completing substructure construction .
Do not disturb or mar the finished concrete or masonry .
.B Water Control and Foundation Treatment Select the method to remove and control water at excavations where seal courses are not shown .
Methods may include well point systems pumping sumps cofferdams or concrete seal courses .
If you construct a seal course comply with section .D except .
Seal course thickness requirement does not apply for a spread footing .
Curing requirements do not apply for a pile footing Where concrete seal courses are shown use a cofferdam concrete seal course and dewatering pumps .
Place seal course concrete under section .D .
If no piles are used and footing concrete culverts or other structures are placed on an excavated surface other than rock .
Perform excavation without disturbing foundation material .
Dewater the excavation if groundwater is encountered and no seal course is used .
Continue dewatering activities before and during subsequent excavation .
Foundations must be free of water when footing concrete or pipes are placed .
Continue dewatering activities as required to prevent damage to the work . .
If foundation material is disturbed by excavation activities damaged by water or removed for your convenience in dewatering restore the foundation to a condition at least equal to the undisturbed foundation .
To replace damaged or removed foundation material for culverts use Class AB that complies with section .
Compact the base as specified for structure backfill in section .E .
If the Engineer determines the undisturbed original material of the excavation is unsuitable correct it as ordered .
This work is change order work .
If footing concrete or masonry is placed on rock fully uncover the rock and remove the surface to sound rock .
Level or cut the rock to steps and then roughen it .
Pressure grout or treat seams in rock as ordered .
This work is change order work .
If you encounter solid rock or other unyielding material when excavating for a culvert other than an arch culvert remove to feet of the material below the bottom of the culvert not to exceed a depth of of the height of the embankment above the top of the culvert .
Backfill the resulting space below the culvert using structure backfill under section .E .
Excavating and backfilling below the planned elevation of the bottom of the culvert is change order work .
For footings on piles excavate to the bottom of footings before driving piles or drilling for piling .
If swell or subsidence results from pile driving excavate or backfill the footing area to the grade of the bottom of the SECTION EARTHWORK footing .
If the material under footings would mix with footing concrete or would not support the weight of wet concrete replace the material with suitable material install soffit forms or provide a platform using authorized means on which to cast the footing .
.C.D Reserved .E Structure Backfill .E General Place structure backfill in uniform layers .
Bring backfill up uniformly on all sides of structures .
Backfill layers must be at most .
foot thick before compacting the thickness must be at most feet when compaction is performed by ponding or jetting .
Do not use compaction equipment or methods that may cause excessive displacement or damage structures .
Do not place structure backfill until footings or other parts of the structure or facility are inspected by the Engineer and authorized for backfilling .
Do not place backfill against the back of abutments retaining walls or outside walls of CIP concrete structures until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least psi or the concrete has been in place for days .
Place backfill inside bridge wingwalls and abutments before railings on wingwalls are constructed .
Compaction by ponding and jetting may be authorized under the following conditions .
Backfill material is selfdraining when compacted .
Foundation materials will not soften or be damaged by water .
Structures will not be damaged by hydrostatic pressure Ponding and jetting of the upper feet below finished grade is not allowed .
Perform work without damaging the structure or embankment and such that water is not collected and confined .
Supplement ponding and jetting with vibratory or other compaction equipment .
Compact structure backfill to a relative compaction of at least percent except you may compact structure backfill to a relative compaction of at least percent at the following locations .
Overside drains .
Footings for slope protection slope paving and aprons .
Headwalls endwalls and culvert wingwalls .
Retaining walls except for portions under any surfacing .
Inlets in median areas or in traffic interchange loops .
Footings and pumping plants not beneath surfacing At locations where ordered place a compacted impervious backfill material for .
Outer foot portion of structure backfill adjacent to inlets and outlets for pipes and culverts .
Structure backfill placed within feet of finished grade at abutments abutment wingwalls retaining walls and other portions of structures Structure backfill placed at bridge supports in waterways and water channels not beneath any embankment pavement or slope protection .
Does not need to be compacted .
Must be placed to the level of original ground or finished grade shown Any material you place outside the excavation pay limits material must comply with the material and compaction requirements of the adjacent structure backfill .
If imported borrow is shown on the Bid Item List you may use imported borrow as structure backfill if it complies with the specifications for structure backfill .
Place material from structure excavation not used as structure backfill in roadway embankments under section or disposed of it under section .B .
SECTION EARTHWORK .E Crib Walls Backfill cells formed by crib members of a crib wall and the space between a crib wall and structure excavation face .
Structure backfill for crib walls must not sift or flow through the openings in the walls .
Backfill crib walls simultaneously during wall erection .
Place material in uniform layers before compacting .
Compact material by hand tamping mechanical compaction or other authorized compaction methods .
.E Soldier Pile Walls Compact structure backfill behind lagging of soldier pile walls by hand tamping mechanical compaction or other authorized compaction method ..
In fill areas behind the lagging key the structure backfill into the existing or excavated back slope .
Place and compact the backfill behind the lagging at least feet above the level of ground anchors before drilling for the anchors .
Place and compact the remaining backfill behind the lagging after the anchors are grouted .
If filter fabric is shown behind the lagging .
Immediately before placing the filter fabric remove any loose or extraneous material and sharp objects from the surface to receive the filter fabric . .
Handle and place the filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
Stretch align and place the fabric without wrinkling. . Stitch the adjacent borders of filter fabric or overlap the adjacent borders by to inches .
If stitching the border use yarn of a contrasting color and a size and composition complying with fabric manufacturers instructions .
Use from to stitches per inch of seam. . Repair any damaged filter fabric by placing a piece of filter fabric large enough to cover the damaged area and complying with the overlapping or stitching requirements .
.F Slurry Cement Backfill Place slurry cement backfill within hour of mixing .
Place it in a uniform manner that prevents voids or segregation of the backfill and floating or shifting of the culverts .
Remove foreign material that falls into trenches .
Do not backfill over or place material over slurry cement backfill until at least hours after placement .
When concrete sand is used as aggregate and the inplace material is free draining you may start backfilling as soon as the surface water is gone .
If slurry cement backfill is used for structure backfill you may reduce the excavation width such that the clear distance between the outside of the pipe and the side of the excavation on each side of the pipe is at least inches for pipes inches or less in diameter or span and foot for pipes over inches in diameter or span .
Place slurry cement backfill only for that portion of structure backfill below the original ground or grading plane or below the top of the embankment placed before excavating for the culvert pipe .
Compact earth plugs at each end of the pipe before placing the backfill to completely contain slurry in the pipe trench .
.G Pervious Backfill Material Place pervious backfill material in layers along with and by the same methods specified for structure backfill .
Pervious backfill material at the same location must have approximately the same gradation .
Cover pervious backfill material at locations exposed to erosion with a foot layer of an authorized earthen material .
.H Culvert Bedding Shape trench beds to fit the bottom of the culvert and to provide uniform support along the entire culvert length .
You may excavate the trench below the bottom of the culvert and construct shaped bedding by backfilling and compacting the backfill material .
Shape beds using a template conforming to the outside shape of the culvert and guided by headers set parallel to the culvert grade .
Headers may be left in place .
SECTION EARTHWORK Place soil cement bedding as specified for slurry cement backfill in section .F except do not backfill over soil cement bedding until hours after placement .
.I Controlled LowStrength Material If a controlled lowstrength material l is used for structure backfill you may reduce the excavation width such that the clear distance between the outside of the pipe culvert and the side of the excavation on each side of the pipe culvert is at least .
inches for pipe culverts with either of the following conditions .. feet or less in height of cover .
inches or less of diameter or span .
foot for pipe culverts with either of the following conditions .. Over feet in height of cover .
Over inches in diameter or span .
Place controlled lowstrength material only for that portion of structure backfill below the original ground or grading plane or below the top of the embankment that is placed before excavating for the pipe .
Compact earth plugs at each end of the pipe culvert before placing the backfill to completely contain slurry in the pipe culvert trench .
For trenches in existing pavement place controlled lowstrength material no higher than the bottom of the existing pavements permeable drainage layer .
Where a drainage layer does not exist place the material no higher than inch below the bottom of the existing asphalt concrete surfacing or no higher than the top of the base below the existing concrete pavement .
For rigid pipe culverts the minimum height of controlled lowstrength material relative to the pipe culvert invert must be .
times the pipe culvert diameter or height .
For flexible pipe culverts the minimum height of controlled lowstrength material must be .
times the pipe culvert diameter or height .
.J Soldier Pile Walls Where necessary to install lagging remove lean concrete backfill from drilled holes and in front of pile .. .K Ground Anchor and Soil Nail Walls For ground anchor and soil nail walls excavate in lifts from the top down .
Clean the excavated face of loose materials mud rebound and other materials that prevent or reduce the shotcrete from bonding to the excavated face and soil nails .
Remove cobbles boulders portions of boulders and debris at the final wall alignment that protrude more than inches from the excavated face .
If stability testing is not performed apply the shotcrete facing during the same work shift that the excavation is performed .
You may delay placing the shotcrete facing up to hours if you demonstrate the integrity of the excavated face is maintained .
Notify the Engineer immediately if raveling or instability of the excavated face occurs or the wall face moves horizontally more than .
percent of the excavated wall height .
Immediately stabilize unstable areas by buttressing the excavated face with an earth berm or other authorized methods .
Stop construction in unstable areas .
Take authorized remedial measures to stablilize the areas .
Replace any damaged soil nails and ground anchors .
If your excavation and installation methods result in a discontinuous wall along any soil nail row the ends of the structurally completed wall section must extend beyond the ends of the next lower excavation lift by a distance equal to twice the lift height .
Maintain temporary slopes at the ends of each wall section to ensure slope stability .
Do not excavate to the next underlying excavation lift until the following conditions have been met for the portion of the soil nail or ground anchor wall in the current excavation lift SECTION EARTHWORK .
Soil nails or ground anchors are installed and grouted. . Reinforced shotcrete facing is constructed. . Grout and shotcrete have cured for at least hours . .
Soil nail facing anchorages are attached or ground anchors are locked off .
Do not excavate beyond the horizontal limits of the overlying completed wall section .
At the end of each excavation lift maintain temporary slopes flatter than horizontal vertical to ensure slope stability. . PAYMENT The Department does not adjust the payment quantity of imported borrow placed as structure backfill if replacement material for the imported borrow is provided .
For structures other than culverts if the pay limits are not shown the payment quantities for structure excavation and structure backfill are computed as follows .
Horizontal limits are vertical planes foot outside the neat lines of the footings or structures without footings. . Upper limit for structure excavation is the original ground surface .
Where structure excavation is performed within a roadway excavation or a ditch excavation area the upper limit is the plane of the bottom and side slopes of the excavated area .
In new embankments the upper limit is the plane of the new embankment at the specified elevation. . Upper limit for structure backfill is the finished grading plane or the finished slope lines. . Lower limit is a plane at the bottom of the completed footings or structures or the lower outside surface of rods or deadmen .
Except for culverts the Department does not adjust the unit price of structure excavation for an increase in depth of up to feet or an increase in width of up to times the outside width of the footing .
For excavation to greater depths or widths the Department does not adjust the unit price of structure excavation outside the limits unless before removal activities the Engineer authorizes the excavation outside the limits to be change order work or you request the excavation outside the limits to be change order work .
When the pay limits of structure excavation are so increased the pay limits for structure backfill are similarly increased .
The Department does not adjust the unit price of structure backfill .
If the depth of the structure excavation is reduced due to a reduction or elimination of the seal course the Department does not decrease the payment quantity for structure excavation Type A .
The payment quantity for structure backfill does not include .
Volume of pervious backfill material within the limits of the structure backfill .
Volume occupied by the new structure For culverts .
Depth of structure excavation is the vertical distance between original ground and the bottom of the culvert trench . .
Increased depth due to unsuitable material or rock or other unyielding material below the planned grade as specified in section .H is not considered in determining the depth of structure excavation .
ROCK EXCAVATION Reserved COMPACTION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for compacting all earthwork except structure backfill. . MATERIALS Not Used SECTION EARTHWORK .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Relative compaction specifications apply to material whether in an excavation or an embankment .
The moisture content of material to be compacted to at least percent must be such that the specified relative compaction is attained and the embankment is in a firm and stable condition .
Do not compact material that contains excessive moisture until the material is dry enough .
.B Relative Compaction Percent Compact earthwork to a relative compaction of at least percent for at least a depth of . . foot below the grading plane for the width between the outer edges of shoulders . . feet below the finished grade for the width of the traveled way plus feet on each side Except for the outer feet measured horizontally from the embankment side slope compact the full width and depth of the embankment within feet of each bridge abutment to at least percent relative compaction .
The foot limit is measured horizontally from the bridge abutment and either parallel or concentric with the roadway centerline .
Compact earthwork to a relative compaction of at least percent for embankments under retaining wall footings without pile foundations .
For the full depth of the embankment .
Within the limits established by inclined planes sloping .
horizontal vertical out and down from lines foot outside the bottom edges of the footing .C Relative Compaction Percent Compact earthwork to a relative compaction of at least percent in embankment areas not required to be compacted to percent .
.D Foundation Preparation You are responsible for preparing the foundation to receive material .
You may excavate and replace basement material to facilitate compaction .
Before you replace the basement material if ordered compact a layer below the excavated material to a depth width and degree of compaction ordered .
The ordered work is change order work. . PAYMENT If basement material is placed in the embankment or used in other planned or authorized work and replaced with planned excavated material or imported borrow the replaced material is paid for at the item bid price for the type of excavation or imported borrow involved .
EMBANKMENT CONSTRUCTION .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing embankments .
Constructing embankments includes .
Preparing areas to receive embankment material .
Placing and compacting embankment material including ..
Suitable material within roadway areas where unsuitable material has been removed .. Material in holes pits and other depressions within the roadway area .
Constructing a temporary surcharge embankment above the grading plane .
Constructing dikes .B Definitions Reserved SECTION EARTHWORK .C Submittals For geosynthetic reinforced embankment If you request the use of backfill with a gradation larger than the specified size submit test results for installation damagereduction factors for each type of geosynthetic reinforcement under FHWANHI section .
with your LTDS calculations .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Embankment material must be excavated material from excavations or from local or imported borrow .
Material for embankment areas where piles are to be placed or driven must not contain rocks broken concrete or other solid materials larger than inches in greatest dimension .
Do not place borrow or excavation material having a sand equivalent value less than within .
feet of finished grade .
.B Geosynthetic Reinforced Embankment Each geosynthetic reinforcement roll must be labeled with .
Manufacturers name .
Production identification .
Roll dimensions .
Lot number .
Date of manufacture The backfill for geosynthetic reinforced embankment must be free from .
Organic material .
Shale soft or poordurability particles .
Recycled materials such as glass shredded tires concrete rubble or other unsuitable materials .
Loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may come in contact with the geosynthetic reinforcement The backfill must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percent passing No .
No .
No .
The backfill must comply with the quality characteristics shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Plasticity index max California Test pH California Test If authorized you may backfill with a gradation larger than the specified size up to a inch maximum. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Compact embankment under section .
SECTION EARTHWORK Construct embankment slopes under section .G .
Scarify water grade and roll the existing roadbed before placing new material if you construct an embankment on an existing roadway .
If you construct an embankment against a slope prepare original ground or embankment slopes by cutting into it at least feet horizontally as you place the new embankment in layers .
Compact the cut material along with the new embankment material .
For bridge footings constructed in an embankment construct the embankment to the grading plane elevation and extend the finished slope to the grading plane before .
Excavating for footings .
Driving piles or drilling holes for CIP piles The grading plane of embankments beneath structure approach slabs and beneath the thickened portion of sleeper slabs must not project above the grade established by the Engineer .
Grade trenches holes depressions and pits outside of areas where embankments are to be constructed to provide a presentable and welldrained area .
.B Subsidence If there is a bid item for embankment or imported borrow you may compact the ground surface on which an embankment is to be constructed before placing embankment material .
If the compaction results in an average subsidence exceeding .
foot the Engineer measures the ground surface after compaction .
Allow time for the measurements before placing the embankment material .
The Engineer determines the additional quantity of material for embankment work due to subsidence by the average end areas from the original measurement and the final measurements .
If a quantity is specified for either embankment or imported borrow for the anticipated effect of subsidence and you do not agree with this specified quantity you may submit a plan for measuring the subsidence .
The plan must include complete details of the measuring devices and their installation .
If your plan for measuring subsidence is authorized install and maintain the subsidencemeasuring devices .
The Engineer takes readings as needed to determine the progress of subsidence .
Help the Engineer as ordered .
If the Engineer finds a damaged device that device is not used for determining subsidence in the area the device represents .
The subsidence for that area is considered zero regardless of the subsidence measured at other areas .
Subsidence is considered zero at .
Intersection of the side slope and end slope at structures with the ground line as established by the original cross sections .
Points on the cross sections feet beyond the start and end of the area equipped with subsidence measuring devices unless the Engineer agrees otherwise After final measurements are made remove the detachable elements of the subsidencemeasuring devices .
The additional payment quantity of material for embankment work due to subsidence is the volume determined by the average end areas from the original measurement and the final measurements including zero subsidence at specific areas .
.C Placing and Compacting Do not construct embankments when material is frozen or a blanket of snow prevents proper compaction .
Construct embankment in layers .
The loose thickness of each layer must not exceed inches .
SECTION EARTHWORK Break up clods or hard lumps of earth that are over inches in greatest dimension before compacting material in the embankment unless material such as hardpan or cemented gravel can not be broken readily in which case .
Distribute the material throughout the embankment .
Place enough earth or other fine material around the larger material as you deposit it to fill the interstices and produce a dense compact embankment If embankment material contains rock the loose thickness of each layer of embankment material before compaction below a plane feet below finished grade must comply with the following requirements .
If embankment material contains over percent by volume of rock larger than inches in greatest dimension the loose thickness of each layer must not exceed the maximum size of rock in the material . .
If embankment material contains from to percent by volume of rock larger than inches in greatest dimension the loose thickness of each layer must not exceed the maximum size of rock or feet whichever is less . .
If embankment material contains less than percent by volume of rock larger than inches in greatest dimension the loose thickness of each layer must not exceed inches in the area between the rocks larger than inches .
Reinforcement or metal attached to reinforced concrete rubble placed in embankments must not protrude above the grading plane .
Trim reinforcement or metal to less than inch from the face of the reinforced concrete rubble material before placing the material within feet below the grading plane .
In a sidehill embankment where the width including bench cuts for bonding existing and new embankments is too narrow to accommodate mobile powercompacting equipment you may place the material by end dumping if authorized .
If end dumping is allowed for constructing an embankment against existing slopes or the embankment width at a time plow or cut the slopes of the original ground or embankment before starting end dumping .
Where embankments are constructed across low swampy ground that can not support the weight of hauling equipment you may construct the lower part of the embankment by dumping successive loads in a uniformly distributed layer that can support the equipment for placing subsequent layers .
Construct embankments such that each layer has a cross fall of less than percent .
At locations where it is impractical to use mobile powercompacting equipment compact the embankment layers by any method that attains the specified compaction .
.D Settlement Periods and Surcharges If an embankment settlement period is specified construct the embankment to at least the grading plane and to the limits described for .
Distance of at least feet measured parallel to the centerline of the roadway from each bridge abutment .
Entire length of a retaining wall and a width of at least feet from the face of the wall If a surcharge is specified place the surcharge in uniform layers .
Compact the surcharge by routing the grading equipment across the full width .
Prevent the embankment and any surcharge from encroaching upon the traveled way or existing improvements .
The settlement period starts after the embankment and any specified surcharge construction is complete .
If ordered install settlement platforms .
The installation is change order work .
The surcharge must remain in place until the end of the specified settlement period or as ordered .
Before the end of the settlement period do not SECTION EARTHWORK .
Excavate for abutments bent footings wingwalls or retaining wall footings .
Drive or drill holes for foundation piles Remove any surcharge material .
Remove surcharge material above the grading plane .
Compact the embankment below the grading plane before placing the subsequent layers of subbase or base .
.E Geosynthetic Reinforced Embankment Place geosynthetic reinforcement within inches of the design elevations .
Place at least inches of compacted backfill between the layers of reinforcement shown .
Geosynthetic reinforcement must be .
Secured with staples pins or small piles of backfill .
Placed without wrinkles .
Aligned with the primary strength direction perpendicular to slope contours .
Spliced under the manufacturers instructions .
Butted edgetoedge for straight slope contours .
Butted edgetoedge at the slope face and fanned out or overlapped into the backfill for curved slope contours Cover the geosynthetic reinforcement with backfill within the same work shift .
Place at least inches of backfill on the reinforcement before operating or driving equipment or vehicles over it except you may drive equipment or vehicles for spreading backfill directly on the reinforcement if you .
Comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Use rubbertire vehicles .
Minimize traffic repetitions .
Maintain a speed less than mph .
Avoid sudden braking and sharp turning Where guardrail posts will be placed at the top crest of a geosyntheticreinforced embankment and the geosynthetic reinforcement interferes with the placement of posts you may precut the affected layers of the reinforcement into crossshaped patterns .
The precutting dimensions must not exceed the post dimensions by more than inches .
Do not extend geosynthetic reinforcement into the pavement structure .
Repair any damaged reinforcement by placing additional reinforcement to cover the damaged area as follows .
For reinforcement placed parallel to slope contours overlap aperture openings or inches whichever is greater .
For reinforcement placed perpendicular to slope contours splice the edges under the manufacturers instructions Grade and compact the backfill to ensure the reinforcement remains taut .
Compact the backfill to a relative compaction of at least percent .
If handoperated equipment is used do not place more than inches of backfill before compaction .
Use handoperated equipment to compact areas within feet of .
Slope contours .
Underground structures Do not disk or plow in the reinforced area .
SECTION EARTHWORK .
PAYMENT If ordered to cut into a slope more than feet the excavated material in excess of feet is paid for as roadway excavation .
If there is a bid item for embankment shown on the Bid Item List the payment quantity for embankment is the volume determined from the planned or authorized cross sections and the measured ground surface .
The Department does not increase the embankment quantity if subsidence or consolidation occurs after you start placing the embankment material .
BORROW MATERIAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for obtaining local and imported borrow material for embankment construction .
The payment quantity for imported borrow does not include aggregate base placed to fill low areas .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Notify the Engineer before opening any imported borrow material site so that the Department may test the material. . MATERIALS .A General Borrow material must be .
Suitable for the purpose intended .
Free of unsuitable material including organic matter .B Local Borrow Reserved .C Imported Borrow Imported borrow must be free of manmade refuse such as .
Concrete .
Asphalt concrete .
Residue from grooving and grinding operations .
Metal .
Rubber .
Mixed debris .
Rubble .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Clear grub and strip borrow sites if necessary .
Excavate load and if necessary haul borrow material .
Construct embankments under section .
.B Local Borrow Obtain local borrow such that no scar or unsightly appearance is generated .
SECTION EARTHWORK .C Imported Borrow Before placing imported borrow in embankments ensure enough space is available in embankment locations for placing planned or designated excavated material from the job site. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for imported borrow paid by theoretical volume basis is the volume determined from the planned or authorized cross section for embankments and the measured ground surface adjusted by subtracting the theoretical quantities of material from excavations .
The theoretical quantity of materials from excavations used in embankments is determined by summing the quantities for roadway excavation structure excavation and ditch excavation and then by multiplying the quantities by the grading factor .
The grading factor used for excavated materials for determining payment quantity for imported borrow is ..
If import borrow site is only being used for project you may request that import borrow be measured and paid based on borrow site cross sections and the following .
Notify the engineer before opening any imported borrow material site so the Department may take crosssection elevations and measurements of the ground surface after clearing grubbing and any stripping . .
The payment quantity for imported borrow paid by the cubic yard is the volume determined from the average areas and the distances between them. . Areas and distances used to determine the volume are those from the material site before and after the imported borrow is excavated .
RESERVED SHOULDER BACKING .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing shoulder backing adjacent to the edge of new pavement surfacing. . MATERIALS Shoulder backing must be clean and consist of one or any combination of the following materials .
Broken stone .
Crushed gravel .
Natural rough surfaced gravel .
Sand .
RAP .
Concrete .
LCB .
CTB Shoulder backing must be graded within the percentage passing limits shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
No .
If percent RAP is used shoulder backing must be graded within the percentage passing limits shown in the following table SECTION EARTHWORK Sieve size Percentage passing No .
Shoulder backing must comply with the sand equivalent requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristics Test method Requirement Sand Equivalent Single type of material except RAP Combination of all type of materials including RAP Combination of all type of materials excluding RAP RAP min California Test If a combination of broken stone crushed gravel natural roughsurfaced gravel and sand is used shoulder backing must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Percentage crushed particles min a California Test fractured face fractured faces Durability index California Test aApplies to material retained on no .
sieve only When tested under California Test using the rodding method the minimum unit weight of shoulder backing must be lbcu ft except if shoulder backing consists of percent RAP this requirement does not apply. . CONSTRUCTION Do not place shoulder backing containing RAP within feet measured horizontally from a culvert watercourse or bridge .
Remove weeds grass and debris from the area to receive shoulder backing .
Scarify the basement material to receive shoulder backing at least .
foot deep and water immediately before placing the shoulder backing .
Place and spread shoulder backing directly on the basement material .
After placing the shoulder backing water and compact it with a minimum of passes with a steeltired roller weighing at least tons .
Wherever the total thickness of shoulder backing is more than inches place the backing under sections and .
Form smooth and uniform cross sections and slopes .
Do not deposit shoulder backing on new pavement .
Complete shoulder backing within days after placement of adjacent new surfacing except complete shoulder backing within days wherever edge treatment under section .C is placed .
Before opening a lane adjacent to uncompleted shoulder backing place portable delineators and W Low Shoulder signs off of and adjacent to the new pavement surfacing .
SECTION EARTHWORK Portable delineators and signs must comply with section except the signs may be set on temporary portable supports or on barricades .
Place portable delineators at the beginning and along the dropoff of the edge of pavement in the direction of travel at maximum intervals of feet on tangents and feet on curves .
Place the W signs at the beginning and along the dropoff of the edge of pavement in the direction of travel at maximum intervals of feet .
Remove portable delineators and W signs when the shoulder backing is complete in that area. . PAYMENT Not Used SUBGRADE ENHANCEMENT GEOSYNTHETIC .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for placing subgrade enhancement geosynthetic between the subgrade and pavement structure .
Subgrade enhancement geosynthetic includes subgrade enhancement geogrid and subgrade enhancement geotextile. . MATERIALS Subgrade enhancement geogrid must be biaxial geogrid .
A polyester geotextile must not be used for subgrade enhancement geotextile within inches of recycled concrete. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Before placing subgrade enhancement geosynthetic remove loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may come in contact with the geosynthetic .
Place the geosynthetic .
Under manufacturers instructions .
Longitudinally along the roadway alignment .
Without wrinkles Overlap the adjacent edges of the rolls at least feet .
Overlap the ends of rolls at least feet in the direction you spread the material covering the subgrade enhancement geosysnthetic .
You may fold or cut the geosysnthetic to conform to curves .
Overlap any cut material at least feet .
Hold the overlap in place with staples pins or small piles of material placed on the subgrade enhancement material .
Make any repairs by placing a new piece of material over the damaged area with at least feet of overlap from the edges of the damaged area .
Compact the AB with either a smooth wheeled roller with no vibrations or rubber tire roller Do not stockpile material on the geosynthetic or place more geotextile than can be covered in hours or operate equipment or vehicles directly on it except you may operate vehicles and equipment on geogrid if at least one of the following conditions is met .
Vehicles and equipment are ..
Equipped with rubber tires .
Operated under mph .
Operated in a manner to avoid sudden braking and sharp turns .
At least .
feet of AB had been placed spread and compacted on the geogrid .
SECTION EARTHWORK .C Subgrade Enhancement Geotextile Do not .
Compact it with a sheepsfoot or other nonsmooth roller Turn vehicles on material placed directly over geotextile Before operating equipment on areas where geotextile has been placed spread and compact .
feet of material on the geotextile. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for subgrade enhancement geogrid and subgrade enhancement geotextile is the area measured parallel to the surface not including the additional quantity used for overlaps .
RESERVED LANDSCAPE GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for performing landscaping work .
Perform roadside clearing .
As required to prepare the job site for construction work .
Until the start of the plant establishment work or Contract acceptance whichever comes first Check for plant deficiencies under section .A before installing any irrigation system in an existing planting area to be maintained .
Unless a supply line is shown through plant holes relocate any plant hole to clear a supply line .
Do not install supply lines control and neutral conductors and electrical conduits in common trenches above each other .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals At least days before applying any pesticide submit a copy of the pest control advisers recommendation .
At the end of each week submit a Report of Chemical Spray Operations form as an informational submittal documenting the application of all pesticides .
Before mixing a pesticide submit a copy of the registered label for the pesticide as an informational submittal .
If you are unable to copy the label allow the Engineer to read the label on the container .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Obtain a recommendation for the use of all pesticides under the Food Agri Code from a pest control adviser who is licensed as an agricultural pest control adviser in the State .
The recommendation must include the pesticides to be used rates of application methods of application and application areas .
The pesticide applicator must have an active and valid qualified applicator license or certificate from the Department of Pesticide Regulation .
.D Progress Inspections The Engineer performs a progress inspection .
Before cultivating work starts .
During pressure testing of irrigation pipe on the supply side of control valves .
During testing of low voltage conductors .
During irrigation system functional tests .
Before planting work starts .
After completion of planting work Notify the Engineer at least business days before each inspection is required .
Allow at least business days for the Engineers inspection .
Do not proceed with the next construction activity until the inspection has been completed and any required corrective work has been performed and authorized. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved SECTION LANDSCAPE .B Water Unless there is a bid item for irrigation water service charges the Department furnishes water if it is available from an existing Departmentowned facility within the project limits or an irrigation system to be installed under the Contract .
If water is not available from one of these sources make arrangements for supplying water .
Water must be of a quality that promotes plant growth .
.C Pesticides Pesticides must comply with the regulations of the Department of Pesticide Regulation .
Insecticide must be imidacloprid .
Rodenticides must be brodifacoum bromadiolone or diphacinone .
Do not use oil or pelleted forms of pesticides for weed control .
For weed control use a pesticide with a photosensitive dye that produces a contrasting color when sprayed on the ground .
The color must disappear within to days after being applied .
The dye must not stain surfaces or injure plants or wildlife when applied at the manufacturers recommended application rate .
.D.H Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Take precautions to prevent irrigation water from .
Wetting vehicles pedestrians and pavement .
Eroding soil .
Causing excess runoff If water use calculations are provided as supplemental project information water plants under the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance CA Code of Regs et seq .
and local water agency provisions .
Water plants at night unless otherwise authorized .
Dispose of removed pruned and damaged vegetative material .
You may reduce removed vegetative material to chips with a maximum thickness of inch and spread it within the job site at locations determined by the Engineer .
Do not substitute chipped material for wood mulch or place it in areas to receive wood mulch .
.B Pesticides Notify the Engineer of pesticide application times at least hours before each application .
Mix and apply pesticides under the regulations of the Department of Pesticide Regulation and the instructions on the pesticide product label .
Do not apply pesticides .
On Saturdays and holidays unless authorized .
Whenever weather and wind conditions are unsuitable for application .
Within the plant basin .
On the foliage and woody parts of the plant Any granular preemergent must be covered with mulch on the same work day .
Do not apply granular preemergent in plant basins .
Do not apply preemergents .
To groundcover plants within days after planting .
Within inches of trees shrubs and seeded areas SECTION LANDSCAPE .
Before plants have been thoroughly watered .C Roadside Clearing .C General Roadside clearing includes .
Removing existing plants described to be removed .
Controlling rodents insects and weeds Control rodents by using rodenticides or traps .
.C Remove Existing Plants Removal of existing plants includes removing their stumps and roots inches or larger in diameter to a minimum depth of inches below finished grade .
Backfill holes resulting from stump removal to the finished grade with material obtained from adjacent areas .
If a plant is to be planted within an existing groundcover area remove the existing groundcover from within an area feet in diameter centered at each plant location .
.C Weed Control Control weeds by the use of pesticides handpulling or mowing .
If pesticides are used to control weeds apply pesticides before the weeds reach the seed stage of growth or exceed inches in length whichever occurs first .
Do not use pesticides at cutting plant locations .
Where cuttings are to be planted control weeds by handpulling within an area feet in diameter centered at each plant location .
If weeds are to be controlled by handpulling handpull weeds before they reach the seed stage of growth or exceed inches in length whichever occurs first .
Where liner plug or seedling plants are to be planted feet or more apart control weeds by the use of pesticides or handpulling within an area feet in diameter centered at each plant location .
Where liner plug or seedling plants are to be planted less than feet apart control weeds by the use of pesticides within the entire area .
Control weeds by mowing outside of mulched areas plant basins groundcover areas and within areas to be seeded .
Mowing must extend to the edges of pavement dikes curbs sidewalks walls and fences .
If mowing is to be performed within areas to be seeded perform mowing as needed until the start of the seeding activity .
Perform mowing before the weeds reach the seed stage of growth or exceed inches in length whichever occurs first .
Mow weeds to a height of inches .
.C Disposal of Removed Groundcover Weeds and Mowed Material Dispose of handpulled weeds the same day they are pulled .
Dispose of removed groundcover within days .
Dispose of mowed material from the initial mowing .
Disposal of material from subsequent mowing is not required .
.D Cultivation Cultivation must be by mechanical methods and performed until the soil is in a loose condition to a minimum depth of inches .
Soil clods must not be larger than inches in maximum dimension after cultivation .
The areas to be cultivated must extend inches beyond the outer limit of each planting area requiring cultivation .
After initial cultivation place soil amendment and fertilizer at specified rates .
Recultivate to thoroughly mix native soil and amendments .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Do not drive on cultivated areas after cultivation .
Planting areas that have been cultivated and become compacted must be recultivated .
Rocks and debris encountered during soil preparation in planting areas must be brought to the ground surface .
Remove rocks and debris as ordered .
This work is change order work .
.E Weed Germination Reserved .F.K Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for landscape bid items paid for by the area is the area measured parallel to the ground surface .
The payment quantity for cultivation includes the area not cultivated within the cultivation area shown .
IRRIGATION .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for installing irrigation systems .
The irrigation systems shown are diagrammatic .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Submit shop drawings for the electrical components of the irrigation system except electric service irrigation days before installation .
The drawings must .
Include schematic wiring diagrams showing wire sizes and routes between electrical components .
Show conduit sizes .
Bear the written approval of the controller manufacturer or the manufacturers authorized agent .
Be accompanied by ..
Colored wire and splice samples .. Manufacturers descriptive and technical literature .Ab Manufacturers Instructions Submit the manufacturers installation instructions as an informational submittal at least days before installing .
Couplings for conduits used for irrigation conduits .
Plastic pipe and fittings .
Solvent cement for plastic pipe and flexible hose .
Sprinklers .
Flow sensors .
Rain sensors .
Remote control valves .
Backflow preventers .A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved SECTION LANDSCAPE .Ab Pressure Testing .Abi General Perform pressure testing for leakage on irrigation supply lines .
In the Engineers presence .
On business days from a.m. to p.m. unless authorized .
Before backfilling supply line trenches .
With irrigation system gate valves open .
With open ends of the supply line and fittings plugged or capped Notify the Engineer at least hours before performing a pressure test .
Perform pressure testing using Method A or B to test supply lines installed by trenching and backfilling and supply lines that are completely visible after installation .
Perform pressure testing using Method A to test all other supply lines including those installed in the ground by methods other than trenching and backfilling .
Test irrigation supply line in conduit by Method A with the testing period modified to .
hour and no allowable pressure drop .
.Abii Method A For Method A pressure testing for leakage .
Calibrate the pressure gauge from to psi in psi increments .
Pressure gauge must be accurate to within a tolerance of psi . .
Fill the supply line with water and connect the line to a pressure gauge .
Place the pipeline under a pressure of psi .
Remove the source of pressure and leave the line under the required pressure. . Test the supply line under the required pressure for a period of hour .
The pressure gauge must remain in place until each test period is complete . .
Leaks that develop in the tested portion of the system must be located and repair after each test period if a drop of more than psi is indicated by the pressure gauge .
After the leaks have been repaired repeat the hour pressure test until the drop in pressure is psi or less .
For a system consisting of a new supply line connected to an existing line the new supply line must be isolated from the existing line and tested .
.Abiii Method B For Method B pressure testing for leakage .
Turn on the water and maintain at full pressure from the water source for a period not less than consecutive hours after all the air has been expelled from the line for the portion of the supply line on the upstream side of the control valve to be backfilled .
Perform the same test for a period not less than hour for the portion of the supply on the downstream side of the control valve to be backfilled. . Repair leaks that develop in the tested portion of the system .
After the leaks have been repaired repeat the pressure test until no leaks occur .
.Ac Sprinkler Coverage Check After installation of the sprinklers check and adjust the entire sprinkler system for proper orientation and uniform coverage .
.Ad Irrigation System Functional Tests The functional tests for each irrigation controller or group of controllers and associated irrigation system served by a single electric service point must consist of at least complete cycle of operation .
The Engineer determines the length of the cycle .
Perform a functional test for each irrigation system .
Before planting the plants .
After planting the plants .
Before the start of the plant establishment work SECTION LANDSCAPE .Ae Final Irrigation System Check Perform the final check of the existing and new irrigation system to days before Contract acceptance .
The Engineer determines the length of the cycle .
Remote control valves connected to existing and new irrigation controllers must be checked for automatic operation when the controllers are in automatic mode .
.B Materials .B General Concrete for replacing concrete facilities must be minor concrete .
HMA for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing and facilities must comply with section except you may use minor HMA only if authorized .
.B Garden Valves Each garden valve must .
Be the inverted nose type and of brass or bronze construction with a female thread inlet .
Have a replaceable seat washer a rising valve stem within a protective collar and a male thread hose outlet .
Have a loose key handle .B Recycled Water Identification Irrigation components used for recycled water must be manufactured or painted purple .
Recycled water irrigation pipe and tubing must have a permanent label with the wording CAUTION RECYCLED WATER every inches in rows spaced approximately degrees apart in the longitudinal direction of the pipe or tubing .
The recycled water warning sign must be a decal or a decal attached to a inchthick aluminum plate or tag .
Each warning sign decal must .
Show the phrase Recycled Water Do Not Drink and the drinkingglass graphic symbol .
Be UV fade and weather resistant and manufactured from flexible vinyl with or without mylar .
Have a purple background black text and selfadhesive backing Each warning tag must .
Show the phrase RECYCLED WATER and the drinkingglass graphic symbol .
Be UV fade and weather resistant .
Be purple doublesided and manufactured from polyurethane .
Have an integral neck attachment and attachment hole capable of withstanding lb of pullout resistance .
Have hotstamped black lettering Posts and hardware for the warning signs must comply with section .
Concrete sprinkler protectors used with recycled water must be painted purple .
.B Location Markers Location markers must be schedule white PVC plastic pipe .
.B Pull Boxes Pull boxes must comply with section and be no .
or larger .
Pull boxes for low voltage conductors must not have side openings .
Pull box covers used solely for irrigation electrical service must be marked IRRIGATION .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .B Unions Unions must be brass or malleable iron capable of withstanding the maximum required working pressure .
.B Valve Boxes and Covers Valve boxes must be precast concrete .
Covers must be .
Concrete steel or cast iron .
Marked WATER in castin letters not less than inch high unless shown .
piece except pieces are required if the weight of the valve box cover exceeds lb The valve box covers must include a polyurethane label with the appropriate controller letter and station number .
.B Wye Strainers Wye strainers except those used for drip valve assemblies must .
Have a cast iron or all bronze body .
Have a removable stainless steel strainer screen with mesh woven wire .
Have a mesh woven wire screen or perforated sheet with .inchdiameter holes when on a backflow preventer assembly .
Be capable of withstanding a working pressure of psi .
Be equipped with a garden valve at the outlet .C Construction .C General Immediately shut off water to broken pressurized irrigation components .
Repair irrigation systems within hours after a malfunction or damage occurs .
Connect underground metallic pipes valves or fittings made of dissimilar metals through a dielectric coupling or bushing .
You may install conduits conductors and supply lines by methods other than trenching provided that they are not damaged and are installed at the depths described .
.C Trenching and Backfilling Perform trenching and backfilling under section .
Remove plants as specified for roadside clearing as necessary to trench .
If plants are to remain adjust the trench alignment to minimize damage .
Do not remove a width of turf more than inches .
Do not remove a width of groundcover more than feet .
You may rototill existing Carpobrotus and Delosperma .
Backfill for the trenches must not contain plants longer than inches .
Make a minimum inchdeep saw cut along neat lines around the perimeter of the pavement to be removed at locations determined by the Engineer .
The trench must have uniform bearing throughout the entire length and must be free of jagged rubble or sharp objects .
Ensure conduit supply line and joints are not moved or damaged by backfill activity .
For a project with multiple water service points excavate and backfill the trenches service point at a time .
Trenches for irrigation supply lines and conduits inches and larger must be times the pipe or conduit diameter deep and times the pipe or conduit diameter wide .
Trenches for irrigation supply lines and conduits inches or less in diameter must be a minimum of inches below finished grade measured from the top of the installed pipe .
Trenches must be at least feet from curbs dikes and paved shoulders .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Rocks and debris encountered during trenching activity must be brought to the ground surface .
The removal of rocks and debris is change order work .
If trenching requires the removal of plants in areas with .
Turf replace turf with sod under section .Ce. . Groundcover replace groundcover plants from flats and plant at inches on center under section .C .
No replacement of Carpobrotus and Delosperma is required if removed by rototilling .
Where existing surfacing is removed replace the structural section to match the materials removed .
Replacement concrete must be of uniform smoothness color and texture equal to the adjacent concrete surface .
Install supply line and conduit at the bottom of trenches and backfill with sand to a depth of inches over the top of the supply lines and conduits .
Except for the part of the trench backfilled with surfacing or pavement the remainder of the trench must be backfilled with material that is excavated from the trench .
Rock broken concrete asphalt concrete and other particles larger than inches in greatest dimension must not be used .
.C Pull Boxes Install pull boxes under section at the following locations .
At all conductor splices except splices made in valve boxes .
Within feet of irrigation controllers .
At ends of electrical conduits .
At other locations shown .C Valve Boxes and Covers In walkways and paved areas install the top of the valve box flush with the surrounding finished grade .
.C Recycled Water Warning Signs Install recycled water warning signs on irrigation facilities that use recycled water .
Install sign decals directly to clean smooth surfaces .
Clean the surface with alcohol or an equivalent cleaner before applying the decal .
Install a byinch warning sign decal to each .
Backflow preventer assembly .
Irrigation controller enclosure cabinet door Install a byinch warning tag to each remote control valve and valve box cover .
Install a byinch sign decal to each sprinkler riser .
Under local regulations install a byinch warning sign decal on an aluminum plate and attach to gates fences and walls located in the vicinity of a recycled water irrigation system .
On gates and fences install signs with S hooks and C clips or gauge galvanized steel wire .
On concrete walls or other rough surfaces install signs with a siliconbased adhesive .
In open areas install signs on metal posts under section .
.C Garden Valves Furnish keys before Contract acceptance .
.D Payment Not Used .
BACKFLOW PREVENTER ASSEMBLIES .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing backflow preventer assemblies .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance Each backflow preventer assembly must be certified by a backflow preventer tester .
The tester must have an active and valid certification from the water purveyor having jurisdiction .
If the local water purveyor does not have a certification program the tester must be certified by AWWA or a nearby county with a certification program .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before certifying the backflow preventer assembly .
Certify each backflow preventer assembly annually and within days of Contract acceptance .
.B Materials .B General Each backflow preventer assembly must include .
Backflow preventer including gate valve wye strainer brass or malleable iron unions fittings and supports .
Blanket .
Enclosure .
Concrete pad Concrete for the pad must be minor concrete except the cementitious material content of the concrete must be at least lbcu yd .
Hand mixing of the concrete is allowed .
.B Backflow Preventers Each backflow preventer must .
Be reducedpressure principle type . .
Comply with the specifications of the water purveyor that has jurisdiction. . Be factory assembled with .. check valves .
.. pressure differential relief valve .
.. test cocks .
.. shutoff valves manufactured from iron or bronze .
Shutoff valves must be one of the following Resilientwedge gate valves .
Resilientseated and fullyported ball valves .
Resilientseated butterfly valves .
Backflow preventer components must be capable of withstanding a working pressure of psi .
.B Backflow Preventer Blankets Each backflow preventer blanket must .
Be polyester fabric coated with vinyl or polymeric resin .
Be resistant to UV light water mildew and fire .
Have an Rvalue from R to R Blankets must have a securing mechanism that includes zippers hookpile tape grommets snaps buttons or any combination of these .
Wherever the backflow preventer is not in an enclosure the securing mechanism must be capable of accepting a padlock .
.B Backflow Preventer Enclosures Each backflow preventer enclosure must SECTION LANDSCAPE .
Be Type stainless steel .
Have expanded metal side end and top panels fabricated from gauge minimumthickness sheet with openings of approximately by inches .
Have expanded metal panels attached to the inchthick frame by a series of welds not less than inch in length and spaced not more than inches on center along the edges of the enclosure .
Have lock guards with a minimum thickness of gauge .
Have hexagonal nuts and locktype washers .
Have padlockclasp or latchandlock mechanism .C Construction Finish exposed top surface of concrete pad with a medium broom finish applied parallel to the long dimension of the pad .
Install the holddowns for the backflow preventer assembly enclosure when the concrete is still plastic .
.D Payment Not Used .
CAM COUPLER ASSEMBLIES .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing cam coupler assemblies .
.B Materials Each cam coupler assembly must consist of a cam coupler dust cap loose key check valve pipes fittings concrete thrust block and valve box with woven wire cloth and gravel .
Cam couplers and keys must be manufactured of brass or bronze and be able to withstand a working pressure of psi .
.C Construction Install cam coupler assemblies in valve boxes .
Furnish loose keys before Contract acceptance .
.D Payment Not Used .
CONTROL AND NEUTRAL CONDUCTORS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing or extending Vac control and neutral conductors between irrigation controllers and valve solenoids .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance Perform field tests on control and neutral conductors .
Field tests must comply with the specifications in section .
Where the conductors are installed by trenching and backfilling perform the field tests after a minimum of inches of backfill material has been placed and compacted over the conductors .
.B Materials Control and neutral conductors must comply with the provisions for conductors and cables in section .
Electrical conduit and fittings must comply with section .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Conductors must include a control conductor for each valve and a common neutral .
Conductor insulation color except for the stripes must be continuous throughout .
The color of the conductors must be consistent from the controller to each valve .
Neutral conductors must be white .
Do not use white for control conductors .
Do not use conductors with green insulation except as allowed by the NEC .
Conductors must be .
Of the size recommended by the manufacturer of the controllers to be installed .
Rated for V or V for armorclad .
Rated for direct burial .
Underground feeder cable Type UF and TWU .
Solid uncoated copper for armorclad .
Not less than percent of the AWG diameter required No .
and smaller conductors must be insulated with a minimum of mils of PVC or a minimum of mils of polyethylene .
No .
and larger conductors must be insulated with a minimum of mils of PVC .
No .
and smaller armorclad conductors must be insulated with a minimum of mils of polyethylene .
No .
and larger armorclad conductors must be insulated with to mils of PVC .
Armorclad conductors must include .
Stainless steel tape armor Type helically wrapped with a percent minimum overlap .
The tape must be .
inch wide and at least .
inch thick. . UVresistant PVC outer conductor jacket complying with ICEA S NEMA standard WC and UL listing .
The jacket nominal thickness must be from to mils .
.C Construction .C General Reserved .C Conductors in Open Trenches Do not install control and neutral conductors above each other in an open trench .
Wrap conductors together with electrical tape at foot intervals .
Where conductors are installed in the same trench as the supply line install at the same depth as the line .
At other locations install conductors not less than inches below finished grade .
Where conductors are not in a supply line trench install conductors at least feet from curbs dikes and paved shoulders .
.C Conductors in Conduits Install conductors in electrical conduit if conductors are to be .
Surface mounted .
Installed in or on structures .
Installed under paved areas .
Installed in irrigation conduits .
Placed in concrete .C Splicing Splice low voltage control and neutral conductors under section except do not use Method B .
Tape used for splice insulation must be PVC tape .
Leave at least feet of slack for each conductor at each .
Pull box .
Valve box for each conductor that is connected to other facilities within the box or spliced within the box SECTION LANDSCAPE Do not splice conductors in irrigation controller cabinets .
Permanent splice connections must be made with freshly cut and skinned conductors .
Do not use temporary splices made for testing valve circuits as permanent splices .
.C Marking Mark control and neutral conductors in pull boxes valve boxes at irrigation control terminals and at splices .
Mark conductor terminations and splices with adhesive cloth wraparound markers .
Seal markers with clear heatshrinkable sleeves .
Mark nonspliced conductors with clipon Cshaped white extruded PVC sleeves .
Sleeves must have black indented legends of uniform depth with transparent overlays over the legends and chevron cuts for the alignment of or more sleeves .
Identify markers for the control conductors with the appropriate irrigation controller and station number .
.D Payment Not Used .
FLOW SENSORS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing flow sensors .
.B Materials Each flow sensor must be an inline type with a nonmagnetic spinning impeller as the only moving part .
The electronics housing must .
Be schedule PVC or cast bronze .
Include glassfilled polyphenylene sulfide .
Be easily removable from the meter body and include ethylenepropylene Orings The impeller must be tungsten carbide .
The electronics must be rated to withstand prolonged water immersion conditions and include two inchlong singleconductor AWG leads .
The insulation must be direct burial UF type colored red for the positive lead and black for the negative lead .
The flow sensor must be capable of withstanding .
to psi operating pressure depending on sensor size shown .
Liquid temperatures up to degrees F . Flows from to ftsec .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
IRRIGATION CONTROLLERS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing irrigation controllers .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .A Definitions base station Designated computer that collects data from a series of satellite controllers through a centralized server .
centralized server Designated server that collects data from all base stations .
network communication Identified means through which satellite controllers base stations and a centralized server communicate to one another such as fiber optics spread spectrum and phone lines .
remote access device Wireless device such as an FCCcompliant radio remote webenabled smart phone or wireless computer or tablet used to communicate with satellite controllers from a remote location .
remote irrigation control system Centralized watermanagement system that consists of .
Base station .
Centralized server or webbased application .
Satellite controllers .
Remote access device satellite controller Irrigation controller that communicates directly to a base station or centralized server .
smart controller Irrigation controller that estimates or measures depletion of available plant soil moisture to operate an irrigation system replenishing water as needed while minimizing excess water use .
webbased application Encrypted managing software that is coded in a browsersupported language and is executable via a common Internet web browser such as Internet Explorer Firefox and Safari .
.A Submittals Submit a complete manufacturers maintenance and operations manual for each type of installed controller as an informational submittal .
After the work is complete submit copies of the asbuilt shop drawings including any wire modifications for each controller installed .
For each controller laminate and place in an envelope copy of .
Asbuilt schematic wiring diagram including wiring modifications .
byinch asbuilt irrigation plan The laminate must be clear matfinished plastic that is at least mils thick .
The envelope must be heavyduty plastic .
Attach the envelope to the inside of the controller enclosure or cabinet door .
If the door is not large enough to secure the envelope submit the envelope and its contents .
.A Quality Assurance Provide training by a qualified person on the use and adjustment of the installed irrigation controllers at least days before Contract acceptance .
Modifications to electrical components must be done by the manufacturer before shipment to the job site .
The installation date and expiration date of the manufacturers guarantee for the controllers must be permanently marked on the inside face of the controller .
.B Materials .B General Conventional ACpowered irrigation controllers must operate on Vac Hz and supply from to Vac Hz for operating electrical remote control valves .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Concrete for the pad and foundation must be minor concrete except the cementitious material content of the concrete must be at least lbcu yd .
Hand mixing of the concrete is allowed .
.B Irrigation Controllers .Ba General The irrigation controllers must .
Be a smart controller from a single manufacturer. . Be fully automatic and capable of operating a complete day or longer irrigation program. . Have a switch or button on the face of the irrigation control panel showing that the irrigation controller can be turned on or off and provide for automatic or manual operation .
Manual operation must allow cycle start at the desired station and allow for the minimum activation of a single station or have the option to operate multiple stations in sequential or simultaneous operation modes. . Have nonvolatile memory. . Have a watering time display on the face of the control panel. . Have a panel and circuit board connected to the low voltage control and neutral conductors by means of a plug and receptacle connectors located within the cabinet enclosure. . Have a variable or incremental timing adjustment ranging from to minutes per station. . Be capable of operating at least program schedules. . Be capable of having at least start times per program schedule. . Have an output that can energize a pump start circuit or a remote control master valve. . Be protected by fuses and circuit breakers . .
Display a program and station affected by a sensory alert without changing other watering schedules not affected by the alert. . Be capable of global manual and automatic seasonal adjustments to all valves in any given program . .
Automatically change watering schedule based on evapotranspiration data provided by a local weather station or have an internal programmed default of historical evapotranspiration data for a given region. . Support a flow sensor and a rain sensor or access to a weather station and have automatic shutoff capability. . Be capable of communicating with the remote access device .
If the irrigation controller is installed in an enclosure cabinet the cabinet must be stainless steel and must comply with section .B .
Irrigation controllers not installed in enclosure cabinets must be weatherproof constructed of fiberglass or metal and have a door lock with keys provided .
Remote irrigation systems must comply with the specifications for irrigation controllers and be accessible only through a secured and encrypted server that is password and firewallprotected by the Department or through a firewallsecured remote server that is independent from any Department servers .
The Department will set up and manage the network communication .
.Bb Battery Powered Irrigation Controllers Reserved .Bc Solar Powered Irrigation Controllers Reserved .Bd Twowire Irrigation Controllers Reserved .B Irrigation Controller Enclosure Cabinets The irrigation controller enclosure cabinet must comply with section and .
Be minimum gauge Type stainless steel . .
Include a mounting panel .
Fabricate mounting panels using any of the following materials .. inch exterior AC grade veneer plywood .
Paint panels with application of an exterior latex based wood primer and applications of an exterior vinyl acrylic enamel white in color .
Paint SECTION LANDSCAPE panels on all sides and edges before installation of the panels in the cabinets and the equipment on the panels .
.. inchthick aluminum sheets .
.. gauge coldrolled steel sheets .
.. .inch stainless steel metal sheets . .
Provide cross ventilation roof ventilation or a combination of both .
Ventilation must not compromise the weather resistance properties of the cabinet and must be fabricated by the cabinet manufacturer . .
Include protection against lightning damage. . Have an area inside the cabinet doors for storage of the asbuilt schematic wiring diagram and irrigation plans. . Have padlock clasp or latch and lock mechanism .
.B Rain Sensors Rain sensor units must be a solidstate automatic shutoff type and compatible with the irrigation controller .
The rain sensor unit must automatically interrupt the master remote control valves if approximately inch of rain has fallen .
The irrigation controller must automatically be enabled again when the accumulated rainfall evaporates from the rain sensor unit collection cup .
Rain sensor units must be one of the following .
Rated from to Vac .
Wireless and FCC compliant .C Construction Finish the exposed top surface of concrete pad with a medium broom finish applied parallel to the long dimension .
Install electrical components for automatic irrigation systems under section .
Install irrigation controllers under the manufacturers instructions .
If or more irrigation controllers operate the same remote master control valve install an isolation relay under the controller manufacturers instructions .
Where direct burial conductors are to be connected to the terminal strip connect the conductors with the openendcrimpon wire terminals .
Exposed wire must not extend beyond the crimp of the terminal and the wires must be parallel on the terminal strip .
Install rain sensor units for irrigation controllers on the irrigation controller enclosure cabinets .
Provide protection against lightning damage .
.D Payment Payment for volt or higher electrical service is not included in the payment for any type of irrigation controller. . IRRIGATION CONDUIT .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing irrigation conduit .
Before performing work on irrigation systems locate existing irrigation conduits shown to be incorporated into the new work .
Before removing or disturbing existing pavement markers that show the location of the existing irrigation conduit mark the location of the existing conduit on the pavement .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved SECTION LANDSCAPE .A Quality Assurance Demonstrate that the irrigation conduits are free from obstructions after placement of base and surfacing .
Before and after extending the irrigation supply line in an irrigation conduit pressure test the supply line under section .Ab .
After conductors are installed in an irrigation conduit test the conductors under section .A .
Assign a technical representative to direct and control the directional bore activities .
The representative must be present during directional bore activities .
Unless otherwise authorized perform directional bore activities in the presence of the Engineer .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B ABS Composite Pipe Conduit ABS composite pipe and couplings must comply with ASTM D. Couplings must be solvent cement type .
.B Corrugated HDPE Pipe Conduit Corrugated HDPE pipe must comply with ASTM F and ASTM F or be Type S complying with AASHTO M and AASHTO M. Couplings and fittings must be as recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
.B Corrugated Steel Pipe Conduit Corrugated pipe conduit must comply with section .
The nominal thickness of metal sheets for pipe must be .
inch for corrugated steel pipe and .
inch for corrugated aluminum pipe .
Coupling bands and hardware must comply with section .
.B PVC Pipe Conduit PVC pipe conduit must be schedule complying with ASTM D. Fittings must be schedule .
.B Welded Steel Pipe Conduit Welded steel pipe must comply with ASTM A .
Pipe must be black and have either welded or threaded joints .
The wall thickness for the various sizes of welded steel pipe must have the thickness shown in the following table Nominal pipe size inches Minimum wall thickness inch . . . . . . .C Construction .C General If existing irrigation conduits are to be incorporated into new work excavate exploratory holes for locating existing conduits at the locations indicated by existing markers or as directed .
Excavate and backfill exploratory holes to a maximum size of feet in width feet in depth and feet on each side of the marker or directed location parallel to the roadway .
If the conduit is not found and if ordered increase the size of the exploratory holes beyond the dimensions specified .
The additional excavation and backfill is change order work .
SECTION LANDSCAPE If extending an existing conduit remove the existing conductors from the conduit .
Use a coupling band if the new conduit matches the existing conduit diameter otherwise overlap the conduit at least inches .
After extending the existing conduits install conductors that match the color and size of the existing conductors without splices .
Splice conductors in adjacent pull boxes .
If installing a control and neutral conductor and electrical conduit through the irrigation conduit install a no .
pull box at each end .
Remove any debris found in the conduit before performing other work .
Removing debris located more than feet from the ends of the conduits is change order work .
Extend conduit feet beyond all paving .
Cap the ends of unused conduit .
Type A pavement markers and adhesive must comply with section .
.C Welded Steel Pipe Conduit .Ca General Install welded steel pipe by directional boring or jack and drill .
Install top of conduits from .
to inches below the finished surface in sidewalk areas .
to inches below the finished grade in other paved areas .Cb Directional Boring Notify the Engineer at least business days before starting directional bore activities .
The diameter of the boring tool for directional boring must be only as large as necessary to install the conduit .
Mineral slurry or wetting solution may be used to lubricate the boring tool and to stabilize the soil surrounding the boring path .
The mineral slurry or wetting solution must be water based .
The directional bore equipment must have directional control of the boring tool and have an electronic boring tool location detection system .
During operation the directional bore equipment must be able to determine the location of the tool both horizontally and vertically .
.Cc Jack and Drill Notify the Engineer at least business days before starting jack and drill activities .
Jacking or drilling pits must be no closer than feet from the pavement edge whenever possible .
If authorized small holes may be cut in the pavement to locate or remove obstructions .
Do not use excessive water that will soften the subgrade or undermine the pavement .
.C Schedule PVC Pipe Conduit Where schedule PVC pipe conduit inches or less in outside diameter is installed under surfacing you may install by directional boring under section .Cb .
For conduit inches or less in diameter the top of the conduit must be a minimum of inches below surfacing .
Extend schedule PVC pipe conduit inches beyond surfacing .
Cap ends of conduit until used .
.D Payment Not Used SECTION LANDSCAPE .
IRRIGATION SUPPLY LINE .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing irrigation supply line .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for polyethylene pipe and plastic pipe supply line .
.A Quality Assurance Solvent cement must comply with local air quality management district provisions .
.B Materials .B General Concrete for thrust blocks must be produced from commercialquality aggregates .
The concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
.B Copper Pipe Supply Line Copper pipe must be Type K rigid pipe complying with ASTM B. Fittings must be wrought copper or cast bronze either soldered or threaded .
Solder must be percent tin and percent antimony .
.B Galvanized Steel Pipe Supply Line Galvanized steel pipe supply line and couplings must be standard weight complying with ASTM A except that the zinc coating must not be less than percent of the specified quantity .
Except for couplings the fittings must be galvanized malleable iron banded and threaded and comply with ANSI B .
Class .
Joint compound must be nonhardening and noncorrosive .
Do not use pipe thread sealant tape .
.B Drip Irrigation Tubing Drip irrigation tubing must be virgin polyethylene plastic complying with ASTM D. The drip irrigation tubing must be distribution tubing with preinstalled inline emitters .
If preinstalled inline drip irrigation tubing is not shown you may install emitters that match the distribution specifications shown .
The emitters must be barbed or threadedtype outlet devices with dual silicone diaphragms .
When tested under ASTM D the wall thickness of polyethylene tubing must have the thickness shown in the following table Nominal pipe size inch Minimum wall thickness inch Maximum wall thickness inch . . . . . .
The polyethylene tubing fittings must be leakfree compression type and have female sockets with an internal barb to provide a positive pipetofitting connection that will not separate at the designed pressure .
.B Plastic Pipe Supply Line Plastic pipe supply line must be PVC pipe that is NSF approved .
Schedule plastic pipe supply line must comply with ASTM D. SECTION LANDSCAPE Class plastic pipe supply line must comply with ASTM D. PVC gasketed bell joints must comply with ASTM D ASTM D ASTM D and ASTM F. For solventcemented type joints the primer and solvent cement must be made by the same manufacturer .
The primer color must contrast with the color of the pipe and fittings .
Solventcemented fittings for schedule plastic pipe supply line must be injection molded PVC schedule and comply with ASTM D. Solventcemented fittings for class plastic pipe supply line must be injection molded PVC schedule and comply with ASTM D and ASTM D. Fittings for a supply line placed in an irrigation conduit must be schedule .
Fittings for a plastic pipe supply line larger than inches must be ductile iron complying with section .Cb .
If UVresistant plastic pipe supply line is required the pipe must be homogeneous a uniform color and manufactured of .
At least percent vinyl chloride resin with UV stabilizers .
NonPVC resin modifiers and coloring ingredients .
Coloring ingredients with UV stabilizers .C Construction .C General Cut pipe straight and true .
After cutting ream out the ends to the full inside diameter of the pipe .
Prevent foreign material from entering the irrigation system during installation .
Immediately before assembling clean all pipes valves and fittings .
Flush lines before attaching sprinklers emitters and other terminal fittings .
Reuse water from waterline flushing for landscape irrigation if practicable .
Pipe supply lines installed between the water meter and backflow preventer assembly must be installed at least inches below finished grade measured to the top of the pipe .
Where a connection is made to existing supply lines belled and gasketed fittings or compression fittings may be used .
Install a thrust block at each change in direction on the main supply line terminus run and at other locations shown .
Where supply lines cross paved ditches more than feet deep at their flow line install galvanized steel pipe for the entire span of the ditch .
.C Galvanized Steel Pipe Supply Line Coat male pipe threads on galvanized steel under the manufacturers instructions .
.C Drip Irrigation Tubing Install drip irrigation tubing on grade and under manufacturers instructions .
If preinstalled inline drip irrigation tubing is not shown install emitters under manufacturers instructions .
Install a flush valve and an airrelief valve if recommended by the drip valve assembly manufacturer .
.C Plastic Pipe Supply Line For PVC pipe inches in diameter or smaller cut the pipe with PVC cutters .
For solventcemented type joints apply primer and solventcement separately under the manufacturers instructions .
Wrap the male portion of each threaded plastic pipe fitting with at least layers of pipe thread sealant tape .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Install plastic pipe supply line mains with solventcemented type joints not less than inches below finished grade measured to the top of the pipe .
Install plastic pipe supply line laterals with solventcemented type joints not less than inches below finished grade measured to the top of the pipe .
.D Payment The payment quantity for any type of supply line pipe or drip irrigation tubing is the length measured along the slope. . SPRINKLER ASSEMBLIES .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing sprinkler assemblies .
.B Materials .B General Where shown you must install a flow shutoff device under the manufacturers instructions unless equipment with a preinstalled flow shutoff device is used .
Risers for sprinkler assemblies must be UV resistant schedule PVC or PVC pipe and comply with ASTM D. Flexible hose for sprinkler assemblies must be leakfree nonrigid and comply with ASTM D cell Type .
The hose must comply with ASTM D and have the thickness shown in the following table Nominal hose diameter inch Minimum wall thickness inch .
. . Solvent cement and fittings for flexible hose must comply with section .B .
.B PopUp Sprinkler Assemblies Each popup sprinkler assembly must include a body nozzle swing joint pressure compensation device check valve sprinkler protector and fittings .
.B Riser Sprinkler Assemblies Each riser sprinkler assembly must include a riser or flexible hose threaded nipple swing joint check valve and nozzle .
Each riser must be UV resistant schedule PVC or PVC pipe and comply with ASTM D. .B Tree Well Sprinkler Assemblies Each tree well sprinkler assembly must include a body riser swing joint perforated drainpipe and drain grate .
The perforated drainpipe must be commercialgrade rigid PVC pipe with holes spaced not more than inches on center on side of the pipe .
The drain grate must be a commerciallyavailable piece injectionmolded grate manufactured from structural foam polyolefins with UV light inhibitors .
Drain grate must be black .
Gravel for filling the drainpipe must be graded such that percent passes the inch sieve and percent is retained on the inch sieve .
Gravel must be clean washed dry and free from clay or organic material .
.C Construction Install popup and riser sprinkler assembly SECTION LANDSCAPE .
From to feet from curbs dikes and sidewalks .
At least feet from paved shoulders .
At least feet from fences and walls If sprinkler assembly can not be installed within these limits the location will be determined by the Engineer .
Set sprinkler assembly riser on slopes perpendicular to the plane of the slope .
.D Payment Not Used .
VALVES .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing valves .
.B Materials .B General Not Used .B Ball Valves Each ball valve must be a piece brass or bronze body with a minimum nonshock working pressure of psi .
The seats and Oring seals must be PTFE .
.B Check Valves Each check valve must .
Be schedule PVC and factory set to psi for adjustable spring check valve .
Be Class PVC for swing check valves on nonpressurized plastic irrigation supply line .B Drip Valve Assemblies Each drip valve assembly must include .
Remote control valve .
Wye filter with .. Filter housing that Can withstand a working pressure of psi Is manufactured of reinforced polypropylene plastic .. Reusable stainless steel filter cartridge with a mesh size filtration .
Ball valve complying with section .B .
Schedule PVC pipes and fittings .
Pressure regulator .B Garden Valve Assemblies Each garden valve assembly must have .
Garden valve .
Location marker .B Gate Valves Each gate valve must be .
Flanged or threaded type .
Iron or bronze body .
Bronze trimmed with one of the following ..
Female thread rising stem .. Nonrising stem .
Able to withstand a working pressure of psi SECTION LANDSCAPE Gate valves smaller than inches must have a cross handle .
Gate valves inches or larger must be flanged type with a square nut .
Gate valves attached to the outlets of a wye strainer must have PTFE seating rings on the discharge side of the gate valves .
Valve wedges must be driven obliquely by cam action into the seating rings .
.B Pressure Regulating Valves Each pressure regulating valve must be .
Flanged or threaded type .
Brass bronze cast iron or plastic body .
Spring diaphragm type .
Pilot controlled Pressure regulating valve must have no internal filter screens .
.B Pressure Relief Valves Each pressure relief valve must have .
Brass or bronze body .
Stainless steel springs .
Bronze nickel chrome seats .
Composition seat discs .
Female bottom inlets .
Female side outlets .B Quick Coupling Valves Each quick coupling valve must be inch double slotted with a selfclosing cap inch brass key and inch brass hose swivel .
Except for the cap quick coupling valve must be brass or bronze construction .
.B Remote Control Valves .Ba General Each remote control valve must .
Be normally closed type. . Be glassfilled nylon brass or bronze. . Be completely serviceable from the top without removing the valve body from the system. . Be equipped with a device that regulates and adjusts the flow of water and be provided with a manual shutoff .
The manual shutoff for valves larger than inch must be operated by a cross handle. . Have solenoids compatible with the irrigation controller. . Have a manual bleed device. . Be capable of withstanding a pressure of psi. . Have replaceable compression discs or diaphragms. . Have threaded fittings for inlets and outlets. . Have DC latching solenoids if used with solar or battery controllers .
Solenoids must operate on .
V. . Be bottom angled or straight inlet configuration .
.Bb Remote Control Valves with Flow Sensor Reserved .Bc Remote Control Valves with Pressure Regulator Each remote control valve with pressure regulator must be factory assembled as unit .
.C Construction .C General All valves must be installed in a valve box with a cover except .
Check valves SECTION LANDSCAPE .
Garden valves .
Pressure regulating valves installed on backflow preventers .C Control Valves Install control valves .
From to feet from curbs dikes and sidewalks .
At least feet from paved shoulders .
At least feet from fences walls or both If a control valve can not be installed within these limits the location will be determined by the Engineer .
.C Check Valves Install springaction check valves as necessary to prevent low head drainage .
.C Garden Valve Assemblies Install a location marker from to inches from the back of each garden valve assembly .
.C Gate Valves Furnish long shank keys before Contract acceptance .
.C Pressure Regulating Valves Install pressure regulating valves with threaded connections and a union on the inlet side of the valves .
.C Quick Coupling Valves Furnish loose quick coupling brass keys and brass hose swivels before Contract acceptance .
.D Payment Not Used .
WYE STRAINER ASSEMBLIES .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing wye strainer assemblies .B Materials Each wye strainer assembly must include .
Wye strainer .
Valve box and cover .C Construction Install wye strainer assembly on the upstream side of the remote control valves .
Install garden valve such that the discharge sprays out of the valve box when the system is flushed .
.D Payment Not Used .
RESERVED .
SUPPLY LINE ON STRUCTURES .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section A includes general specifications for installing water supply lines through bridges and on the exterior of concrete structures .
.Ab Definitions Reserved SECTION LANDSCAPE .Ac Submittals Submit a work plan for the temporary casing support at the abutments as an informational submittal .
.Ad Quality Assurance .Adi General Before installing seismic expansion assemblies or expansion assemblies the Engineer must authorize the extension setting .
.Adii Regulatory Requirements Piping materials must bear the label stamp or other markings of the specified standards .
.Adiii Quality Control Test water supply lines before .
Backfilling .
Starting work on box girder cell decks .
Otherwise covering the water supply lines Furnish pipe anchorages to resist thrust forces occurring during testing .
Test the water supply lines as unit .
The limits of the unit must be feet beyond the casing at each end of the bridge .
Cap each end of the water supply lines before testing .
Caps must be rated for the test pressure .
Test water supply lines under section .Ab except that the testing period must be hours with no pressure drop .
Place water supply lines inches and larger under a pressure of at least psi during testing .
Air relief valves must not be subjected to pressure testing .
If water supply lines fail testing retest the lines after repair .
.A Materials .Aa General Protect stored piping from moisture and dirt .
Elevate piping above grade .
Support piping to prevent sagging and bending .
Protect flanges fittings and assemblies from moisture and dirt .
.Ab Air Release Valve Assemblies Each air release valve assembly must include an air release valve ball valve tank vent nipples and pipe saddle .
Air release valves must have a cast iron body with stainless steel trim and float inch NPT inlet inch NPT outlet and inch orifice .
Ball valves must have a piece bronze body with chrome plated or brass ball and inch fullsize port and be rated for at least psi .
Tank vents must have a inch NPT inlet and downwardfacing double openings with screened covers .
Nipples must be schedule galvanized steel pipe .
Pipe saddle must be rated for at least psi and be compatible with the water supply line .
Pipe saddle for water supply lines smaller than inches must be a single strap pipe saddle .
Pipe saddle for water supply lines inches and larger must be a double strap pipe saddle .
You may use a tee fitting for galvanized steel water supply lines .
.Ac Casings Casings must be welded steel pipe casing and comply with section .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .Ad Pipe Wrap Tape Pipe wrap tape must be pressure sensitive tape made from PVC or polyethylene .
Pipe wrap tape must be at least mils thick and not wider than inches .
.Ae Pipe Hangers Pipe hangers must comply with section .C .
The pipe hanger must be rated for the water supply line .
If casings are shown include the weight of the casing .
.Af Epoxy Adhesives Epoxy used for anchoring concrete pipe supports must comply with section .D .
.Ag Concrete Pipe Supports Concrete pipe supports must comply with section .D .
.Ah Pipe Clamps and Anchors Metal clamps must be commercialquality steel and comply with section .
Anchors must comply with the specifications for concrete anchorage devices in section .C .
.Ai Pull Boxes Each pull box and cover must comply with section .B .
.A Construction .Aa General Support water supply lines as described .
Where water supply lines penetrate bridge superstructure concrete either form or install pipe sleeves at least pipe sizes larger than the pipe .
.Ab Preparation Clean the interior of the pipe before installation .
Cap or plug openings as pipe is installed to prevent the entrance of foreign material .
Leave caps or plugs in place until the adjacent pipe section is installed .
.Ac Installation .Aci General Reserved .Acii Casings Install each casing under section .. Seal casing end with inches of polyurethane foam at dirt stop or pipe end seal .
.Aciii Wrapping Water Supply Line Wrap damaged supply line coatings with pipe wrap tape .
Wrap field joints and fittings that are in contact with the earth .
Wrapping must be clean .
Prime the area as recommended by the tape manufacturer .
Tightly wrap the tape with uniform overlap free from wrinkles and voids and provide not less than a mil thickness .
The tape must conform to the joint or fitting contours .
Extend the tape at least inches over adjacent pipe .
.Aciv Pipe Clamps and Anchors Install water supply lines on the exterior surfaces of bridges or other concrete structures with metal clamps and anchors .
Drill holes for anchors to the manufacturers recommended depth .
Drilling tools must be authorized .
Do not drill holes closer than inches from the edge of a concrete structure .
Relocate holes if reinforcing steel is encountered .
Fill abandoned holes with mortar .
Mortar must comply with section .F .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Where water supply lines are mounted vertically for more than feet install clamps and anchors within inches of the elbows .
Where water supply lines are mounted vertically for more than feet install additional clamps and anchors at foot maximum centers .
.Ad Sequences of Operation If the bridge superstructure is to be prestressed do not place mortar around casings in abutments and hinges until bridge superstructure prestressing has been completed .
.A Payment The payment quantity for a supply line on structures is the length measured from end to end along the centerline .
The Department does not pay for failed tests .
.B Supply Line on Structures Less than Inches .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for installing water supply lines smaller than inches on structures .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Product data for materials includes catalog cuts performance data and installation instructions .
Submit product data for .
Water supply line .
Expansion assemblies .
Casing insulators .
Pipe end seals .
Pipe anchorages .
Air release valve assemblies .
Casings .
Pipe hangers .
Epoxy adhesives .
Concrete pipe supports .Bd Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .Ba General Reserved .Bb Water Supply Line Water supply line must comply with section .. .Bc Expansion Assemblies Each expansion assembly must consist of a hose with ends insulated flange connections and elbows .
Each expansion assembly must have the same nominal inside diameter as the water supply line .
Working pressure must be at least psi .
Hose must be medium or heavy weight crush and kink resistant and rated for at least psi .
Cover must be flexible oilresistant rubber or synthetic and reinforced with at least ply synthetic yarn or steel wire .
The inner tube must comply with FDA and USDA standards for potable water .
Hose ends must be SECTION LANDSCAPE stainless steel flanged connections with stainless steel crimped bands or swaged end connectors .
Do not use barbed ends with band clamps .
Elbows must be degree standardweight galvanized steel fittings .
.Bd Casing Insulators Each casing insulator must be .
piece highdensity injectionmolded polyethylene and must have a nonconductive inner liner with cadmiumplated nuts and bolts. . Factoryconstructed to ensure the water supply line is centered in the casing .
The insulator must not allow any contact between the pipe and casing and have at least runners seated on the bottom of the casing. . Sized for the casing and water supply line shown .
.Be Pipe Anchorages Each pipe anchorage must consist of an Ibeam Ubolts anchors and double nuts .
Use concrete anchorage devices for anchors on existing bridges .
Use Lanchor bolts for anchors on new bridges .
Fabricate the Ibeam from inch steel plate .
Steel plate Ubolts Lanchors and nuts must comply with section .
Concrete anchorage devices must comply with section .C .
.Bf Pipe End Seals Each pipe end seal must consist of a pipe end seal stainless steel bands and polyurethane foam .
Pipe end seal must be factoryconstructed from seamless neoprene and sized for the casing and water supply line shown .
Neoprene must be at least inch thick .
Stainless steel bands must be crimped .
Polyurethane foam must be expanding foam spray that is water resistant and moisture cured .
.B Construction Locate pipe anchorage halfway between expansion assemblies .
Pipe end seal must be pulled onto the casing during pipe installation .
Do not use wraparound type end seals .
.B Payment Not Used .C Supply Line on Structures Inches and Larger .C General .Ca Summary Section .C includes specifications for installing inch and larger water supply lines on structures .
.Cb Definitions Reserved .Cc Submittals Product data for materials includes catalog cuts performance data and installation instructions .
Submit product data for .
Water supply line .
Expansion assemblies .
Flange insulating gaskets .
Casing insulators .
Seismic expansion assemblies .
Lateral restraint assemblies .
Air release valve assemblies SECTION LANDSCAPE .
Casings .
Pipe hangers .
Epoxy adhesives .
Concrete pipe supports Submit the maximum range and preset dimension for each expansion assembly or seismic expansion assembly as an informational submittal .
Submit at least sets of product data to OSD Documents Unit .
Each set must be bound together and include an index stating equipment names manufacturers and model numbers .
Two sets will be returned .
Notify the Engineer of the submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
.Cd Quality Assurance Reserved .C Materials .Ca General Reserved .Cb Water Supply Line Water supply lines must consist of ductile iron pipe and fittings .
Pipe must comply with ANSIAWWA CA .
Class .
Fittings must comply with ANSIAWWA CA .
and be rated for a working pressure of psi .
Ductile iron pipe connections to expansion assemblies must be a flanged joint complying with ANSIAWWA CA .. Flange gaskets must be rated for a working pressure of psi .
Fasteners must comply with section except that stainless steel fasteners must not be used .
All other ductile iron pipe and fitting joints must be pushon restrained type complying with ANSIAWWA CA .. Pushon restrained type joints may use proprietary dimensions and restrained joint locking systems .
Ductile iron pipe and fittings must have an asphaltic coating complying with ANSIAWWA CA .
and a cement mortar lining complying with ANSIAWWA CA .. .Cc Expansion Assemblies Each expansion assembly must be a sleeve type expansion joint .
The expansion assembly must have .
Ductile iron body complying with ANSIAWWA CA. . Flanged ends complying with ANSIAWWA CA. . Fusionbonded epoxy internal lining complying with ANSIAWWA C with a minimum thickness of mils .
Internal expansionsleeve limitingstop collars and be pressure balanced .
Working pressure of at least psi for sizes inches and smaller and psi for sizes larger than inches .
NSF certification The expansion assembly must be factory set at the extension capacity .
.Cd Flange Insulating Gaskets Each flange insulating gasket must consist of a dielectric flange gasket insulating washers and sleeves and commercialquality steel bolts and nuts .
Dielectric flange gasket must have a dielectric strength of at least VPM .
.Ce Casing Insulators Each casing insulator must be .
piece inch gauge epoxycoated or galvanized steel band .
The band must be four inchwide glassreinforced polyester or polyethylene runners with cadmiumplated nuts and bolts . .
Coated with at least mils of heatfused PVC to provide a nonconductive inner liner .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .
Factory constructed to ensure that the water supply line is centered in the casing .
Insulators must not allow any pipe to casing contact and have at least runners seated on the bottom of the casing. . Sized for the casing and water supply line shown .
.Cf Dirt Stops Dirt stops must consist of a redwood cover with polyurethane foam .
Redwood cover must be construction heart grade redwood complying with section .B .
Construct cover to fit snugly around the water supply line .
The cover must be inches taller and inches wider than the casing .
Polyurethane foam must be expanding foam spray that is water resistant and moisture cured .
.Cg Seismic Expansion Assemblies Each seismic expansion assembly must be a sleevetype expansion joint with integral ball joints at each end .
Each seismic expansion assembly must have .
Ability to withstand at least a degree angular deflection at each end and a maximum movement in all planes at the same time .
Ductile iron body complying with ANSIAWWA CA. . Flanged ends complying with ANSIAWWA CA. . Fusionbonded epoxy internal lining complying with ANSIAWWA C with a minimum thickness of mils .
Internal expansionsleeve limitingstop collars and be pressure balanced .
Ball joints contained in flanged retainers with seal gaskets .
Working pressure of at least psi for sizes inches and smaller and psi for sizes larger than inches .
NSF certification The seismic expansion assembly must be factory set at the extension capacity .
.Ch Lateral Restraint Assemblies Each lateral restraint assembly must be .
Constructed from commercialquality steel components complying with section .
Adjustable .
Able to resist a horizontal force of percent of the contributory dead load .C Construction Each ductile iron pipe must be connected and fully extended pulled out after joint assembly before the adjacent pipe section is added .
Install flange insulating gaskets on the outside flange of seismic expansion assemblies and expansion assemblies .
.C Payment Not Used .
TEMPORARY IRRIGATION SYSTEMS Reserved ..
RESERVED PLANTING .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for performing planting work .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .A Definitions average plant density Number of living plants per square yard determined from a count of sample areas selected by the Engineer representing to percent of the total planted area .
.A Submittals .Aa General Submit nursery invoices showing sizes quantities and botanical names of plants including genus species and variety .
Include lot numbers for plants grown from the same seed lot or cutting source .
If a root stimulant is required submit a copy of the root stimulant manufacturers product sheet and instructions for the application of the root stimulant .
If cuttings are to be taken from outside the rightofway submit proof of permits and payment of associated fees .
Notify the Engineer of the location at least days before taking cuttings .
.Ab Vendor Statements At least days before planting the plants submit a statement from the vendor that the order for the plants required including sample plants used for inspection has been received and accepted by the vendor .
The statement from the vendor must include the plant names sizes quantities and anticipated delivery date .
.Ac Certificates of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance for sod and soil amendment .
.A Quality Assurance Plants must comply with federal and State laws requiring inspection for diseases and infestations .
Inspection certificates required by law must accompany each shipment of plants .
The Engineer inspects the roots of containergrown sample plants by removing earth from the root ball of not less than plants nor more than percent of the total number of plants of each species or variety .
If containergrown plants are purchased from several sources the Engineer inspects the roots of not less than of each sample plant species or variety from each source .
The root ball of container grown plants must not show evidence of having been restricted or being underdevelvoped or deformed .
If the Engineer finds noncompliant plants the entire lot represented by the noncompliant sample plants is rejected .
Cuttings with mature or brown stems and cuttings that have been trimmed will be rejected .
.B Materials .B General Notify the Engineer at least days before the plants are shipped to the job site .
.B Plants .Ba General Plants must be true to the type or name shown .
Plants must be individually tagged or tagged in groups identifying the plants by species or variety .
Tagging is not required for cuttings .
Plants must be healthy wellformed free from insect pests and disease and grown in nurseries inspected by the Department of Food and Agriculture .
Plants must not be rootbound .
The plants must be the size and type shownin the following table SECTION LANDSCAPE Plant group designation Description Container size cu in A No .
container B No .
container C Balled and burlapped E Bulb F In flats H Cutting I Pot K inch box M Linera O Acorn P Plugsa b S Seedlingc U No .
container aDo not use containers made of biodegradable material .
bGrown in individual container cells .
cBare root .
Trucks used for transporting plants must be equipped with covers to protect plants from windburn and sunburn .
Handle and pack plants using authorized methods appropriate for the species or variety .
.Bb Cuttings .Bbi General Take cuttings at random from healthy vigorous plants .
Make cuts with sharp clean tools .
Do not take more than percent of an individual plant and not more than percent of the plants in an area .
Keep cuttings covered and wet until planted .
Do not allow cuttings to dry or wither .
Plant cuttings within days of being cut .
.Bbii Carpobrotus and Delosperma Cuttings You may take cuttings for new Carpobrotus and Delosperma groundcover from the existing highway planting areas but these areas may not provide enough material to complete the work .
Contact the local districts encroachment permit office to obtain a permit to harvest cuttings identify acceptable cutting harvest areas and determine acceptable quantities to take .
Take tip cuttings from healthy vigorous Carpobrotus and Delosperma plants that are free of pests and disease .
Carpobrotus cuttings must be inches or more in length and not have roots .
Delosperma cuttings must be inches or more in length and not have roots .
.Bbiii Willow Cuttings Take willow cuttings from areas shown or designated by the Engineer .
Willow cuttings must be .
Reasonably straight .
From to inches in length .
From to inch in diameter at the base of the cutting Cut the top of each willow cutting square above a leaf bud .
Cut the base below a leaf bud at approximately a degree angle .
Trim off leaves and branches flush with the stem of the cutting .
.Bbiv Cottonwood Cuttings Cottonwood cuttings must comply with the specifications for willow cuttings in section .Bbiii .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .Bbv.Bbviii Reserved .Bc Sod Sod must .
Be grown to comply with the Food Agri Code .
Be free from weeds and undesirable types of grasses and clovers .
Be fieldgrown on soil containing less than percent silt and clay .
Have less than inchthick thatch .
Be from to months old .
Be machine cut to a uniform soil thickness of inch not including top growth and thatch Protect sod with tarps or other protective covers during delivery .
Do not allow sod to dry out during delivery or before placement .
.B Soil Amendments Soil amendment must comply with the provisions in the Food Agri Code .
Soil amendment must be one or a combination of the following .
Sphagnum peat moss .
Nitrolized fir bark .
Vermiculite .
Perlite .B Fertilizers .Ba General Deliver fertilizer in labeled containers showing weight chemical analysis and manufacturers name .
Fertilizer must comply with the provisions of the Food Agri Code .
.Bb Slowrelease Fertilizers Slowrelease fertilizer must be a pelleted or granular form with a nutrient release over an to month period and be within the chemical analysis ranges shown in the following table Ingredient Range Nitrogen N percent Phosphoric acid P percent Water soluble potash K percent .Bc Packet Fertilizers Packet fertilizer must be a biodegradable packet with a nutrient release over a month period .
Each packet must have a weight of grams and must comply with the chemical analysis requirements shown in the following table Ingredient Requirement Nitrogen N percent Phosphoric acid P percent Water soluble potash K percent .Bd Organic Fertilizers Organic fertilizer must be pelleted or granular with a cumulative nitrogen release rate at degrees F of no more than percent for the first days and percent at days .
Organic fertilizer must be within the chemical analysis ranges shown in the following table SECTION LANDSCAPE Ingredient Range Nitrogen N percent Phosphoric acid P percent Water soluble potash K percent .B Root Stimulants Root stimulant must be a commercialquality product .
.B Plaster Sand Backfill material for the palm tree planting holes must be percent commercialquality washed plaster sand .
.B Root Barrier Root barrier must be an injectionmolded or extruded modular panel made of highdensity polypropylene or polyethylene plastic .
Each panel must .
Be at least inch .
Have at least molded rootdeflecting vertical ribs from .
to .
inch wide and to inches apart .
Have a locking strip or an integral malefemale sliding lock designed to resist slippage between panels .
Be at least feet wide and feet deep .B Root Protectors Each root protector must be .
Fabricated from inch hexagonal pattern gauge mesh wire .
Closed bottom design with a height and diameter that provides a minimum of inches of clearance between the root ball and the sides and bottom of the wire cylinder The wire edge at the top of the cylinder must be the manufactured finished edge uncut and free of sharp points .
.B Foliage Protectors Each foliage protector must be .
Fabricated from inch hexagonal pattern gauge mesh wire .
Approximately feet high and feet in diameter The wire edge at the top of the cylinder must be the manufactured finished edge .
Other wire edges that are cut must be free of sharp points .
Support stakes must be one of the following .
inch reinforcing steel bar a minimum of feet long with an orange or red plastic safety cap that fits snugly onto the top of the reinforcing steel bar. . inch nominal diameter or byinch nominal size wood stakes a minimum of feet long .
Wood stakes must be straight .
The jute mesh cover must comply with section .O .
The material required to hold the jute mesh cover in place must be inchdiameter manila hemp twine .
.B Wood Plant Stakes Each plant stake must be nominal by inches or nominal inches in diameter and long enough to keep the plant in an upright position .
Plant stakes for vines must be nominal by inch inches long .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .B Plant Ties Plant ties must be extruded vinylbased tape inch wide and at least mils thick .
.C Construction .C General Apply a root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions to the plants specified in the special provisions .
Before transporting the plants to the planting area thoroughly wet the root ball .
.C Pruning Prune plants under ANSI A part Pruning published by the Tree Care Industry Association .
Do not use tree seal compounds to cover pruning cuts .
.C Watering Water existing plants to be maintained transplanted trees and new plants as needed to keep the plants in a healthy growing condition .
.C Replacement Plants Plants that show signs of failure to grow at any time or which are so injured or damaged as to render them unsuitable for the purpose intended must be removed replaced and replanted .
Replace unsuitable plants within weeks after the Engineer marks or indicates that the plants must be replaced .
Replacement planting must comply with the original planting specifications sizes and spacing described for the plants being replaced .
Replacement planting for transplanted trees must comply with the work plan and be planted in the same planting hole .
Replacement ground cover plants must be the same species specified for the ground cover being replaced .
Other replacement plants must be the same species as the plants being replaced .
Place orders for replacement plants with the vendor at a time such that the replacement plants are not in a rootbound condition .
The Department does not pay for replacement plants or the planting of replacement plants .
.C Maintain Plants Maintain plants from the time of planting until Contract acceptance .
.D Payment Not Used .
PLANTING WORK .A General Section .
includes specifications for planting plants .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction .C General Do not start planting until authorized .
If an irrigation system is required do not start planting in an area until the functional test has been completed and authorized for the irrigation system serving that area .
.C Preparing Planting Areas The Engineer may designate a location other than that shown in which case the Engineer marks the location by a stake flag or other marker .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Conduct work such that the existing flow line in drainage ditches is maintained .
Material displaced by your activity that interferes with drainage must be removed .
Where a minimum distance to a drainage ditch is shown locate the plant such that the outer edge of its basin wall is at least the minimum distance shown for each plant involved .
Excavate each planting hole by manual or machine method .
The bottom of each planting hole must be flat .
Do not use water to excavate the hole .
Unless a larger planting hole is described the planting hole must be large enough to receive the root ball or the total length and width of roots backfill amendments and fertilizer .
Where rock or other hard material prohibits the hole from being excavated a new hole must be excavated and the abandoned hole backfilled .
.C Planting Plants .Ca General Do not plant plants in soil that is too wet too dry not properly amended as described or in an unsatisfactory condition for planting .
Do not distribute more plants than can be planted and watered on that day .
Water plants immediately after planting .
Apply water until the backfill soil around and below the roots or ball of earth around the roots of each plant is thoroughly saturated .
If watering with a hose use a nozzle water disbursement device or pressure reducing device .
Do not allow the full force of the water from the open end of the hose to fall within the basin around any plant .
Groundcover plants in areas with an irrigation system must be watered by sprinklers .
Several consecutive watering cycles may be necessary to thoroughly saturate the soil .
If root barriers are shown install them between trees and concrete sidewalk or curb .
Install panels flush with finished grade and join with locking strips or integral malefemale sliding locks .
Install barriers with root deflectors facing inward .
If a tree grate is shown install the root barrier panels .
inch above finish grade .
Adjust planting locations such that each tree or shrub is at least feet away from any sprinkler .
Where a tree shrub or vine is to be planted within a groundcover area or cutting planting area plant it before planting groundcover or cuttings .
Where shrubs and groundcovers are shown to be planted in groups the outer rows directly adjacent to the nearest roadway or highway fence must be parallel to the nearest roadway or highway fence .
Stagger shrubs and groundcovers in adjacent rows .
Adjust the alignment of the plants within the outer rows .
The Engineer determines the size and location of sample areas used to calculate average plant density .
Core holes in concrete masonry block wall where needed for vine planting .
Where a vine is to be planted against a wall or fence plant it as close as possible to the wall or fence .
If a vine planted adjacent to a wall is to be staked stake and tie the vine at the time of planting .
A vine planted adjacent to a fence must be tied to the fence immediately after planting .
Protect each tree trunk from injury .
Do not .
Drag a tree .
Use chains to move a tree .
Lay tree on the ground .Cb Trees Shrubs and Vines After preparing holes thoroughly mix soil amendment and granular fertilizer at the rate shown with native soil to be used as backfill material .
Remove containers from plants in a way that the ball of earth surrounding the roots is not broken .
Do not cut plant containers before delivery of the plants to the planting area .
Plant and water plants immediately after removal from their containers .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Place packet fertilizer in the backfill within to inches of the ground surface and approximately inch from the root ball .
If more than packet is required per plant distribute the packets evenly around the root ball .
Apply any root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions .
Ensure roots are not restricted or distorted .
Distribute backfill uniformly throughout the entire depth of the plant hole without clods or lumps .
After the planting holes have been backfilled jet water into the backfill with a pipe or tube inserted into the bottom of the hole until the backfill material is saturated for the full depth .
If the backfill material settles below this level add additional backfill to the required level .
If a plant settles deeper than shown replant it at the required level .
Remove nursery stakes after planting .
Install plant stakes for each plant to be staked immediately after planting .
Ensure the root ball is not damaged .
Tie the plant to the stakes with plant ties tie to each stake .
Each tie must form a figure by crossing the tie between the plant and the stake .
Install ties at the lowest position that will support the plant in an upright position .
Ties must provide trunk flexibility but not allow the trunk to rub against the stakes .
Wrap each end of the tie turns around the stake and securely tie .
Construct a watering basin around each plant .
Install foliage protectors within days after planting .
Install the foliage protector as follows .
Cut the bottom of the wire cylinder to match the slope of the ground .
Do not leave sharp points of wire after cutting .
Sharp points must be bent over or blunted . .
Install support stakes for foliage protectors vertically and embed in the soil on opposite sides of the plant crosswise to the direction of the prevailing wind. . Weave the support stakes through the wire cylinder mesh at inch maximum centers or fasten the wire cylinder to the support stakes at a maximum inches on center . .
Ensure that the wire cylinder is snug against the support stakes but loose enough to be raised for pesticide application or to perform weeding within the plant basin . .
Install jute mesh cover over the foliage protector and secure with twine .
.Cc Groundcover Plants Each groundcover planting area irrigated by a single control valve must be completely planted and watered before planting other groundcover planting areas .
Plant groundcover plants in moist soil and in neat straight rows parallel to the nearest roadway .
Stagger plants in adjacent rows .
Apply fertilizer to groundcover plants and water into the soil immediately after planting .
.Cd Cuttings Liners Plugs and Seedling Plants .Cdi General Apply fertilizer to cuttings liners plugs and seedling plants and water immediately after planting .
Ensure the soil is moist to a minimum depth of inches before planting cuttings .
Apply any root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions .
.Cdii Willow Cuttings Excavate planting holes for willow cuttings perpendicular to the ground line by using a steel bar auger posthole digger or similar tool .
Holes must be large enough to receive the cuttings and a fertilizer packet .
Plant the willow cuttings without damaging the bark .
SECTION LANDSCAPE If rock or other hard material prohibits the excavation of the planting holes excavate new holes and backfill the unused holes .
Plant willow cuttings during the period specified in the special provisions .
Apply root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions .
Plant the base of the cutting from to inches deep with to bud scars exposed above the ground .
If more than bud scars are exposed trim off the excess willow cutting length .
Place fertilizer packet in the backfill of each cutting from to inches below the ground surface and approximately inch from the cutting .
Backfill the plant holes with excavated material after planting .
Distribute the excavated material evenly within the hole without clods lumps or air pockets .
Compact the backfill such that the cutting can not be easily removed from the soil .
Do not damage the cuttings bark .
Dispose of trimmings and unused cuttings .
.Cdiii Cottonwood Cuttings Reserved .Cdiv Carpobrotus and Delosperma Cuttings Plant Carpobrotus cuttings to a depth such that at least nodes are covered with soil .
The basal end of Delosperma cuttings must be at least inches below the surface of the soil and the basal end of Carpobrotus cuttings must be at least inches below the surface of the soil .
Apply root stimulant to Delosperma cuttings before planting .
Do not plant Carpobrotus or Delosperma cuttings in soil that does not contain sufficient moisture at an average depth of inches below the surface .
.Cdv Liner Plants Plant liner plants during the period specified in the special provisions .
If a foliage protector is required install under section .Cb .
.Cdvi Plug Plants Plant plug plants during the period specified in the special provisions .
.Cdvii Seedling Plants Plant seedling plants during the period specified in the special provisions .
.Ce Sod After all other planting is performed grade sod areas to drain and to a smooth and uniform surface .
Fine grade and roll sod areas before placing sod .
Areas adjacent to sidewalks edging and other paved borders and surfaced areas must be inch below the finished surface elevation of the facilities after fine grading rolling and settlement of the soil .
Place sod such that the end of each adjacent strip is staggered a minimum of feet .
Place the edge and end of sod firmly against adjacent sod and against sidewalks edging and other paved borders and surfaced areas .
Lightly roll the entire sodded area to eliminate air pockets and ensure close contact with the soil after placement of the sod .
Water the sodded areas such that the soil is moist to a minimum depth of inches after rolling .
Do not allow the sod to dry out .
If irregular or uneven areas appear in the sodded areas restore to a smooth and even appearance .
Trim sod to a uniform edge at sidewalks edging and other paved borders and surfaced areas .
Trimming must be repeated whenever the edge of sod extends inch or more beyond the edge of the edging sidewalks and other paved borders and surfaced areas .
Remove trimmed sod .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Mow sod when it has reached a height of inches .
Mow sod to a height of .
inches .
.D Payment The payment quantity for soil amendment is the volume measured in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
The payment quantity for slowrelease fertilizer organic fertilizer or iron sulfate lb is the weight determined from the marked weight or sack count .
The payment quantity for plants is measured by either the product of the average plant density and the total planted area or by a count of the living plants in place .
..
RESERVED PLANT ESTABLISHMENT WORK .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for performing plant establishment work .
Plant establishment consists of caring for the plants including .
Controlling plant growth .
Fertilizing .
Controlling rodents insects and weeds .
Replacing damaged plants .
Watering .
Operating irrigation system .
Repairing new irrigation system Working days on which no work is required are credited as plant establishment working days regardless of whether or not you perform plant establishment work .
If any component of the electric automatic irrigation system is operated manually the day will not be credited as a plant establishment working day unless the manual operation is authorized .
Working days on which you fail to adequately perform plant establishment work are not credited as plant establishment working days .
.B Definitions Type plant establishment Plant establishment period with the number of working days specified for plant establishment starting after all work has been completed except for plant establishment work and other bid items specified to be performed until Contract acceptance .
Type plant establishment Plant establishment period with the number of working days specified for plant establishment starting after all planting work has been completed except for plant establishment work and other bid items specified to be performed until Contract acceptance .
The Department will not accept the Contract unless the plant establishment work has been satisfactorily performed for at least the number of working days specified for plant establishment .
If maintenance and protection relief is granted for a portion of the work Type plant establishment period for that portion is the time between completion of all planting work except for plant establishment work and the granting of maintenance and protection relief .
The Department will not grant relief unless the plant establishment work in the completed portion of the work has been satisfactorily performed for at least the number of working days specified for the plant establishment period .
.C Submittals .C General Submit seasonal watering schedules for use during the plant establishment period within days after the start of the plant establishment period .
Remote irrigation control system watering schedule must use the remote irrigation control system software program .
SECTION LANDSCAPE Submit updated watering schedules within business days after any changes have been made to the authorized schedules .
Submit a revised watering schedule for each irrigation controller at least days before completion of the plant establishment period .
.C Notification The Engineer notifies you when the plant establishment period starts and furnishes statements regarding the number of working days credited to the plant establishment period after the notification .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before applying each application of fertilizer .
.D Quality Assurance Provide training by a qualified person on the use and adjustment of the installed irrigation controllers no more than days before completion of the plant establishment period .
Perform a final inspection of the plant establishment work in the presence of the Engineer to days before Contract acceptance. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Fertilizers Fertilizer must comply with section .B. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Dispose of surplus earth accumulated in roadside clearing and planting areas .
Remove the tops of foliage protectors if plants become restricted .
Remove foliage protectors including support stakes within days before the completion of the plant establishment period .
Keep plant basin walls well formed .
Clean new wye strainers and existing wye strainers that are a part of the new irrigation system annually until the completion of the plant establishment period .
The last cleaning must be done within days before the completion of the plant establishment period .
Remove clean and reinstall new filters and existing filters that are a part of the new irrigation system annually until the completion of the plant establishment period .
The last cleaning must be done within days before the completion of the plant establishment period .
.B Plant Growth Control Trim and mow turf areas as specified for sod in section .Ce .
Dispose of trimmed and mowed material .
If irregular or uneven areas appear within turf areas restore to a smooth and even appearance .
Reseed turf seed areas .
Prune plants planted as part of the Contract as authorized .
Remove plant growth that extends within feet of sidewalks curbs dikes shoulders walls or fences .
Remove new and existing ground cover from within the plant basins including basin walls turf areas and planting areas within edging .
Vines adjacent to walls and fences must be kept staked and tied .
Train vines on fences and walls or through cored holes in walls .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .C Fertilizing Apply fertilizer to the plants as described and water into the soil after each application .
Apply fertilizer with a mechanical spreader whenever possible .
.D Weed Control Control weeds under section .C .
.E Plant Staking Replace plant stakes that are inadequate to support plants with larger stakes .
Remove plant stakes when the Engineer determines they are no longer needed .
.F Replacement Plants Replacement plants must comply with section .C .
Replacement of plants up to and including the th plant establishment working day must be with a plant of the same size as originally specified .
Plants of a larger container size than those originally specified for replacement plants may be used during the first working days of the plant establishment period .
Plants replaced after the th plant establishment working day must be the size shown in the following table Plant size Original Plant size Replacement Potlinerplugseedling No .
container No .
container No .
container No .
container No .
container Other replacement plants must be the same size as originally specified .
Replacement ground cover plants must have the spacing shown in the following table Original spacing inches On center spacing of replacement ground cover plants inches Number of completed plant establishment working days End of plant establishment period .G Watering Operate the electric automatic irrigation systems in the automatic mode unless otherwise authorized .
Water plants utilizing the remote irrigation control system software program unless authorized .
Implement the watering schedule at least days before completion of the plant establishment period. . PAYMENT Not Used LANDSCAPE ELEMENTS .
GENERAL .A General Section .
includes general specifications for constructing and installing landscape elements .
Earthwork must comply with section .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
EDGING .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing landscape edging .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Header Board Edging Lumber for header board edging must be one of the following types .
Construction grade cedar .
Pressuretreated Douglas fir .
Construction heart grade redwood complying with section .B Lumber must be .
Rough cut from sound timber. . Straight .
Sweep must not exceed inch in feet. . Free from loose or unsound knots .
Knots must be sound tight well spaced and not to exceed inches in size on any face. . Free of shakes in excess of the thickness of the lumber. . Free of splits longer than the thickness of the lumber. . Free of other defects that would render the lumber unfit structurally for the purpose intended .
.B Metal Edging Metal edging must be commercial quality made of aluminum or steel and have an Lshaped design .
Edging must be at least inches in height .
The thickness must be as recommended by the manufacturer for the use intended .
Edging anchors must be from the same manufacturer as the metal edging .
.B HDPE Edging HDPE edging must be commercial quality and a minimum of inches in height .
The thickness must be as recommended by the manufacturer for commercial installation for the use intended .
Edging anchors must be from the same manufacturer as the HDPE edging .
.B Concrete Edging Concrete for edging must be minor concrete .
.B.B Reserved .C Construction .C General Where edging is used to delineate the limits of inert ground cover or mulch areas install edging before installing inert ground cover or mulch areas .
Saw cut surfaces where asphalt concrete or concrete surfacing must be removed to allow the installation of edging and no joint exists between the surfacing to be removed and the surfacing to SECTION LANDSCAPE remain in place .
The surfacing must be cut in a straight line to a minimum depth of inches with a power driven saw before the surfacing is removed .
Spike or stake spacing must comply with the manufacturers instructions for use and job site conditions .
.C Header Board Edging Each stake must be driven flush with the top edge of the header board edging and the stake top must be beveled away from the header board at a degree angle .
Attach stake to header board with at least two penny hotdipped galvanized nails per stake .
.C Metal and HDPE Edging Spike or stake spacing for metal and HDPE edging must comply with the manufacturers instructions for use and job site conditions .
.C Concrete Edging Construct and finish minor concrete edging under section .
.C.C Reserved .D Payment The payment quantity for edging is the length measured parallel to the ground surface . .
INERT GROUND COVERS AND MULCHES .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section .A includes general specifications for placing inert ground covers and mulches .
.Ab Definitions Reserved .Ac Submittals For filter fabric submit .
Product data including the manufacturers product sheet and installation instructions .
Certificate of compliance at least business days before delivery of the material to the job site .Ad Quality Assurance Reserved .A Materials Soil sterilant must be an oxadiazon granular preemergent .
Filter fabric must be Class A .
Staples for filter fabric must comply with section .R .
.A Construction .Aa General Before performing inert ground cover and mulch work remove plants and weeds to ground level .
.Ab Earthwork Maintain the planned flow lines slope gradients and contours of the job site .
Grade subgrade to a smooth and uniform surface and compact to at least percent relative compaction .
.Ac Treatment of Soil After compaction apply soil sterilant at the maximum label rate .
Do not apply soil sterilant more than inches beyond the inert ground cover or mulch limits .
The soil sterilant application and inert ground cover or mulch placement must be completed within the same work day .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .Ad Filter Fabric Immediately before placing filter fabric the surfaces to receive filter fabric must be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the filter fabric during installation .
Align fabric and place in a wrinklefree manner .
Overlap adjacent rolls of the fabric from to inches .
Spread each overlapping roll in the same direction .
Fasten fabric with staples flush with the adjacent fabric to prevent movement of fabric by placement of inert ground cover or mulch .
Repair or replace fabric damaged during placement of inert ground cover or mulch with sufficient fabric to comply with overlap specifications .
.A Payment Not Used .B Rock Blanket .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for placing rock blanket .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Submit a sq yd sample including rock of various sizes .
.Bd Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .Ba General Do not use filter fabric .
.Bb Concrete Concrete must be minor concrete .
.Bc Rock Rock must be clean smooth obtained from a single source and must comply with the following gradation requirements Gradation Requirements Screen size inches Percentage passing .Bd Mortar Mortar must comply with section .F .
.B Construction Do not use filter fabric .
Rock must be placed while concrete is still plastic .
Remove concrete adhering to the exposed surfaces of the rock .
Loose rocks or rocks with a gap greater than inch must be reset by an authorized method .
The rock gap is measured from the edge of the rock to the surrounding concrete bedding .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .B Payment The payment quantity for rock blanket is the area measured parallel to the surface of the rock blanket .
.C Gravel Mulch .C General .Ca Summary Section .C includes specifications for placing gravel mulch .
.Cb Definitions Reserved .Cc Submittals Submit a lb sample of the gravel mulch .
.Cd Quality Assurance Reserved .C Materials Gravel mulch must be .
Uniform gray color .
From only source .
Crushed rock that complies with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Gradation Requirements Sieve size Percentage passing inch inch inch No .
.C Construction Place gravel and compact it by rolling .
The finished gravel mulch surface must be smooth uniform and maintain the original flow lines slope gradients and contours of the job site .
.C Payment The payment quantity for gravel mulch is the area measured parallel to the surface of the gravel mulch .
.D Decomposed Granite .D General .Da Summary Section .D includes specifications for placing decomposed granite .
.Db Definitions Reserved .Dc Submittals Five business days before delivery of the materials to the job site submit .
Solidifying emulsion product data including the manufacturers product sheets and installation instructions .
Certificate of compliance for solidifying emulsion .
lb sample of the decomposed granite SECTION LANDSCAPE .Dd Quality Assurance A test plot must be .
Constructed at an authorized location .
At least by feet .
Constructed using the materials equipment and methods to be used in the work .
Authorized before starting decomposed granite work Notify the Engineer at least days before constructing the test plot .
The Engineer uses the authorized test plot to determine acceptability of the work .
If ordered prepare additional test plots .
Preparing additional test plots is change order work .
The Engineer may order you to remove any test plot not incorporated into the work .
.D Materials .Da General Decomposed granite must be .
Uniform gray or tan color .
From only source .
Crushed granite rock that complies with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Gradation Requirements Sieve size Percentage passing inch No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
NOTE Gradation is based on AASHTO T and T . .Db Solidifying Emulsion Solidifying emulsion must be either a waterbased polymer or nontoxic organic powdered binder specifically manufactured to harden decomposed granite .
The solidifying emulsion must not change the decomposed granite color .
.D Construction Do not place decomposed granite during rainy conditions .
Mix solidifying emulsion thoroughly and uniformly throughout the decomposed granite and under the manufacturers instructions .
Mix the material in the field using portable mixing equipment or have it delivered in mixer trucks from a local readymixed plant .
Place decomposed granite uniformly in layers no more than inches thick .
Compact each layer of decomposed granite to a relative compaction of not less than percent .
Start compaction at least hours but no more than hours after placement .
For fieldmixed material apply a solidifying emulsion after compaction as recommended by the manufacturer .
Prevent runoff or overspray of solidifying emulsion onto adjacent paved or planting areas .
The finished decomposed granite surface must be smooth uniform and compacted to a relative compaction of not less than percent .
The finished surface must maintain the original flow lines slope gradients and contours of the job site .
SECTION LANDSCAPE .D Payment Not Used .E Wood Mulch .E General .Ea Summary Section .E includes specifications for placing wood mulch .
.Eb Definitions Reserved .Ec Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for the mulch .
Submit a cubic foot mulch sample with the mulch source shown on the bag .
Obtain authorization before the delivery of mulch to the job site .
.Ed Quality Assurance Reserved .E Materials .Ea General Mulch must not contain more than .
percent of deleterious materials such as rocks glass plastics metals clods weeds weed seeds coarse objects sticks larger than the specified particle size salts paint petroleum products pesticides or chemical residues harmful to plant or animal life .
Do not use soil sterilant or filter fabric .
.Eb Tree Bark Mulch Tree bark mulch must be derived from cedar Douglas fir or redwood species .
Tree bark mulch must be ground such that at least percent of the material by volume is less than inches in any direction and no more than percent by volume is less than inch in any direction .
.Ec Wood Chip Mulch Wood chip mulch must .
Be derived from clean wood .
Not contain leaves or small twigs .
Contain at least percent wood chips by volume with an average thickness of to inch in any direction and to inches in length .Ed Shredded Bark Mulch Shredded bark mulch must .
Be derived from trees .
Be a blend of loose long thin wood or bark pieces .
Contain at least percent wood strands by volume with an average thickness of to inches in any direction and to inches in length .Ee Tree Trimming Mulch Tree trimming mulch must .
Be derived from chipped trees and may contain leaves and small twigs .
Contain at least percent material by volume less than inches and no more than percent by volume less than inch SECTION LANDSCAPE .Ef.Ej Reserved .E Construction Do not use soil sterilant or filter fabric .
Mulch must be spread or placed after the plants have been planted .
Mulch placed in plant basins must not come in contact with the plant crown and stem .
Spread mulch uniformly from the outside edge of the proposed plant basin to the adjacent edges of shoulders paving retaining walls dikes edging curbs sidewalks walls fences and existing plantings .
If the proposed plant is feet or more from the adjacent edges of any of these elements spread the mulch feet beyond the outside edge of the proposed plant basin .
Do not place mulch within feet of .
Flow line of earthen drainage ditches .
Edge of paved ditches .
Drainage flow lines .E Payment The payment quantity for wood mulch is the volume measured in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
.F.J Reserved .
RESERVED Reserved .
SITE FURNISHINGS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing site furnishings .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .E.Z Reserved ..
RESERVED RESERVED EXISTING LANDSCAPE .
GENERAL .A General Section .
includes general specifications for performing work on existing planting and irrigation facilities .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Transplant any plant to be transplanted and protect any irrigation component to be relocated before performing any other construction activity in the area .
.D Payment Not Used SECTION LANDSCAPE .
EXISTING IRRIGATION FACILITIES .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for performing work on existing irrigation facilities .
Work performed on existing irrigation facilities must comply with section .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a list of irrigation system deficiencies within days of checking the existing facilities .
.A Quality Assurance After irrigation facilities have been relocated demonstrate in the presence of the Engineer that the relocated facilities function properly .
Certify each existing backflow preventer under section .A .
.B Materials Valve box covers must be the same size as the covers they replace .
Control and neutral conductors must be the same size and color as the control and neutral conductors they replace .
.C Construction .C General Notify the Engineer at least business days before shutting off the water supply to any portion of the existing irrigation system and immediately after restoring the water supply to any portion of the existing irrigation system .
If an irrigation facility to be relocated is determined unsuitable replace the irrigation facility under section .
The replacement of the unsuitable facility is change order work .
.C Check and Test Existing Irrigation Facilities Before performing irrigation system work check existing irrigation facilities to remain in place or to be relocated .
The Engineer determines the test watering cycle lengths .
Check for deficiencies including missing parts damaged components and improper operation .
Correct deficiencies as ordered .
The correction of deficiencies is change order work .
.C Operate Existing Irrigation Facilities If the Contract includes a bid item for operate existing irrigation facilities after performing work under section .C operate existing irrigation facilities through Contract acceptance .
Operate existing irrigation facilities except for water meters underground supply lines control and neutral conductors and electrical conduits .
Check for proper operation at least once every days .
Adjust repair or replace existing irrigation facilities within days of finding any deficiency .
Operate irrigation systems using the automatic irrigation controller until Contract acceptance .
You may operate irrigation controllers manually during plant replacement fertilization weed germination and repair work .
Program the irrigation controllers for seasonal requirements .
.C Remove Irrigation Facilities Irrigation facilities to be removed that are more than inches below the finished grade may be abandoned in place unless salvaging is specified or shown SECTION LANDSCAPE Immediately after disconnecting an existing irrigation facility to be removed or abandoned from an existing facility to remain the remaining facility must be capped or plugged or connected to a new or existing irrigation facility .
.C Replace Valve Box Covers Existing valve box covers shown to be replaced must remain in place until the new covers are ready to be installed .
.C Relocate Backflow Preventer Assemblies Install backflow preventer assemblies under section .C .
.C Relocate Water Meters Relocate water meters .
.C Relocate Irrigation Controllers Install irrigation controllers under section .C .
.C Salvage Irrigation Facilities Salvage irrigation facilities under section .C .
.D Payment Not Used .
EXISTING PLANTING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for performing work on existing planted areas .
Transplant palm trees between March and October .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a work plan for .
Transplanting trees .
The work plan must include methods for lifting transporting storing planting guying and maintaining each tree to be transplanted .
Include the root ball size method of root ball containment and a maintenance program for each tree . .
Maintaining existing planted areas .
The work plan must include controlling the weeds fertilizing mowing and trimming of turf areas watering and controlling rodents and pests .
Submit a copy of the manufacturers product sheet for root stimulant including application instructions .
.A Quality Assurance Inspect for deficiencies of existing planted areas in the presence of the Engineer .
Complete the inspection within days of the start of job site activities .
Deficiencies requiring corrective action include .
Weeds .
Dead diseased or unhealthy plants .
Plant stakes and tree ties that are missing .
Inadequate plant basins and basin mulch .
Other deficiencies needing corrective action to promote healthy plant life .
Rodents and pests .B Materials Not Used SECTION LANDSCAPE .C Construction .C General Correct deficiencies of the existing planted areas if ordered within days of the order .
Correction of deficiencies is change order work .
.C Prune Existing Plants If a bid item for prune existing plants is not shown on the Bid Item List prune existing plants if ordered .
Pruning existing plants is change order work .
.C Transplant Trees Prune each tree to be transplanted immediately before lifting .
Prune a palm tree by removing dead fronds and frond stubs from the trunk .
Remove green fronds up to rows of fronds away from the center of growth .
Tie the remaining rows of fronds in an upright position with light hemp or manila rope .
Remove fronds and frond stubs at the trunk in a way that will not injure the trunk .
Remove fronds and frond stubs for Phoenix dactylifera approximately inches from the trunk .
Prepare each hole in the new location before lifting the tree to be transplanted .
Lift each tree to be transplanted as described in the work plan .
Handle and plant each tree to be transplanted under section .C .
Until a tree is replanted cover exposed root ball with wet burlap or canvas and cover the crown with percent shade cloth .
Replant each tree on the same day it is lifted if possible .
If the transplant location is not ready to receive the tree store and maintain the tree to be transplanted until the transplant location is authorized .
Store the tree in an upright position .
Replace each damaged transplanted tree under section .C with the number of trees specified in the special provisions .
The replacement trees must be planted in individual plant holes at the location determined by the Engineer within the area of the tree being replaced .
Plant replacement trees under section .C .
.C Maintain Existing Planted Areas Section .C applies if a bid item for maintain existing planted areas is shown on the Bid Item List .
After deficiencies are corrected perform work to maintain existing planted areas in a neat and presentable condition and to promote healthy plant growth through Contract acceptance .
Existing plant basins must be kept wellformed and free of sediment .
If the existing plant basins need repairs and the basins contain mulch replace the mulch after the repairs are done .
Control weeds within the existing planted area and .
From the existing planted area limit to the adjacent edges of paving and fences if less than or equal to feet .
From the existing planted area limit to feet beyond the outer limit of the existing planted area if the adjacent edge of paving or fence is more than feet away .
Within a foot radius from each existing tree and shrub If a bid item for maintain existing planted areas is not shown on the Bid Item List maintain existing planted areas if ordered .
Maintain existing planted areas is change order work .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED EROSION CONTROL GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for applying permanent erosion control measures. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used EROSION CONTROL WORK .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying permanent erosion control measures to the soil surface .
Moveinmoveout for erosion control includes moving onto the project when the Engineer determines an area is ready to receive erosion control materials setting up all required personnel and equipment and moving out all personnel and equipment when work in that area is complete .
.B Definitions percent total viability The sum of the percent germination percent hard seed and percent dormant seed .
TRM Turf reinforcement mat .
.C Submittals .C General Submit a certificate of compliance for straw fiber RECP and fasteners before application .
If weedfree straw is used the certificate of compliance must include the certificate of quarantine compliance .
Submit records for hydraulically applied erosion control materials that indicate compliance with the specified application rates areas treated and quantity of materials applied and application date and time .
.C Compost Submit the compost producers compost technical data sheet including test results and seal of testing assurance certificate before application .
.C Seed At least days before seed application submit proof that the order for seed required for the Contract has been placed and accepted by the seed vendor .
Include the seeds botanical names quantity ordered and the anticipated date of delivery .
Submit a copy of the analysis report for each seed species before application .
Submit seed labels .
Seed labels must show .
Seed variety including botanical name and common name .
Lot number or other lot identification .
Origin .
Net weight .
Percent pure live seed .
Percent total viability .
Percent by weight inert matter SECTION EROSION CONTROL .
Percent by weight other crop seed .
Percent by weight weed seed .
Name of restricted noxious weed seed by number per pound of seed .
Name and address of the supplier or grower responsible for the analysis .C Tackifier Submit a certificate of compliance for tackifier and bonded fiber matrix at least business days before application .
Certificates of compliance must include .
SDS .
Product label .
List of applicable nonvisible pollutant indicators for soil amendment and stabilization materials as shown in the table titled Pollutant Testing Guidance Table in the Departments Construction Site Monitoring Program Guidance Manual .
For the manual go to the Departments Division of Construction website .
Report of acute and chronic toxicity tests on aquatic organisms complying with EPA methods .
List of ingredients including chemical formulation .
Properties of polyacrylamide in tackifier including ..
Percent purity by weight ..
Percent active content .. Average molecular weight ..
Charge density .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Compost Compost producers must be permitted by the Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery Local Enforcement Agencies and any other State and local agencies that regulate solid waste plants .
If exempt from State permitting provisions the composting plant must certify it complies with the guidelines and procedures for production of compost under CA Code of Regs .
Compost producers must be participants in the United States Composting Councils seal of testing assurance program .
.D Seed Seed must be tested for purity and germination by a seed laboratory certified by the Association of Official Seed Analysts or by a seed technologist certified by the Society of Commercial Seed Technologists .
Tests must be performed within months before application .
The Engineer takes a sample of approximately ounce or cup of seed for each seed lot greater than pounds .
Provide the Engineer with a glassinelined bag and custody seal tag for each seed lot sample. . MATERIALS .A General Water must be of a quality that promotes germination of seeds and growth of plants .
.B Duff Duff must consist of vegetation removed and collected from clearing and grubbing activities .
Vegetation may include trees shrubs ground cover grasses bark leaves and roots with attached soil .
Process vegetation into duff by tub grinding or chipping it into pieces not exceeding inches in any dimension .
Stockpile duff until work area to receive duff is complete .
Duff stockpiles must not exceed feet in height .
.C Topsoil .C General SECTION EROSION CONTROL Obtain topsoil from sources within or outside the job site as shown .
.C Local Topsoil Local topsoil must comply with the specifications for selected material in section and consist of the excavated topsoil including organic material and leaf litter from the designated areas at the depth shown .
.C Imported Topsoil Imported topsoil must .
Consist of fertile friable soil of loamy character that contains organic matter in quantities natural to the region and be capable of sustaining healthy plant life .
Be free from deleterious substances such as litter refuse toxic waste stones larger than inch in size coarse sand heavy or stiff clay brush sticks grasses roots noxious weed seed weeds and other substances detrimental to plant animal and human health .D Fiber Fiber must be wood fiber cellulose fiber alternate fiber or a combination of these fibers .
Wood fiber must be a longstrand wholewood fiber thermo mechanically processed from clean whole wood chips .
Cellulose fiber must be made from natural or recycled pulp fiber such as wood chips sawdust newsprint chipboard corrugated cardboard or a combination of these materials .
Alternate fiber must be a long strand whole natural fiber made from clean straw cotton corn or other natural feed stock .
Fiber must .
Disperse into a uniform slurry when mixed with water . .
Contain inch fiber strands for at least percent by total volume. . Have at least percent retained when passed through a no .
sieve. . Have an initial moisture content of no more than percent of its dry weight when tested under California Test .
The moisture content must be marked on the packaging. . Have a water holding capacity by weight of at least percent when tested under ASTM D. . Be nontoxic to plants and animal life. . Be free of synthetic or plastic materials lead paint printing ink varnish petroleum products seed germination inhibitors and chlorine bleach . .
Contain less than ppm of boron. . Be colored to contrast with the area where it is to be applied .
The coloring agent must be biodegradable nontoxic and free from copper mercury and arsenic and must not stain concrete or painted surfaces .
.E Tackifier Tackifier must be free from growth or germination inhibiting factors nonflammable nontoxic to aquatic organisms and functional for a minimum of days .
Tackifier must be one of the following .
Plant based natural highmolecularweight polysaccharide .
Plantbased tackifier must be a high viscosity hydrocolloid that is miscible in water and labeled as either guar psyllium or starch as follows .. Guar gum based tackifier must be derived from the ground endosperm of the guar plant Cyanmopsis tetragonolobus .
It must be treated with dispersing agents for easy mixing .
It must be able to be diluted at the rate of to pounds per gallons of water .
.. Psyllium based tackifier must be manufactured from the finely ground mucilloid coating of Plantago ovata or Plantago ispaghula seeds and able to dry and form a firm but rewettable membrane .
.. Starch based tackifier must be a nonionic watersoluble granular material derived from corn potato or other plantbased source .
SECTION EROSION CONTROL .
Prepackaged liquid or dry powder polymeric emulsion blend .
Prepackaged tackifier must be an anionic formulation with a residual monomer content not exceeding .
percent by weight .
The tackifier must contain and be labeled with one of the following as the primary active ingredients .. Acrylic copolymers and polymers .
.. Polymers of methacrylates and acrylates .
.. Copolymers of sodium acrylates and acrylamides .
.. Polyacrylamide and copolymer of acrylamide .
.. Hydrocolloid polymers .
.F Seed Seed must not contain .
Prohibited noxious weed seed .
More than .
percent total weed seed by weight Seed with a germination rate lower than the minimum rate shown may be used if authorized .
Deliver seed to the job site in unopened separate containers with the seed tag attached .
Measure individual seed species and mix in the presence of the Engineer .
.G Fertilizer Fertilizer must comply with the material specifications for fertilizer in section .B .
.H Straw Straw must be stalks from wheat rice or barley furnished in airdry condition with a consistency compatible for application with commercial strawblowing equipment .
Wheat and barley straw must be derived from irrigated crops .
Straw must be free of plastic glass metal rocks and refuse or other deleterious material .
Straw must have not have been used for stable bedding .
.I Reserved .J Bonded Fiber Matrix Bonded fiber matrix must be a hydraulicallyapplied material composed of fiber and tackifier and may also include seed and fertilizer as shown .
Fiber for bonded fiber matrix must be percent wood fiber and comply with the specifications for fiber under section .D except that at least percent is retained when passed through a no .
sieve .
Tackifier for bonded fiber matrix must .
Be bonded to the fiber or prepackaged with the fiber by the manufacturer .
Contain a minimum of percent of the combined weight of the dry fiber activating agents and additives .
Be an organic high viscosity colloidal polysaccharide with activating agents or a blended hydrocolloidbased binder .K Compost Compost must be derived from one or a combination of the following types of materials .
Green material consisting of chipped shredded or ground vegetation or clean processed recycled wood products .
Biosolids .
Manure .
Mixed food waste Compost must not be derived from mixed municipal solid waste and must not contain paint petroleum products pesticides or other chemical residues harmful to plant or animal life .
SECTION EROSION CONTROL Process compost materials under CA Code of Regs .
Metal concentrations in compost must not exceed the maximum listed under CA Code of Regs .
Compost must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Compost Quality characteristic Test methoda Requirement pH TMECC .A .
Soluble salts dSm TMECC .A Moisture content wet weight TMECC .A Organic matter content dry weight TMECC .A Maturity relative to positive control TMECC .A or above Stability mg COCg OM per day TMECC .B or below Particle size for fine compostb dry weight Pass inch sieve min Pass inch sieve min TMECC .B Particle size for medium compostb dry weight Pass inch sieve min Pass inch sieve max TMECC .B Particle size for coarse compostb dry weight Pass inch sieve min Pass inch sieve max TMECC .B Pathogen Salmonella most probable number per grams dry weight basis TMECC .B Pathogen Fecal coliform most probable number per gram dry weight basis TMECC .B Physical contaminants dry weight Plastic glass and metal TMECC .C combined total .
Physical contaminants dry weight Sharps TMECC .C None detected aTMECC refers to Test Methods for the Examination of Composting and Compost published by the United States Department of Agriculture and the United States Compost Council USCC .
bMaximum particle length must be inches .
.L.N Reserved .O Rolled Erosion Control Products .O General RECP must be a longterm degradable openweave textile manufactured or fabricated into rolls designed to reduce soil erosion and assist in the growth establishment and protection of vegetation .
RECP must conform to the classification system established by the ECTC .
Deliver RECP in suitable wrapping to protect against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure occurring before placement .
.O Jute Mesh Jute mesh must be ECTC Type B made of unbleached and undyed woven jute .
Jute mesh must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION EROSION CONTROL Jute Mesh Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Strands per foot min in each direction Roll width min inches USLE CFactor for a . HV unvegetated slope .
Shear stress max psf ASTM D . Tensile strength min psf ASTM D Functional longevity months Average open area Weight of fabric min ozsq yd ASTM D .. .O Netting Netting must be ECTC Type and made of percent coconut fiber woven into a matrix .
Netting must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Netting Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Type A Type B Type C Thickness min inch ASTM D . Roll width min inches USLE CFactor for a HV unvegetated slope .
Shear stress max psf ASTM D . . . Tensile strength min psf ASTM D Functional longevity months Average open area Weight of fabric min ozsq yd ASTM D . .O Erosion Control Blankets Erosion control blanket must be ECTC Type D and made of processed natural fibers that are mechanically structurally or chemically bound together to form a continuous matrix that is surrounded by natural nets .
Erosion control blanket must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Erosion Control Blanket Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Type A Type B Type C Roll width min inches Matrix Strawcoconut Woven coir coconut fiber Wood excelsior inches or longer USLE CFactor for a HV unvegetated slope .
Shear stress max psf ASTM D . Tensile strength min psf ASTM D Functional longevity months .O Turf Reinforcement Mats SECTION EROSION CONTROL Turf reinforcement mat must be ECTC Type and nondegradable openweave textile made of synthetic fibers filaments nets wire mesh or other elements processed into a permanent dimensional matrix .
Turf reinforcement mat must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Turf Reinforcement Mat Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Type A Type B Type C Roll width min inches Thickness min inches ASTM D . USLE CFactor for a HV unvegetated slope .
Shear stress max psf ASTM D . Tensile strength min psf ASTM D Functional longevity months UV stability at hrs ASTM D .P Fiber Rolls Fiber roll must be a premanufactured roll filled with rice or wheat straw wood excelsior or coconut fiber .
Fiber roll must be covered with biodegradable jute sisal or coir fiber netting secured tightly at each end and must be one of the following .
to inches in diameter and at least .
lbft .
to inches in diameter and at least lbft Fiber roll must have a minimum functional longevity of year .
.Q Compost Socks Compost sock must be a mesh tube inches in diameter filled with compost and must have a functional longevity of year .
The mesh tube must be composed of a natural biodegradable product such as cotton jute sisal burlap or coir .
The mesh tube must be clean evenly woven and free of encrusted concrete or other contaminating materials cuts tears broken or missing yarns and thin open or weak places .
Compost for compost sock must comply with section .K except the particle size must be for coarse compost .
.R Fasteners Wood stakes must be untreated fir redwood cedar or pine and cut from sound timber .
The ends must be pointed for driving into the ground .
Notched stakes must be at least by by inches in size .
Stakes without notches must be at least by by inches .
Metal stakes must be at least inch in diameter and have tops bent at degree angles or capped with an orange or red plastic safety cap that fits snugly onto the metal stake .
Steel staples must be a minimum of gauge inch Ushaped staples with a inch crown .
Provide heavier gauge and greater length if required by the job site conditions .
You may use an alternative attachment device such as a percent biodegradable fastener to install RECP instead of staples .
Rope to fasten fiber rolls and compost socks must be inch in diameter and biodegradable such as sisal or manila .
.S.V Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General The Engineer designates the extent of erosion control areas by directing the placement of stakes or other suitable markers in increments of acre or less .
Furnish tools labor materials and transportation required to mark areas receiving erosion control treatments .
SECTION EROSION CONTROL Before applying erosion control materials verify that finished grades comply with the specifications for grade compaction and finish in section .
Remove and dispose of trash debris and weeds in areas to receive erosion control materials .
Remove and dispose of loose rocks larger than inches in maximum dimension unless otherwise authorized .
Protect the traveled way sidewalks lined drainage channels and existing vegetation from overspray of hydraulicallyapplied material .
Apply erosion control materials within hours after the final preparation of the erosion control areas .
Do not apply hydraulically applied materials if .
Precipitation occurs .
Water is standing on or moving across the soil surface .
Soil is frozen .
Air temperature is below degrees F during the tackifier curing period unless allowed by the tackifier manufacturer and authorized .B Duff Upon completion of the earthwork in an area spread duff to a uniform thickness .
Do not apply duff within feet of the pavement edge .
Trackwalk duff with tracked equipment run perpendicular to slope contours .
Water may be used to assist this process but must not cause erosion .
.C Topsoil Place topsoil after all other earthwork in an area is complete .
Spread topsoil to a uniform thickness .
Trackwalk topsoil with tracked equipment run perpendicular to slope contours .
Water may be used to assist the process but must not cause erosion .
.D Hydromulch and Hydroseed Apply hydromulch with hydraulic spray equipment that mixes fiber tackifier fertilizer and other erosion control materials specified .
If applying hydroseed add seed to hydromulch .
Seed may be dry applied to small areas not accessible by hydroseeding equipment if authorized .
Add water to hydromulch and hydroseed materials as recommended by the manufacturer and mix sufficiently to ensure an even application .
A dispersing agent may be added to the mixture if authorized .
Equipment must have a builtin continuous agitation and discharge system capable of producing a homogeneous mixture and a uniform application rate .
The tank must have a minimum capacity of gallons .
You may use a smaller tank if authorized .
Apply materials in locations rates and number of applications shown and as follows .
Start application within minutes after adding seed to the tank . .
Apply in successive passes as necessary to achieve the specified application rate . .
Apply all hydromulch or hydroseed materials shown for a single area within hours .
If hydromulch or hydroseed materials are applied to areas covered by RECP apply hydromulch and hydroseed materials to the rolled product as follows .
Verify the RECP is in uniform contact with the slope surface. . Spray materials into the RECP perpendicular to the slope and integrate well. . Do not displace or damage the RECP .
After the final application do not allow pedestrians or equipment on the treated areas .
SECTION EROSION CONTROL .E Dry Seed Apply dry seed and fertilizer at the rates shown after job site preparation .
Scarify areas to a minimum depth of inch .
Apply and incorporate materials into the soil to a maximum depth of inch by dragging or raking .
.F Drill Seed Drillseeding equipment must be a rangeland drill seeder with a ring roller attached .
The seeder must be equipped with a fluffy seed box with agitators to prevent bridging and clogging .
The seed box must have metal row dividers and individual box adjustments to meter the seed flow .
Apply drill seed as follows .
Drill seed in rows no greater than inches apart and to a depth of inch. . Make a minimum of passes in different directions with seeding equipment to reduce any uniform row appearance. . Do not apply seed within feet of the pavement edge .
.G Straw Apply straw by spreading it uniformly without clumping or piling at the rates shown based on slope measurements .
Once straw work is started in an area apply all materials for that area in the same work shift .
.H Bonded Fiber Matrix Apply bonded fiber matrix materials in the locations rates and number of applications shown and as follows .
Apply in successive passes as necessary to achieve the specified application rate. . Form a continuous uniform mat with no gaps between the mat and the soil surface as follows ..
Apply in or more directions if necessary .
..
Apply in layers as necessary to avoid slumping and aid drying .
.I Compost Apply compost to a uniform thickness in the locations shown .
If compost and seed are applied simultaneously mix and apply together with equipment suitable for the application such as a pneumatic blower truck .
.J Incorporate Materials Incorporate topsoil duff compost and mulch to the depth shown until well mixed .
Materials may be mixed together before incorporation if authorized .
Do not incorporate materials within feet of the pavement edge .
Incorporate straw with a roller made of approximately inch steel plate equipped with straight studs placed approximately inches apart and staggered .
Studs must not be less than inches long nor more than inches wide and must be rounded to prevent the straw withdrawing from the soil .
The roller weight must be sufficient to incorporate the straw into the soil to a depth that will not support combustion and result in a uniform surface .
Compact the area to a relative compaction between and percent except as otherwise specified in section .
.K.N Reserved .O Rolled Erosion Control Products Before placing RECP ensure the subgrade has been graded smooth and has no depressed voids .
The subgrade must be free from obstructions such as tree roots projecting stones or foreign matter greater than inch in diameter .
Fasten RECP to the surface with staples and anchor as shown .
Do not drive vehicles on RECP .
SECTION EROSION CONTROL .P Fiber Rolls Before installing fiber roll remove obstructions from the ground including rocks clods and debris greater than inch in diameter .
Install fiber roll approximately parallel to the slope contour .
For any foot section of fiber roll prevent the fiber roll from varying more than percent from level .
Install fiber roll on slopes at the following spacing unless shown otherwise .
feet apart for slopes steeper than horizontalvertical .
feet apart for slopes from to horizontalvertical .
feet apart for slopes from to horizontalvertical .
feet apart for slopes flatter than horizontalvertical Type fiber roll installation consists of placing and fastening as follows .
Place in a furrow that is from to inches deep. . Fasten with wood stakes every feet along the length of the fiber roll. . Fasten the ends of the fiber roll by placing a stake inches from the end of the roll. . Drive the stakes into the soil so the top of the stake is less than inches above the top of the fiber roll .
Type fiber roll installation consists of placing and fastening as follows .
Fasten with notched wood stakes and rope. . Drive stakes into the soil until the notch is even with the top of the fiber roll. . Lace the rope between stakes and over the fiber roll .
Knot the rope at each stake . .
Tighten the fiber roll to the surface of the slope by driving the stakes further into the soil .
If soil conditions do not allow driving stakes into the soil drill pilot holes to facilitate driving of the stakes .
Maintain fiber roll in a way that provides sediment holding capacity and reduces runoff velocities as follows .
Remove sediment from behind the fiber roll if sediment is of fiber roll height above ground. . Repair or adjust the fiber roll if rills or other evidence of concentrated runoff occur beneath the fiber roll. . Repair or replace the fiber roll if they become split torn or unraveled. . Add stakes if the fiber roll slumps or sags . .
Replace broken or split wood stakes . .
Remove sediment deposits trash and debris from fiber roll as needed .
If removed sediment is deposited within project limits it must be stabilized and not exposed to erosion by wind or water .
.Q Compost Socks Before installing compost sock remove obstructions from the ground including rocks clods and debris greater than inch in diameter .
Install and maintain compost sock under the specifications for fiber rolls in section .P and the following requirements .
Place mesh tube secure the end and fill uniformly with compost .
Secure the remaining end. . Fasten compost sock to soil surface under the procedures for Type and Type installation of fiber roll . .
Remove sock rope and stakes if ordered .
Cut sock and empty contents in place .
This work is change order work .
.R.T Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for bid items paid for by area is the area measured parallel to the ground surface except overlaps .
SECTION EROSION CONTROL The payment quantity for bid items paid for by length is the length measured parallel to the ground surface except overlaps .
A movein followed by a moveout counts as measurement unit .
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the moveinmoveout quantity .
Local topsoil is paid for as roadway excavation .
The payment quantity for imported topsoil paid for by volume is the volume measured in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
RESERVED FINISHING ROADWAY .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for finishing the roadway .
Perform finishing activities after completing all other construction activities. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Trim and shape graded areas without surfacing to smooth and uniform cross sections and slopes .
Between edge of shoulder and hinge point of slopes .
At medians For a graded roadbed without surfacing or pavement trim and shape the entire roadbed to uniform cross sections and slopes .
Trim slopes of gutters without lining or surfacing to the required grade and cross section .
Do not stockpile material on finished pavement or allow material to drift across pavement .
Clean finished pavement of dirt and foreign material .
Clear debris and obstructions from ditches and channels constructed under the Contract .
Clean out sewers culverts and other drainage facilities and appurtenant structures constructed under the Contract .
Remove debris and excess material adjacent to culverts headwalls and endwalls bridge ends poles posts trees or other objects and leave in a neat and orderly condition .
Remove from slopes any exposed material that might become loose such as rocks and roots .
Remove loose rock larger than inches in maximum dimension from .
Between the edge of shoulder and hinge point of slopes .
Medians .
Finished roadbed Dispose of material resulting from finishing activities .
If authorized soil and rock resulting from finishing activities may be used along the roadway. . PAYMENT Not Used DIVISION IV SUBBASES AND BASES GENERAL GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing subbases and bases. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED STABILIZED SOILS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for stabilizing soils .
.B Definitions stabilizing agent Material added to improve strength and durability of the basement material .
.C Submittals .C General At least days before starting soil stabilization activities submit the name of the laboratory you will use for QC tests .
The laboratory must be qualified under the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
Before performing QC sampling and testing submit the time and location the sampling and testing will occur .
Submit QC testing results within hours of receiving the results .
Submit a certificate of compliance with the stabilizing agent samples that includes a statement certifying the stabilizing agent furnished is the same as on the Authorized Material Source List for the stabilizing agent specified .
Submit a weighmaster certificate for stabilizing agent remaining on hand after completion of the work .
.C Samples From to days before use submit one lb sample of each stabilizing agent proposed and from each source .
Submit stabilizing agents in airtight containers .
Mark the sample date on the container .
Include the SDS .
.D Quality Assurance .D General If requested perform QC testing in the presence of the Engineer .
If required construct test strips with materials tools equipment and methods you will use in the work .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Preparing Basement Material After preparing an area for soil stabilization verify the surface grades .
.Dc Mixing Except for clods larger than inch randomly test the adequacy of the mixing with a phenolphthalein pH indicator solution .
.Dd Compaction Construct test pads for compaction tests by scraping away material to the depth ordered .
If a compaction test fails corrective action must include the layers of material already placed above the test pad elevation .
.D Department Acceptance Stabilized soil acceptance is based on .
Visual inspection .
Compliance with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION STABILIZED SOILS Stabilized Soil Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Relative compaction min California Test and See section for the specified stabilization agenta Stabilization agent application rate Calibrated tray or equal Final application rate ordered by the Engineer a For lime stabilized soil see section .E. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Water Notify the Engineer if a water source other than potable water is used and perform testing for chlorides and sulfates .
If potable water is not used water for stabilized soil must be clean and contain no more than parts per million of chlorides as Cl determined under California Test and no more than parts per million of sulfates as SO determined under California Test .
.C Curing Seal Curing seal must be asphaltic emulsion Grade SS SSh CSS or CSSh .
.D Stabilizing Agent Lime sources must be on the Authorized Material List for approved producers of lime for use in soil stabilization. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not mix different types of stabilizing agent or from more than one source .
Deliver stabilizing agent in full loads unless it is the last load needed for a work shift .
.B Preparing Basement Material For native soil and embankment other than imported borrow remove rocks or solids larger than of the layer thickness .
Regardless of the layer thickness remove rocks and solids greater than inches .
Removing soil clods is not required .
Notify the Engineer if you encounter rocks or solids greater than of the layer thickness .
Removing rocks and solids is change order work .
Grade the basement material to be stabilized to within .
foot of the lines and grades shown .
.C Applying Stabilizing Agent The application rate is ordered as pounds of stabilizing agent per square yard of basement material to be stabilized .
Do not vary from the Engineers ordered application rate by more than percent .
.D Mixing Stabilizing agent and basement material must be uniformly mixed at least twice to within .
foot of the depth shown at any point .
If you exceed the mixing depth shown by more than percent add stabilizing agent in proportion to the exceeded depth .
Remix until the mixture is uniform with no streaks or pockets of stabilizing agent .
.E Compaction Compact using a sheepsfoot or segmented wheel roller immediately followed by steel drum or pneumatic tired rollers .
Wherever the thickness shown is .
foot or less compact in layer .
Wherever the thickness shown is more than .
foot compact in or more layers of approximately equal thickness .
The maximum compacted thickness of any layer must not exceed .
foot unless you first construct a test strip to SECTION STABILIZED SOILS demonstrate your equipment and methods provide uniform distribution of stabilizing agent and achieve the specified compaction .
The test strip must contain at least cu yd of material and no more material than days production .
Construct test strips with materials tools equipment and methods you will use in the work .
Use other compaction methods in areas inaccessible to rollers .
.F Finish Grading Wherever the finished surface of stabilized soil is above the allowable tolerance trim and remove the excess material .
Do not leave loose material on the finished surface .
If finish rolling can not be completed within hours of trimming defer trimming .
Finish rolling of trimmed surfaces must be performed with at least complete coverage with steel drum or pneumatictired rollers .
Do not proceed with construction activities for subsequent layers of material until the Engineer verifies the final grades of the stabilized soil .
.G Curing .G General Cure by one of the following methods .
Water cure .
Curing seal .
Moist material blanket .G Water Cure Water may be used to cure the finished surface before you place a moist material blanket or apply curing seal .
Keep the surface above the optimum moisture content of the stabilized soil .
Use this method for no more than days after which you must apply a curing seal or place a moist material blanket .
.G Curing Seal Curing seal equipment must have a gauge indicating the volume of curing seal in the storage tank .
Apply curing seal to the finished surface of stabilized soil under section .
when the stabilized soil is at optimum moisture content and .
When the ambient temperature is above degrees F and rising. . At a rate from .
to .
gallon per square yard .
The exact rate is determined by the Engineer .
Repair damaged curing seal the same day the damage occurs .
.G Moist Material Blanket Moist material blanket may be either a temporary or permanent layer of material of sufficient thickness to prevent drying of the stabilized soil .
You may use moist material blanket if the stabilized soil can bear the weight of construction equipment .
Maintain the moist material blanket above the optimum moisture content as appropriate until the next structural layer is placed. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for stabilized soil is measured from the horizontal planned surface of the stabilized soil .
The payment quantity for lime or cement cement stabilized soil does not include the quantity of stabilizing agent .
Wasted or disposed of in a manner not specified . .
Remaining on hand after completion of the work .
If you use a partial load of stabilizing agent the quantity remaining is determined by scale weights of the truck and the remaining stabilizing agent. . Added stabilizing agent when the mixing depth exceeds the depth shown by more than percent .
SECTION STABILIZED SOILS LIME STABILIZED SOIL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for stabilizing soil by mixing basement material with lime and water .
.B Definitions mellowing period Time between the initial and final mixing to promote initial chemical reactions between lime water and basement material .
.C Submittals Submit lime samples under ASTM C. Include the chemical and physical analyses with the submittal .
At least days before applying lime in slurry form submit the slurrys lime content for authorization .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Place unique sequentially numbered lock seals on each load and affix them to trailer blowdown valves that are locked open .
The bill of lading for each lime delivery must have that specific lock seal number legibly and visibly imprinted .
.Da Preparing Basement Material For every cu yd of basement material to be lime stabilized .
Test the relative compaction under California Test .
Test the moisture content under California Test .Db Applying Lime The Engineer determines the final application rate for each lime product proposed from the samples submitted based on California Test .
Wherever the basement material to be stabilized changes the Engineer changes the application rate .
The Engineer provides the optimum moisture content determined under California Test for each application rate .
Whenever lime in slurry form is used report the quantity of slurry placed by measuring the volume of slurry in the holding tank once per sq ft stabilized or twice per day whichever is greater .
The Engineer verifies the application rate of lime used in dry form with a calibrated tray or equal once per sq ft of stabilized soil or twice per day whichever is greater .
.Dc Test Result Disputes Work with the Engineer to avoid potential conflicts and resolve disputes regarding test result discrepancies .
If you dispute the test result notify the Engineer within days of receiving the test result .
If you or the Engineer dispute each others test results submit written quality control test results and copies of paperwork including worksheets used to determine the disputed test results .
An independent third party must perform referee testing .
Before the independent third party participates in a dispute resolution the independent third party must be accredited under the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
The independent third party must be independent of the project .
By mutual agreement the independent third party is chosen from .
A Department laboratory .
A Department laboratory in a district or region not in the district or region the project is located .
The Transportation Laboratory .
A laboratory not currently employed by you or your lime producer If split quality control or acceptance samples are not available the independent third party uses any available material representing the disputed material for evaluation .
If the dispute resolution independent third party determines the Departments test results are correct the Department deducts the independent third party testing costs from payments and pays the independent SECTION STABILIZED SOILS third party .
If the independent third party determines your test results are correct the Department pays the independent third party testing costs without a deduction .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Mixing During mixing operations measure and record the ground temperature at full mixing depth .
Take a composite sample from random locations after initial mixing .
The moisture content of the composite sample tested under California Test must be a minimum of percent greater than optimum .
Determine the moisture versus density relationship of the composite sample material under California Test except part section E paragraph is modified as follows After adjustment of the moisture content compact each of the remaining test specimens in the mold then record the water adjustment tamper reading and the corresponding adjusted wet density from the chart on Table using the column corresponding to the actual wet weight of the test specimen compacted .
Note each of these wet weights on Line I .
After mixing and before compacting determine maximum density under California Test from composite samples of mixed material samples from random locations and at each distinct change in material .
Test the gradation for compliance with section .D .
Test the moisture content of the mixed material under California Test .
Moisture content during the mellowing period determined under California Test must be at least percent higher than the optimum moisture content .
.Dc Compaction Test relative compaction on a wet weight basis .
After initial compaction determine the inplace density under California Test and moisture content under California Test at the same locations .
Perform one test per cu yd of lime stabilized soil .
Test in .foot depth intervals. . MATERIALS Lime must comply with ASTM C and the requirements shown in the following table Lime Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Available calcium and magnesium oxide min ASTM C or ASTM C and C High calcium quicklime CaO Dolomitic quicklime CaO and CaO MgO Loss on ignition max ASTM C total loss carbon dioxide free moisture Slaking rate ASTM C C rise in minutes A . lb sample of lime drysieved in a mechanical sieve shaker for minutes seconds must comply with the percentage passing for the sieve size shown in the following table Lime Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing inch SECTION STABILIZED SOILS Slurry must .
Be free of contaminants .
Contain at least the minimum dry solids .
Have uniform consistency Prepare lime slurry at the job site. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Before applying lime measure the ground surface temperature .
Apply lime at ground temperatures above degrees F. Do not apply lime if you expect the ground temperature to drop below degrees F before you complete mixing and compacting .
During mixing maintain the inplace moisture of the basement material to be stabilized at a minimum of percent above the optimum moisture determined under California Test as modified in section .Db .
During compaction and finish grading add water to the surface to prevent drying until the next layer of mixed material is placed or until you apply curing treatment .
Scarify the surface of lime stabilized soil at least inches between each layer .
Do not scarify the finished surface of the lime stabilized soil .
From the application of lime to days after the application of curing treatment only equipment and vehicles essential to the lime stabilization work are allowed on the lime stabilized soil .
.B Preparing Basement Material Compact the basement material to at least percent relative compaction .
.C Applying Lime Apply lime in dry form .
You may apply lime in slurry form if authorized .
Apply lime uniformly over the area to be stabilized using a vane spreader .
Lime slurry must be in suspension during application .
Apply lime slurry uniformly making successive passes over a measured section of the roadway until the specified lime content is reached .
Apply the residue from lime slurry over the length of the roadway being processed .
.D Mixing Mix lime on the same day it is applied .
After the initial mixing allow a mellowing period for at least hours before final mixing .
You may add water and mix during the mellowing period .
Complete all the mixing work within days of the initial application of lime .
Before compaction the mixed material except rock must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table Mixed Material Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing No .
.E Compaction Do not use vibratory rollers .
Start compacting immediately after final mixing .
Compact the lime stabilized soil to at least percent relative compaction .
SECTION STABILIZED SOILS .F Finish Grading The finished surface of the stabilized soil must not vary more than .
foot above or below the grade established by the Engineer unless the stabilized soil is to be covered by material paid for by the cubic yard in which case the finished surface must not vary above the grade established by the Engineer .
Maintain the moisture content of the lime stabilized soil at a minimum of percent above optimum moisture content through the entire finish grading operation .
Wherever lime stabilized soil is below the allowable tolerance you may use trimmed material to fill low areas only if final grading and final compaction occurs within hours of beginning initial compaction .
Before placing trimmed material scarify the surface of the area to be filled at least inches deep .
.G Curing Choose the method of curing and apply the chosen curing method within hours of completing the sheepsfoot or segmented wheel compaction and within the same day of any trimming and finish grading. . PAYMENT The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in lime quantity .
Reserved AGGREGATE SUBBASES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing aggregate subbase .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Reserved .D Department Acceptance The Department accepts AS based on aggregate gradation Rvalue requirements and sand equivalent requirements specified in section ..
The Department accepts AS based on percent relative compaction specified in section .E tested under California Test .
For Class AS if the aggregate gradation test results the sand equivalent test results or both comply with contract compliance requirements but not operating range requirements you may continue placing AS for the remainder of the work day .
Do not place additional AS until you demonstrate to the Engineer the AS to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
For Class AS if the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both do not comply with contract compliance requirements remove the AS or request a payment deduction .
If your request is authorized .cu yd is deducted for each noncompliant test result .
Each aggregate gradation and a sand equivalent test represents no more than cu yd of AS or days production whichever is smaller. . MATERIALS .A General Aggregate for Class and AS must be clean and consist of any combination of the following .
Broken stone .
Crushed gravel .
Natural rough surfaced gravel .
Sand .
Reclaimed processed asphalt concrete PCC LCB or CTB If Class is specified the location for obtaining the material and gradation requirements are in the special provisions .
.B Class Class and Class Aggregate Subbases Aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table SECTION AGGREGATE SUBBASES Aggregate Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing Class Class Class Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
The aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements for the classes shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Characteristics Quality characteristic Requirement Class Class Class Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance Sand equivalent min Resistance Rvalue min .C Class Aggregate Subbase Reserved .D Class Aggregate Subbase Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Apply water to the AS as needed for compaction .
.B Subgrade Immediately before spreading the AS the subgrade must comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved and be free from loose or extraneous material .
You may fill areas of the subgrade lower than the grade established by the Engineer with AS .
Before placing biaxial geogrid remove sharp objects that may come in contact with the material .
.C Placing Geosynthetics Materials Section .C applies if geosynthetic materials are shown .
Geosynthetic materials include filter fabric and biaxial geogrid .
If filter fabric is shown place it on the subgrade .
Place biaxial geogrid if shown .
Under manufacturers instructions .
Longitudinally along the roadway alignment .
Without wrinkles Overlap adjacent edges of geosynthetic material at least feet .
Overlap the ends of the rolls at least feet in the direction AS is spread .
You may fold or cut geosynthetic material to conform to curves .
If material is cut overlap it at least feet .
You may hold the material in place with mechanical ties staples pins or small piles of AS .
SECTION AGGREGATE SUBBASES Do not place stockpiles on geosynthetic material or place more material than can be covered in hours .
Do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on filter fabric .
Do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on geogrid unless one of the following conditions is met .
Vehicles and equipment are ..
Equipped with rubber tires ..
Operated under mph ..
Operated to avoid sudden braking and sharp turns .
At least .
ft of AS has been placed spread and compacted on the material Repair or replace any damaged geosynthetic material by placing a new piece of material over the damaged area with at least feet of overlap .
.D Spreading Deliver uniform mixtures of AS to the roadbed .
Deposit AS in layers or windrows .
Spread and shape the AS to such thickness that after watering and compacting the completed AS is within the tolerances specified in section .E .
When AS is spread and compacted the moisture content must be uniform and sufficient to obtain the required compaction .
Avoid material segregation .
AS must be free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
Where the subgrade is cohesionless sand and if authorized you may dump AS in piles and spread it ahead in sufficient quantities to stabilize the subgrade .
Where the subbase thickness shown is .
foot or less you may spread and compact the AS in one layer .
Where the shown thickness is more than .
foot spread and compact in or more layers approximately equal in thickness .
The compacted thickness of any one layer must not exceed .
foot .
At locations inaccessible to spreading equipment spread and compact AS by any means that will produce the specified results .
.E Compacting Compact each AS layer to at least percent relative compaction .
Where biaxial geogrid is shown compact AS with either a smoothwheeled roller or a rubbertired roller .
Do not use vibratory devices during compaction .
The finished surface of AS not covered or covered by material paid for by weight must not vary more than .
foot above or below the grade established by the Engineer .
The finished surface of AS covered by material paid for by volume must not project above the grade established by the Engineer at any point .
Correct areas of AS that do not comply with the thickness shown if an equivalent thickness of overlying base will not compensate or request a payment deduction .
If your request is authorized the Engineer calculates the deduction by multiplying .
Deficient thickness less allowable tolerance .
Planned width .
Longitudinal distance of the deficient thickness .
.cu yd .
PAYMENT The payment quantity of aggregate subbase is determined by the dimensions shown .
The payment quantity does not include the volume of aggregate subbase used to fill low areas of the subgrade .
AGGREGATE BASES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing aggregate base .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Reserved .D Department Acceptance The Department accepts AB based on aggregate gradation Rvalue requirements and sand equivalent requirements specified in section ..
The Department accepts AB based on percent relative compaction specified in section .E tested under California Test .
Aggregate samples must not be treated with lime cement or chemicals before testing for durability index .
Aggregate from untreated reclaimed processed AC PCC LCB or CTB is not considered treated .
If the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both comply with the Contract compliance requirements but not the operating range requirements you may continue placing AB for the remainder of the work day .
Do not place additional AB until you demonstrate to the Engineer the AB to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
If the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both do not comply with Contract compliance requirements remove the AB or request a payment deduction .
If your request is authorized .cu yd is deducted .
If AB is paid by weight the Engineer converts tons to cubic yards for the purpose of reducing payment for noncompliant AB left in place .
Each aggregate gradation and a sand equivalent test represents no more than cu yd of AB or days production whichever is smaller. . MATERIALS .A General Aggregate must be clean and consist of any combination of the following .
Broken stone .
Crushed gravel .
Natural roughsurfaced gravel .
Sand .
Processed reclaimed asphalt concrete PCC LCB or CTB Use either inch or inch maximum aggregate gradation unless otherwise specified .
Do not change your selected aggregate gradation without authorization .
.B Class Aggregate Base Aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table SECTION AGGREGATE BASES Aggregate Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing inch maximum inch maximum Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
No .
The aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Characteristics Quality characteristic Requirement Operating range Contract compliance Resistance Rvalue min Sand equivalent min Durability index min .C Class Aggregate Base Aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing inch maximum inch maximum Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
No .
The aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Characteristic Quality characteristic Requirement Operating range Contract compliance Resistance Rvalue min Sand equivalent min .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Apply water to the AB as needed for compaction .
.B Subgrade Immediately before spreading AB the subgrade must comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved and be free from loose or extraneous material .
SECTION AGGREGATE BASES You may use AB to fill areas of the subgrade that are lower than the grade established by the Engineer .
.C Placing Geosynthetic Materials Section .C applies if geosynthetic materials are shown .
Geosynthetic materials include filter fabric and biaxial geogrid .
If filter fabric is shown place it on the subgrade .
Before placing geosynthetic materials remove sharp objects that may come in contact with the material .
Place the material .
Under manufacturers instructions .
Longitudinally along the roadway alignment .
Without wrinkles Overlap adjacent edges of geosynthetic material at least feet .
Overlap the ends of the rolls at least feet in the direction AB is spread .
You may fold or cut geosynthetic material to conform to curves .
If material is cut overlap it at least feet .
You may hold material in place with mechanical ties staples pins or small piles of AB .
Do not place stockpiles on geosynthetic material or place more material than can be covered in hours .
Do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on filter fabric .
Do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on geogrid unless one of the following conditions is met .
Vehicles and equipment are ..
Equipped with rubber tires ..
Operated under mph ..
Operated to avoid sudden braking and sharp turns .
At least .
ft of AB has been placed spread and compacted on the material Repair or replace any damaged geosynthetic material by placing a new piece of material over the damaged area with at least feet of overlap .
.D Spreading Deliver uniform mixtures of AB to the roadbed .
Deposit AB in layers or windrows .
Spread and shape the AB to such thickness that after watering and compacting the completed AB is within the tolerances specified in section .E .
When AB is spread and compacted the moisture content must be uniform and sufficient to obtain the required compaction .
Avoid material segregation .
AB must be free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
If the subgrade is cohesionless sand you may dump AB in piles and spread it ahead in sufficient quantities to stabilize the subgrade if authorized .
If the AB thickness shown is .
foot or less spread and compact the AB in at least layer .
If the thickness shown is more than .
foot spread and compact the AB in at least approximately equal layers in thickness .
The compacted thickness of any one layer must not exceed .
foot .
At locations inaccessible to spreading equipment spread and compact AB by any means that will attain the specified requirements .
.E Compacting Compact each AB layer to at least percent relative compaction .
If biaxial geogrid is shown compact AB with either a smoothwheeled roller or a rubbertired roller .
Do not use vibratory devices during compaction .
The finished AB surface must not vary more than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer .
SECTION AGGREGATE BASES Correct areas of AB that do not comply with the described thickness or request a payment deduction if AB is paid for by volume .
If your request is authorized the Engineer calculates the deduction by multiplying .
Deficient thickness less allowable tolerance .
Planned width .
Longitudinal distance of the deficient thickness .
.cu yd or the item bid price adjusted for cubic yards whichever is higher .
PAYMENT If aggregate base is paid for by volume the payment quantity is determined from the dimensions shown .
The payment quantity does not include the volume of aggregate base used to fill low areas of the subgrade .
If the basement material is imported borrow aggregate base placed to fill low areas is not measured or paid for as imported borrow .
If aggregate base is paid for by weight the Engineer deducts the weight of the water at the time of weighing in excess of the optimum moisture content plus percent from the weight of the aggregate base .
The Engineer determines the optimum moisture content under California Test .
CEMENT TREATED BASES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing cement treated base .
.B Definitions coarse aggregate Aggregate retained on a no .
sieve .
fine aggregate Aggregate passing a no .
sieve .
.C Submittals Submit evidence of the cost of cement used for an ordered increase or decrease .
.D Quality Assurance .D General After the CTB has been spread on the subgrade and before initial compaction the cement content of the completed mixture of CTB must not vary from the specified cement content by more than .
percent of the weight of the dry aggregate when tested under California Test .
For Class A CTB compaction is tested under California Test or .
The relative compaction of CTB must be at least percent .
Each layer of CTB may be tested for compaction or all layers may be tested together at the option the engineer .
If all layers are tested together you are not relieved of the responsibility to achieve the required compaction in each layer placed .
.D Aggregate When tested under California Test aggregate for Class B CTB must have an Rvalue of at least before mixing with cement and an Rvalue of at least when aggregate is mixed with an amount of cement that does not exceed .
percent by weight of the dry aggregate .
Before sand equivalent testing aggregate samples must not be treated with lime cement or chemicals .
If the aggregate gradation test results the sand equivalent test results or both comply with contract compliance requirements but not operating range requirements you may continue placing CTB for the remainder of the work day .
Do not place additional CTB until you demonstrate to the Engineer the CTB to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
If the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both do not comply with contract compliance requirements remove the CTB or request a payment deduction .
If your request is authorized .cu yd is deducted .
If CTB is paid for by weight the Engineer converts tons to cubic yards for the purpose of reducing payment for noncompliant CTB left in place .
An aggregate gradation and a sand equivalent test represents up to cu yd or days production if less than cu yd .
.D RoadMixed Cement Treated Base Moisture Content Just before initial compaction the moisture content of the completed mixture must be at least the optimum moisture content less percent .
The moisture content is determined under California Test and optimum moisture content is determined under California Test .
.D PlantMixed Cement Treated Base Moisture Content At the point of delivery to the work the moisture content of the completed mixture must be at least the optimum moisture content less percent .
The moisture content is determined under California Test and optimum moisture content under California Test . . MATERIALS Cement must be Type ll portland cement .
Asphaltic emulsion curing seal must be Grade SS or CSS .
Aggregate must be clean and free from deleterious substances .
SECTION CEMENT TREATED BASES Aggregate must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table Aggregate Gradationa Sieve size Percentage passing Class A Class B Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
No .
aCalifornia Test is modified by California Test if the difference in specific gravity between the coarse and fine portions of the aggregate or between the blends of different aggregates is .
or more .
The aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Characteristics Quality characteristic Requirement California Test Operating range Contract compliance Sand equivalent min Compressive strength min psia aFor Class A CTB only .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Subgrade Immediately before spreading CTB the subgrade must comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved and be free from loose or extraneous material .
.C Depositing Aggregate and Mixing RoadMixed Cement Treated Base .C General Reserved .C Depositing Aggregate For roadmixed CTB deposit enough untreated aggregate on the roadbed to comply with the depth shown the depth specifications in section .E and the grade tolerance specifications in section .F .
Do not mix the aggregate to be treated with roadbed material that is not to be treated .
If or more nominal sizes of coarse and fine aggregate are deposited on the grade accurately and uniformly meter each nominal size as it is deposited .
Before adding cement mix the deposited aggregate as many times as necessary to produce a uniform mixture that complies with the specified gradation .
For mixing done from windrows shape the windrow to a uniform cross section with a sizing device .
Do not use a motor grader unless equipped with a sizing device .
Aggregate mixed with cement and water before delivery on the roadbed must be deposited and spread on the prepared subgrade under section .E .
.C Mixing Mix roadmixed CTB by either of the following methods .
Roadmixed method on the roadbed or at a location off the roadbed .
Plantmixed method under section .D except a Class batch plant may be used SECTION CEMENT TREATED BASES Use mechanical equipment that uniformly distributes cement and water .
Whenever cement is added to windrowed aggregates flatten or slightly trench the top of the windrow to receive cement .
If crossshaft mixers are used spread cement uniformly over the entire surface of the deposited aggregate .
Do not spread cement on aggregate more than hours before the roadmixing operation .
The roadmixing machine must introduce water at the time of mixing with a metering device or other authorized methods .
Supply the correct quantity of water by means of controls that will produce a completed mixture with a uniform moisture content .
Correct water leaks from equipment or excessive amounts of water during application before proceeding .
For CTB spread and compacted in or more layers mix material for each layer separately .
If more than pass of the roadmixing machine is required to obtain a uniform mixture at least pass must be made before adding water to the material .
Regulate the length of roadmixed sections to comply with section .G .
.D Proportioning and Mixing PlantMixed Cement Treated Base .D General Mix plantmixed CTB at a central mixing plant by either of the following .
Batch type mixing using either of the following ..
Revolving blade .. Rotary drum mixers .
Continuous type mixing .
In all mixing plants proportion aggregate cement and water by weight or volume .
The Engineer must be able to readily verify the amount of water per batch or the flow rate for continuous mixing .
The time of the addition of water or the points where it is introduced into the mixer must be authorized .
In all mixing plants add cement in such a manner that it will be uniformly distributed throughout the aggregates during the mixing operation .
.D Batch Mixing If different aggregate sizes are used the aggregates must be blended as they enter the mixer .
Weigh cement for each batch on scales that are separate and distinct from the aggregate batching scales .
Each cement scale graduation must be approximately of the total scale capacity .
The total capacity of the scale must not exceed the capacity of the smallest commercially available scale that is capable of weighing twice the amount of cement when the plant is operated at full capacity .
No scale is required to have a total capacity less than lb or graduations less than lb .
Mixing plants must be Class unless Class is specified .
Class batch mixing plants must be equipped with .
Enough paddles arranged to produce a uniform mixture .
Mixer platform large enough to provide safe and convenient access to the mixer and other equipment .
Timing device accurate to within seconds that indicates the end of the mixing period by an audible or visual signal For Class mixing plants the mixing period begins after all the ingredients are in the mixer and ends when the mixer is half empty .
Mix until a homogeneous mixture with uniformly distributed and properly coated aggregates that do not change appearance is produced and testing indicates the cement content consistently complies with section .D .
The mixing period must not be less than seconds .
Class mixing plants must be equipped with automatic sampling devices actuated by operation of a push button or similar device .
When a sampling device is actuated it must simultaneously deliver a representative sample of each size of aggregate or the combined aggregates to adequately sized receptacles .
Each sample must weigh from to lb .
Locate receptacles safely clear of plant operations with convenient access .
SECTION CEMENT TREATED BASES Class mixing plants must comply with the specifications for a Class mixing plant except a timing device to signal the end of mixing is not required and automatic sampling devices are not required .
Class mixing plants must provide safe and convenient access to sampling facilities for obtaining representative samples of aggregate and the mixture .
.D Continuous Mixing Draw aggregate from storage facilities by a feeder or feeders that continuously supply the correct amount of aggregate in proportion to cement .
If different aggregate sizes are used arrange feeders such that the proportion of each aggregate size can be separately adjusted .
Storage facilities for fine aggregate must be equipped with a device that effectively vibrates the side walls of the feeder preventing hangup of material while the plant is operating .
The plant must be equipped with a control system that automatically closes down the plant when the material in any storage facility approaches the strikeoff capacity of the feed gate .
The plant must not be operated unless the automatic control system is in good working condition .
The aggregate feeder must be mechanically or electrically driven .
Mechanically driven feeders must be directly connected to the cement feeder drive .
The drive shaft on the feeder must be equipped with a revolution counter that reads to revolution with sufficient capacity to register the total number of revolutions in a days run .
Electrically driven feeders must be actuated by the same circuit that provides power to the cement feeder motor .
For electric power obtained from a noncommercial source a frequency meter must be connected to the cement feeder motor circuit .
The meter must have a minimum range from to Hz and must be graduated in Hz increments or less .
A voltage regulating transformer must be installed in the circuit of vibratory aggregate feeders .
The transformer must maintain the voltage to the feeder motors to within percent of their nameplate voltage .
A voltmeter must be connected to the secondary of the voltage regulating transformer .
The meter must have a range from to percent of the motor nameplate voltage and must be graduated in increments of percent of the nameplate voltage or less .
For plants equipped with electrically actuated aggregate feeders the power must have a frequency of Hz .
Continuous mixing plants must be equipped with an automatic sampling device specified for Class plants in section .D that allows sampling when the plant is in full operation .
The cement feeder and aggregate feeders must be equipped with devices that allow the feed rate to be determined when the plant is in full operation .
.E Spreading Treated Mixture Transport materials mixed at a location off the roadbed as a uniform mixture .
Cover the mixture during transport to avoid moisture loss if ordered .
Deposit the mixture on the roadbed at a quantity that provides the specified compacted thickness without spotting picking up or shifting the mixture .
Just before depositing plantmixed or spreading roadmixed CTB moisten the area to be covered .
The area must be kept moist but not excessively wet .
Avoid material segregation .
CTB must be free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
Spread the mixed materials in widths of not less than lanes insofar as the width of the CTB to be spread permits .
Sections with lane width may be spread as a lane width and a lane width .
Spread materials with spreader or with several spreaders operating in a staggered position across the subgrade unless traffic conditions limit spreading to less than a lane width .
If traffic conditions limit spreading to less than a lane width spread the remainder of the lane section within hours .
For traffic conditions that prevent placement of CTB in adjacent lanes within hours a longer time may be authorized .
Longitudinal construction joints must be within foot of lane line delineation .
SECTION CEMENT TREATED BASES For areas inaccessible to mechanical spreading equipment spread CTB in layer using an authorized method .
After spreading thoroughly compact the mixture with pneumatic tampers or other compacting equipment that obtains the degree of compaction specified in section .F to the required lines grades and cross section .
Do not mix or place CTB while the atmospheric temperature is below degrees F. Do not place CTB on frozen ground .
Apply curing seal to completed CTB before the atmospheric temperature falls below degrees F. Comply with one of the following types of spreading operations .
For Type spreading operation spread CTB with a selfpropelled mechanical spreader in operation .
The CTB must be ready for compaction without further shaping .
Equipment not propelled by the unloading equipment is considered selfpropelled .
The spreader must be equipped with a screed that strikes off and distributes the material to the full width being spread and within the specified surface tolerance .
The screed must be adjustable to produce the required cross section .
Screed action includes any cutting crowding or other practical motion that produces a finished surface texture of uniform appearance .
The mechanical spreader must be equipped with fully automatic screed and grade sensing controls that control the longitudinal grade and cross slopes of the screed .
Screed controls must be able to automatically compensate for differences from the slope and grade established by the Engineer. . For Type spreading operation comply with Type except automatic screed controls and grade sensing controls are not required. . For Type spreading operation spread the treated mixture with any equipment that will consistently finish the base within the tolerance specified in section .F without material segregation .
If a spreading type is not specified use Type on ramps and Type at all other locations .
Except as otherwise specified in section .F do not use motor graders for spreading and compacting operations .
To finish the base within the specified tolerance motor graders may be used to trim the edges and surface of CTB after initial compaction .
A motor grader is considered a selfpropelled mechanical spreader if .
It is equipped with end wings on the blade .
Blade is locked in a position perpendicular to the direction of travel .
It is equipped with cross slope and automatic grade controls that comply with the requirements for the specified type of spreading operation .F Compacting Compacting equipment must produce the required compaction within the operation time limit specified in .G .
Immediately following the spreading operation compact the CTB with at least complete coverage .
After initial compaction wherever the finished surface is higher than the specified tolerance trim off high spots to within tolerance .
Do not fill low areas by drifting or hauling trimmed material .
Following trimming the trimmed areas must be compacted with complete coverage such that the entire layer of CTB complies with the specified compaction requirements .
Perform final compaction in such a manner that no loose material remains on the surface and tear marks are eliminated .
If CTB is spread and compacted in more than layer compact each layer to the required degree of compaction before placing the next layer .
Trim only to comply with the specified layer thickness .
The compacted thickness of any layer must not exceed .
foot or be less than .
foot .
When placed in more than layer keep the compacted material moist until covering with the next layer or applying curing seal .
Apply curing seal to the surface of a lower layer that will not be covered with the next layer on the same day .
The finished CTB surface must be uniform and must not deviate at any point by more than .
foot from the bottom of a foot straight edge laid in any direction .
SECTION CEMENT TREATED BASES The finished CTB surface must be within .
foot above or below the grade established by the Engineer except wherever concrete pavement will be placed on CTB the finished CTB surface must not extend above the grade established by the Engineer .
The surface must be kept moist at all times until the curing seal is applied .
Wherever the surface of hardened CTB is lower than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with CTB or if authorized fill low areas according to the pavement material as follows .
For HMA pavement fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation. . For concrete pavement fill low areas with pavement concrete concurrent with the paving operation .
If CTB is paid for by the cubic yard a deduction will be made if there are areas that are deficient in thickness and the deficient thickness has not been compensated for by filling of low areas .
The deduction will be computed as the product of .
Deficient thickness less allowable tolerance .
Spread width .
Longitudinal distance of the deficient thickness . . per cubic yard or the item bid price whichever is higher For determining areas of deficient thickness the longitudinal distance between thickness measurements will not exceed linear feet for each direction of travel .
Whenever requested the Engineer will make additional measurements at the Engineers discretion to define the area of deficient thickness at your cost .
Excess material may be placed as aggregate for shoulder construction if .
Shoulder subgrade is prepared as specified. . Hardened chunks of trimmed material are removed or reduced to the maximum size specified for shoulder aggregate . .
Trimmed material incorporated into the shoulder does not exceed percent of the planned volume of shoulder aggregate per foot of shoulder .
If trimmed material exceeds this limit it must be removed and placed in other areas under the percent limit . .
Excess material is uniformly distributed in the shoulder area before spreading additional shoulder aggregate .
Excess material may be used in other work if the material complies with the applicable specifications .
.G Operation Time Requirement Complete initial compaction before trimming within hours of adding water to the aggregate and cement .
Complete final compaction after trimming within hours of adding water to the aggregate and cement .
.H Contact Joints Construct a contact joint at the end of each work day and whenever CTB operations are delayed or stopped for more than hours .
Contact joints must be constructed in thoroughly compacted material normal to the roadbed centerline with a vertical face .
Do not place additional CTB until the contact joint is accepted .
Where CTB has been finally compacted for more than hour construct longitudinal joints by cutting vertically into the existing edge approximately inches deep .
Moisten the face of the cut joint in advance of placing adjacent base .
Material from cutting may be used as excess material as specified in section .F .
.I Curing Cover the completed CTB with asphaltic emulsion curing seal .
Dilute and thoroughly mix asphaltic emulsion for curing seal at a ratio of part water to part asphaltic emulsion .
The water must not cause premature separation of the emulsion .
Uniformly apply the diluted SECTION CEMENT TREATED BASES curing seal at a rate between .
to .
galsq yd of CTB surface .
The Engineer determines the exact rate .
Apply curing seal on the same day as completion of final compaction and as soon after final compaction is practicable .
Keep the surface moist until curing seal is applied .
Do not allow traffic or equipment on the CTB for hours after application of the curing seal .
After hours limit traffic and equipment on the CTB to that used in paving operations or placing additional layers of CTB. . PAYMENT If excess material is placed in an area in which the item is measured by the ton payment as the item where placed is not made unless applicable measurement specifications for the item where placed are complied with .
If cement treated base is paid for by the ton the payment quantity for cement treated base does not include the quantity of excess material except for the quantity of excess material used in shoulders .
If cement treated base is paid for by the cubic yard .
The payment quantity for cement treated base is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
The payment quantity for cement treated base does not include the volume of any cement treated base placed below the grade established by the Engineer . .
If an increase or decrease in the specified quantity of cement is ordered the quantity of cement subject to increased or decreased payment is the difference between the specified theoretical quantity of cement and the theoretical quantity of cement ordered .
The theoretical quantity of cement is determined from the following formula Wc C x VD M C where Wc Theoretical quantity of cement in lb V Pay volume of cement treated base in cu yd C Percentage of cement in the mix D Average inplace wet density in gcc M Average inplace moisture in gcc If cement treated base is paid for by the ton .
Payment quantity of cement treated base is the sum of the weight of the aggregate used in the mix and the weight of cement to be added to the mix . .
Weight of aggregate for roadmixed cement treated base that is mixed on the roadbed is measured before delivery to the roadbed under section .
except the weight to be paid for is determined by deducting from the weight of the aggregate the weight of the water in the aggregate at the time of weighing in excess of percent of the dry weight of the aggregate . .
Weight of cement for roadmixed cement treated base that is mixed on the roadbed to be included in the payment quantity of roadmixed cement treated base is the product of the specified percentage of cement to be added to the mix and the weight of dry aggregate . .
Weight of plantmixed cement treated base or roadmixed cement treated base that is mixed by the plantmixed method is measured after mixing under section .
except that moisture in excess of percent of the dry weight of the mixture is deducted from the weight of the combined aggregate cement and water .
When the specified quantity of cement is increased in plantmixed cement treated base or roadmixed cement treated base mixed by the plantmixed method the weight of cement for which increased compensation is made as specified in section .
is deducted from the combined weight of aggregate and cement .
If an increase or decrease in the specified cement content is ordered payment is adjusted based on the cost of cement per ton FOB from the cement mill including sales tax plus the freight cost per ton for delivery from the mill to the plant .
In determining the cost of cement any cash or trade discount offered or available is credited to the Department even if the purchaser did not take the discount .
SECTION CEMENT TREATED BASES Maintain records that allow a clear determination of the cement costs associated with the increase or decrease .
Submit evidence of the cost of cement used for the increase or decrease .
If your records show an excessive cost for the increase or decrease of cement or you furnish inadequate evidence for the cost the Engineer determines the cost to be the lowest wholesale price that the cement was available for in the quantities delivered to the point of production less any available discounts .
The quantity of cement subject to increased or decreased compensation will be the difference between the specified theoretical quantity of cement and the theoretical quantity of cement ordered .
The Department does not adjust payment for variations in the cost of work resulting from the change in the quantity of cement .
CONCRETE BASES GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing concrete bases .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals For a concrete base requiring field qualification submit the name of your proposed testing laboratory at least days before the qualification .
For a base not requiring field qualification submit the name of the proposed laboratory at least days before submitting your mix design .
.D Quality Assurance Testing laboratories and testing equipment must comply with the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
Aggregate samples must not be treated with lime cement or chemicals before testing for sand equivalent .
Stop concrete base activities and immediately notify the Engineer whenever .
Any QC or QA test result does not comply with the specifications .
Visual inspection shows a noncompliant concrete base If concrete base activities are stopped before resuming activities .
Notify the Engineer of the adjustments you will make .
Remedy or replace the noncompliant concrete base .
Field qualify or construct a new test strip as specified for the concrete base involved to demonstrate compliance with the specifications .
Obtain authorization Sample the base under California Test . . MATERIALS Aggregate must be clean and free of decomposed material organic material and other deleterious substances. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Subgrade Preparation Immediately before placing the base verify that the subgrade to receive the base complies with the specified compaction and elevation tolerances and is .
Free of loose and extraneous material .
Uniformly moist but free of standing or flowing water .C Placing Place concrete base under section .F except the rd paragraph does not apply .
Spread screed shape and consolidate concrete base under section .F or under section .F except where there are confined work areas .
If authorized for confined work areas you may .
Spread and shape concrete base using suitable powered finishing machines and supplement with hand work as necessary .
SECTION CONCRETE BASES .
Consolidate the base using highfrequency internal vibrators within minutes after depositing the base on the subgrade. . Vibrate such that adequate consolidation occurs across the full paving width .
Do not use vibrators for extensive weight shifting of the concrete base .
Contraction joints must comply with section .B. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for any type of concrete base is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
The payment quantity for asphaltic emulsion concrete base is determined from the gauge reading on the curing seal equipment .
LEAN CONCRETE BASES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing lean concrete base .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit QC test data and QC test results within hours of test completion .
At least days before field qualification submit .
Aggregate qualification test results .
Proposed aggregate gradation .
Mix design including .. Proportions .. Types and amounts of chemical admixtures .
Optional notice of intent to produce LCB qualifying for a transverse contraction joint waiver under section .D .C Field Qualification For each field qualification test submit of the cylinders within to hours after preparing them .
Submit field qualification data and test reports including .
Mixing date .
Mixing equipment and procedures used .
Batch volume in cubic yards the minimum is cu yd .
Type and source of ingredients used .
Age and strength from compression strength results The test reports must be signed by the person in responsible charge of the laboratory performing the tests .
.D Quality Assurance .D General The molds for compressive strength testing under ASTM C or ASTM C must be by inches .
If the aggregate gradation or sand equivalent test results comply with the contract compliance requirements but not the operating range requirements you may continue placing LCB for the remainder of the work day .
Do not place additional LCB until you demonstrate the LCB to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
SECTION CONCRETE BASES .D Qualifications Field qualification tests and calculations must be performed by an ACI certified Concrete Laboratory Technician Grade I .
.D Aggregate Qualification Testing Qualify the aggregate for each proposed aggregate source and gradation .
The qualification tests include a sand equivalent and an average day compressive strength under ASTM C of cylinders manufactured under ASTM C. For the compressive strength test the cement content for each cylinder must be lbcu yd .
The day average compressive strength must be at least psi .
The cement must be Type II portland cement .
LCB must have from to percent air content during aggregate qualification testing .
.D Field Qualification Testing Before placing LCB you must perform field qualification testing and obtain authorization for each mix design .
Retest and obtain authorization for changes to the authorized mix designs .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before field qualification .
Perform the field qualification at the job site or an authorized location .
Field qualification testing includes tests for compressive strength air content and penetration or slump .
For compressive strength field qualification testing .
Prepare cylinders under ASTM C from a single batch . .
Perform tests each test consists of determining the average compressive strength of cylinders at days under ASTM C. The average compressive strength for each test must be at least psi If you submitted a notice to produce LCB qualifying for a transverse contraction joint waiver manufacture additional specimens and test the LCB for compressive strength at days .
Prepare the compressive strength cylinders under ASTM C at the same time using the same material and procedures as the day compressive strength cylinders except do not submit additional test cylinders .
The average day compressive strength for each test must be not more than psi .
.D Quality Control Provide a testing laboratory to perform quality control tests .
Maintain sampling and testing equipment in proper working condition .
Test the LCB under the test methods and at the locations and frequencies shown in the following table LCB Sampling Location and Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Sampling location Minimum sampling and testing frequency Sand equivalent ASTM D Source per cubic yards but at least per day of production Aggregate gradation ASTM C Air content ASTM C Job site Penetrationa ASTM C Slumpa ASTM C Compressive strength ASTM C b aTest for either penetration or slump bPrepare cylinders under ASTM C SECTION CONCRETE BASES .D Department Acceptance The Department accepts LCB based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table LCB Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Compressive strength min psi at days ASTM C a b a Cylinders prepared under ASTM C b A compressive strength test represents up to cu yd or days production if less than cu yd. . MATERIALS .A General You may use a waterreducing chemical admixture .
Waterreducing chemical admixture must comply with ASTM C Type A or Type F. The air content in LCB must not exceed percent .
If the aggregate used for LCB is produced from processed reclaimed asphalt concrete or other material that may cause the air content to exceed percent reduce the air content with an admixture .
Portland cement content in LCB must not exceed lbcu yd .
LCB must comply with the requirements shown in the following table LCB Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Sand equivalent min ASTM D Aggregate gradation ASTM C Note a Air content max percent b ASTM C Penetration inches ASTM C to nominal c Slump inches ASTM C nominal c Compressive strength min psi at days ASTM C Compressive strength max psi at days d ASTM C a Comply with the table titled Aggregate Gradation in section .C .
b If no single test in the first air content tests exceeds percent no further air content tests are required .
c Maximum penetration must not exceed inches and maximum slump must not exceed inches d Only applicable if you submitted a notice stating intent to produce LCB qualifying for a transverse contraction joint waiver and successfully field qualified the LCB for day compressive strength .
.B Cementitious Material SCM must comply with section .B except the equations for SCM content under section .B do not apply .
For aggregate qualification testing use Type II portland cement under section .B without SCM .
.C Aggregate Use either inch or inch gradation .
Do not change your selected aggregate gradation without authorization .
When tested under ASTM C the aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table SECTION CONCRETE BASES Aggregate Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing maximum maximum Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
No .
Aggregate must comply with the quality requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Operating range Contract compliance Sand equivalent min ASTM D Compressive strength min psi at days ASTM C ASTM C at lbcu yd cement content NOTE Cement must comply with the specifications for Type II portland cement in section .B. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not allow traffic or equipment on the LCB for at least hours after the st application of the curing compound and completion of contraction joints .
Limit the traffic and equipment on the LCB to that required for placing additional layers of LCB or paving .
.B Subgrade Areas of the subgrade lower than the grade established by the Engineer must be filled with LCB .
.C Proportioning Mixing and Transporting Proportion LCB under section .F except the aggregate does not have to be separated into sizes .
Mix and transport LCB under section .G except the th and th paragraphs in section .G do not apply .
.D Placing Do not mix or place LCB if the atmospheric temperature is below degrees F. Do not place LCB on frozen ground .
Unless otherwise described construct LCB in minimum widths of feet separated by construction joints .
For LCB constructed monolithically in widths greater than feet construct a longitudinal contraction joint offset no more than feet from the centerline of the width being constructed .
If concrete pavement will be placed on LCB construct longitudinal construction and longitudinal contraction joints in the LCB to provide at least foot of horizontal clearance from planned longitudinal construction and longitudinal contraction joints in the concrete pavement .
Construct transverse contraction joints in intervals that result in LCB areas where the lengths and widths are within percent of each other .
Measure the widths from any longitudinal construction or longitudinal contraction joints .
The Engineer waives the requirement for transverse contraction joints if you .
Submitted a notice under .C SECTION CONCRETE BASES .
Successfully field qualified LCB for day compressive strength testing under section .A . .
Submit QC test results for day compressive strength under section .D .
.E Finishing For LCB to be paved with HMA before the curing operation texture the LCB finished surface by dragging either a broom burlap or a spring steel tine device .
If using a spring steel tine device the device must produce a scored surface with scores parallel or transverse to the pavement centerline .
Texture at a time and in a manner that produces the coarsest texture for the method used .
For LCB to be paved with HMA the finished surface must not vary more than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer .
For LCB to be paved with concrete pavement do not texture LCB .
Before applying curing compound finish LCB to a smooth surface free from mortar ridges and other projections .
For LCB to be paved with concrete pavement the finished surface must not be above the grade or more than .
foot below the grade established by the Engineer .
The finished surface must be free from porous areas .
.F Curing After finishing LCB cure LCB with pigmented curing compound under section .B and .I except for LCB to be paved with concrete pavement comply with section .
Apply curing compound to the area to be paved with concrete pavement .
In separate applications .
Before the atmospheric temperature falls below degrees F . At a rate of gal sq ft for the first application .
At a rate of gal sq ft for the second application Within days after the first application clean the surface and apply the second application .
Immediately repair damage to the curing compound or LCB .
.G Surfaces Not Within Tolerance For LCB not to be paved with concrete pavement remove the base where the surface is higher than .
foot above the grade established by the Engineer and replace it with LCB .
For LCB to be paved with concrete pavement remove the base where the surface is higher than the grade established by the Engineer and replace it with LCB .
If authorized grind the surface with either a diamond or carborundum blade to within tolerance .
After grinding LCB to be paved with concrete pavement and after all free water has left the surface clean foreign material and grinding residue from the surface .
Apply curing compound to the ground area at a rate of approximately gal sq ft. Where the surface of the LCB is lower than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with LCB or if authorized fill low areas according to the pavement material as follows .
For HMA pavement fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation. . For concrete pavement fill low areas with pavement concrete concurrent with the paving operation. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for lean concrete base does not include lean concrete base used to fill low areas of subgrade RAPID STRENGTH CONCRETE BASE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing rapid strength concrete base .
SECTION CONCRETE BASES .B Definitions final set time Elapsed time after the initial contact of the cement and water required for the mortar sieved from the concrete to reach a penetration resistance of psi determined under ASTM C. early age Any age less than times the RSC base final set time .
opening age Age at which the RSC base achieves the specified strength for opening to traffic and construction traffic .
.C Submittals .C General At least days before placing RSC base submit a mix design that includes .
Opening age .
Proposed aggregate gradation .
Proportions of hydraulic cement and aggregate .
Types and amounts of chemical admixtures .
Maximum time allowed between batching and placing .
Final set time .
Any special instructions or conditions such as water temperature requirements .C Quality Assurance Submittals At least days before placing RSC base submit a sample of cement from each proposed lot and samples of proposed admixtures in the quantities ordered .
During RSC base activities submit uniformity reports for hydraulic cement at least once every days to METS Attention Cement Laboratory .
Uniformity reports must comply with ASTM C except testing age and water content may be modified to suit the particular material .
.C Quality Control Plan Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General At the preconstruction meeting be prepared to discuss the project specifications and methods of performing each item of work .
Items discussed must include the processes for .
Production .
Transportation .
Placement .
QC plan if specified in the special provisions .
Contingency plan .
QC sampling and testing .
Acceptance criteria Beams for modulus of rupture testing must be fabricated and tested under California Test .
The beams may be fabricated using an internal vibrator under ASTM C. For each test beam must be fabricated and the test results averaged .
No single test represents more than that days production or cu yd whichever is less .
For early age testing beams must be cured so the monitored temperatures in the beams and the test strip are always within degrees F. The internal temperatures of the RSC base and early age beams must be monitored and recorded at intervals of at least minutes .
Thermocouples or thermistors connected to stripchart recorders or digital data loggers must be installed to monitor the temperatures .
Temperature recording devices must be accurate to within degrees F. Until early age testing is completed internal temperatures must be measured at inch from the top inch from the bottom and no closer than inches from any edge .
SECTION CONCRETE BASES For other age testing beams must be cured under California Test except beams must be placed into sand at a time that is the earlier of either from to times the final set time or hours .
.D Preconstruction Meeting Reserved .D Test Strip Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Quality Control Manager Reserved .Dc Quality Control Testing During the placement of RSC base fabricate beams and test for the modulus of rupture .
At opening age .
At days after placing the first cu yd .
At least once every cu yd .
Within the final truckload Opening age tests must be performed in the presence of the Engineer .
RSC base must have an opening age modulus of rupture of not less than psi and a day modulus of rupture of not less than psi .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts RSC base based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table RSC Base Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Modulus of rupture min psi at days California Test The Engineer adjust payment for RSC base for the day modulus of rupture as follows .
Payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of psi or greater is not adjusted. . Payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of less than and greater than or equal to psi is reduced by percent. . Payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of less than and greater than or equal to psi is reduced by percent. . Payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of less than psi is not adjusted and no payment is made .
Remove and replace this base. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Rapid Strength Concrete Base Concrete for RSC base must be RSC .
For batches with a volume of cu yd or more comply with one of the following methods .
Batch the ingredients at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to the pour site .
SECTION CONCRETE BASES .
Batch the ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a cement silo and weigh system which must proportion cement for charging into the mixer truck. . Batch ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a location where preweighed containerized cement is added to the mixer truck .
The cement preweighing operation must use a platform scale .
The platform scale must have a maximum capacity of .
tons with a maximum graduation size of lb .
Preweigh cement into a fabric container .
The minimum amount of cement to be proportioned into any single container must be of the total amount required for the load of RSC base being produced . .
Proportion cement water and aggregate volumetrically .
For the combined aggregate gradation the difference between the percent passing the inch sieve and the percent passing the No .
sieve must be at least percent of the total aggregate .
You may use Type C accelerating and Type E accelerating and water reducing chemical admixtures .
.C Curing Seal Asphaltic emulsion must be Grade RS or SS. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Subgrade Reserved .C Placing Spreading and Shaping You may place RSC base in lane monolithic segments .
A longitudinal joint is not required in the center of the concrete base .
Construct transverse contraction joints at foot intervals .
Cut a groove in the RSCB with a power driven concrete saw .
Grooves for longitudinal and transverse contraction joints must be the minimum width possible for the type of saw used .
Immediately wash slurry from the joint with water at a pressure less than psi .
The RSC base finished surface must not vary more than inch from the bottom of a foot long straightedge placed parallel with the center line .
Broom the RSC base surface to produce a uniform rough surface .
Do not broom the surface until the concrete base has set sufficiently .
.D Curing Begin curing work as soon as free water leaves the RSC base surface .
Cure RSC base by applying a curing seal of asphaltic emulsion under section .
Apply curing seal at a rate from .
to .
galsq yd .
The Engineer determines the exact application rate .
If you damage applied curing seal immediately cover the damaged area with additional curing seal .
Do not remove curing seal until surfacing is placed .
If you do not place HMA within hours of applying curing seal apply more asphaltic emulsion at a rate from .
to .
galsq yd residual binder content immediately before placing HMA .
.E Surfaces Not Within Tolerance RSC base must be within .
foot of the grade established be the Engineer .
Remove and replace hardened RSC base with a surface higher than .foot above the grade established by the Engineer with RSC base or if authorized high areas may be ground until the surface of RSC base conforms to the tolerances specified .
Grinding equipment must be equipped with diamond or carborundum blades .
Clean the ground area of RSC base that is to be covered with pavement of all foreign material and grinding residue as soon as any free water has left the surface and apply curing seal .
SECTION CONCRETE BASES Where the surface of RSC base is lower than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with RSC base or if authorized fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation. . PAYMENT Not Used LEAN CONCRETE BASE RAPID SETTING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing lean concrete base rapid setting .
.B Definitions final set time Elapsed time after initial contact of cement and water required for the mortar sieved from the concrete to reach a penetration resistance of psi determined under ASTM C. early age Any age less than times the lean concrete base rapid setting final set time .
opening age Age at which the lean concrete base rapid setting achieves the specified strength for opening to traffic including construction traffic .
.C Submittals .C General At least days before field qualification submit the name of your proposed testing laboratory .
Submit QC test date and QC test results within hours of test completion .
.C Mix Design At least days before field qualification submit a mix design for lean concrete base rapid setting and include .
Opening age .
Proposed aggregate gradation .
Mix design including .. Proportions .. Types and amounts of chemical admixtures .
Maximum time allowed between batching and placing .
Range of ambient temperatures over which the mix design is applicable .
Finalsettime .
Aggregate qualification test results if required Submit mix design for each ambient temperature variation anticipated during base placement .
Each mix design must have a maximum ambient temperature range of degrees F. Submit compressive strength development data for each mix design .
You may use strength development data from laboratoryprepared samples .
The testing ages for strength development data must include hour before opening age opening age hour after opening age hours and days .
.C Field Qualification Submit field qualification data and test reports including .
Mixing date .
Mixing equipment and procedures used .
Batch volume in cubic yards minimum cu yd .
Type and source of ingredients used .
Age and strength at time of cylinder testing Reports must be certified with a signature by an official in responsible charge of the laboratory performing the tests .
SECTION CONCRETE BASES .D Quality Assurance .D General For compressive strength testing prepare cylinders under California Test .
Test cylinders must be by inches .
As an alternative to rodding a vibrator may be used under California Test .
Test cylinders under California Test and perform tests with each test consisting of cylinders .
The test result is the average from the cylinders .
.D Field Qualification Before placing lean concrete base rapid setting you must perform field qualification testing and obtain authorization for each mix design .
Retest and obtain authorization for changes to authorized mixed designs .
Proposed mix designs must be field qualified before you place the base represented by those mix designs .
The technician performing the field test must hold current American Concrete Institute ACI certification as a Concrete Field Testing TechnicianGrade I .
Notify the Engineer at least days before field qualification .
Perform field qualification within the job site or a location authorized .
Field qualification testing includes compressive strength air content and penetration or slump in compliance with the table titled Lean Concrete Base Rapid Setting Requirements .
Field qualification must comply with the following .
Test for compressive strength at opening age and days of age .
At opening age the compressive strength for each test must be at least psi and the average strength for the tests must be at least psi .
At days age the compressive strength for each test must be at least psi and the average strength for the tests must be at least psi .D Quality Control Perform sampling under California Test .
Test the base under the test methods and at the locations and frequencies shown in the following table LCB Rapid Setting Sampling Location and Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Sampling location Minimum sampling and testing frequency Sand equivalent ASTM D Source per cu yd minimum per day of production Aggregate gradation ASTM C Air content ASTM C Job site per hours of placement work plus one in the last hour of placement work Penetrationa ASTM C Slumpa ASTM C Compressive strength California Test aTest either penetration or slump .D Department Acceptance The Department accepts LCB rapid setting based on compliance with the requirement shown in the following table LCB Rapid Setting Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Compressive strength min psi at days California Test a aCylinders made under California Test SECTION CONCRETE BASES .
MATERIALS .A General LCB rapid setting must comply with the requirements shown in the following table LCB Rapid Setting Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Sand equivalent min ASTM D a Aggregate gradation ASTM C Comply with section .C Air content max percent b ASTM C Penetration inches ASTM C nominal maximum Slump inches ASTM C nominal maximum Compressive strength min psi at days California Test Compressive strength min psi at opening age California Test a If aggregate is qualified under section .D item the minimum is .
b If no single test in the first air content tests exceeds percent no further air content tests are required .
.B Cement Cement must comply with the requirements for RSC .
.C Chemical Admixtures Chemical admixtures must comply with chemical admixtures for concrete except you may use Type E chemical admixture .
You may submit a request to use citric acid or borax .
Your request must include a request from the cement manufacturer and a test sample .
.D Aggregates Aggregate must comply with either of the following .
Section .C except aggregate gradation must comply with the aggregate gradation table in section .C .
Section .C and the following .. Qualify the aggregate for each proposed aggregate source and gradation .. Qualification tests include sand equivalent and average day compressive strength under ASTM C on specimens manufactured under ASTM C. The cement content for this test must be lbcu yd and the day compressive strength must be at least psi .
Cement must be Type II portland cement under section .B without SCM. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Construct LCB rapid setting under section .
except section .A does not apply and the rd through th paragraphs of section .D do not apply .
Do not open the LCB rapid setting to traffic before opening age .
Subsequent paving operations may begin only after final set time of the LCB base .
The LCB base must have a compressive strength of at least psi under California Test before .
Placing HMA .
Placing additional base .
Operating equipment on the LCB rapid setting .B Proportioning Mixing and Transporting For batches cu yd or more comply with one of the following methods SECTION CONCRETE BASES .
Batch the ingredients at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to the pour site. . Batch the ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a cement silo and weigh system which must proportion cement for charging into the mixer truck. . Batch ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a location where preweighed containerized cement is added to the mixer truck .
The cement preweighing operation must utilize a platform scale .
The platform scale must have a maximum capacity of .
tons with a maximum graduation size of lb .
Preweigh cement into a fabric container .
The minimum amount of cement to be proportioned into any single container must be of the total amount required for the load of lean concrete base rapid setting being produced . .
Proportion cement water and aggregate volumetrically under ASTM C or section .B .
.C Spreading Compacting and Shaping You may use metal or wood side forms .
Wood side forms must be at least inches thick .
After you deposit the LCB rapid setting on the subgrade consolidate it with highfrequency internal vibrators .
Consolidate adjacent to the forms and across the full pavement width .
Place the base as nearly as possible to its final position .
Spread and shape the base with powered finishing machines and supplement with hand work if necessary After you place lean concrete base rapid setting do not add water to the surface to facilitate finishing .
If authorized you may use surface finishing additives as recommended by the manufacturer of the cement. . PAYMENT If volumetric proportioning is used and calibration is performed more than miles from the project limits the Department deducts for each calibration session .
CONCRETE BASE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing concrete base .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General For each lot of concrete for a concrete base .
Quantity must not exceed cu yd. . Department determines the modulus of rupture of test beams aged days under California Test . . Department calculates the modulus of rupture by averaging the individual test results of beams aged for days .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts a concrete base based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table Concrete Base Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Modulus of rupture min psi at days California Test SECTION CONCRETE BASES Acceptance for the modulus of rupture is on a lot basis .
The Department provides the molds and machines for the modulus of rupture acceptance testing .
Provide any material and labor the Engineer may require for the testing. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Portland Cement Concrete Concrete must be PCC .
For the combined aggregate gradation the difference between the percentage passing the inch sieve and the percentage passing the no .
sieve must be at least percent of the total aggregate .
The specifications for the reduction in operating range and contract compliance for cleanness value and sand equivalent for coarse aggregate in section .C and fine aggregate in section .C do not apply to a concrete base .
The base must contain not less than lb of cementitious material per cubic yard .
.C Curing Seal The curing seal must be asphaltic emulsion Grade RS or SS. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Aggregate and bulk cementitious material must be proportioned by weight using authorized automatic proportioning devices .
.B Placing Spreading and Shaping You may place concrete base in lane monolithic segments .
A longitudinal joint is not required in the center of the base .
The finished surface must not vary more than inch from the bottom of a foot long straightedge placed parallel with the centerline .
After the base has sufficiently set broom the concrete base surface to produce a uniform rough surface .
After the free water leaves the surface and the surface is finished but not later than hours after placement cure the base by applying asphaltic emulsion .
Apply the curing seal at a rate from .
to .
galsq yd .
The Engineer determines the exact application rate .
If you damage the applied curing seal immediately cover the damaged area with additional curing seal .
Construct transverse contraction joints at foot intervals .
Apply the curing seal on cleaned contraction joints .
Saw transverse contraction joints before any volunteer cracking occurs and after the concrete base is hard enough to saw without spalling raveling or tearing .
The base must be within .
foot of the grade established be the Engineer Where the surface of the base is lower than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove and replace it with concrete base or if authorized fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation .
If you do not place the HMA within hours of applying curing seal apply more asphaltic emulsion at a residual binder rate from .
to .
galsq yd immediately before placing the HMA. . PAYMENT Not Used SECTION CONCRETE BASES RESERVED EXISTING CONCRETE BASES .
GENERAL .A General Section contains specifications for performing work on existing concrete bases .
Work performed on existing bases must comply with section .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
REPLACE BASES Reserved ..
RESERVED TREATED PERMEABLE BASES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing treated permeable bases. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Immediately before spreading the treated permeable base the subgrade must .
Comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved .
Be free from loose or extraneous material .
Be uniformly moist Areas of subgrade lower than the grade established by the Engineer must be filled with permeable base .
Spread the permeable base when the atmospheric temperature is above degrees F. Finish the permeable base to a uniform surface within .
foot of the grade established by the Engineer .
Place filter fabric on the edge and on the top of the high side the side opposite the edge drain side of the treated permeable base and at intermediate cross drain interceptors .
Place filter fabric under section .. Place and compact the treated permeable base for edge drains under section .. .B Surfaces Out of Tolerance Where the surface of the permeable base is higher than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with the specified treated permeable base .
If authorized remove high spots to comply with the specified tolerance by any method that does not produce contaminating fines or damage the base remaining in place .
Grinding is not allowed .
Where the surface of the treated permeable base is lower than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer remove the base and replace it with the specified treated permeable base .
If authorized fill low areas with pavement material as follows .
For HMA pavement fill low areas with HMA that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of HMA pavement .
Do not fill low areas concurrently with the HMA paving operation. . For concrete pavement fill low areas with paving concrete concurrent with the concrete pavement paving operation. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for treated permeable base is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
The payment quantity for treated permeable base does not include .
Quantity used for edge drains installed adjacent to the treated permeable base .
Treated permeable base used to fill low areas of subgrade ASPHALT TREATED PERMEABLE BASES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing asphalt treated permeable bases .
.B Definitions Reserved SECTION TREATED PERMEABLE BASES .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance The Engineer determines the asphalt content of the asphalt mixture under California Test .
The bitumen ratio pounds of asphalt per lb of dry aggregate must not vary more than .
lb of asphalt above or below the amount designated by the Engineer .
Samples used to determine the bitumen ratio are obtained from trucks at the plant or from the mat behind the paver before rolling .
If the sample is taken from the mat behind the paver the bitumen ratio must not be less than the amount designated by the Engineer less .
lb of asphalt per lb of dry aggregate. . MATERIALS .A General Aggregate for ATPB must be clean and free from decomposed material organic material and other deleterious substances .
Produce ATPB under section .B except a JMF is not required .
Do not use RAP .
The temperature of the aggregate must be from to degrees F before adding the asphalt binder .
Do not store ATPB material longer than hours .
Combine aggregate with .
percent asphalt binder by weight of dry aggregate .
An increase or decrease in the asphalt content may be ordered after your proposed aggregate supply has been tested .
.B Aggregate The aggregate must comply with the gradation shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
No .
The aggregate must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Percentage of crushed particles min California Test Los Angeles rattler loss at rev max California Test Cleanness value min California Test Film stripping max California Test .
CONSTRUCTION Equipment for spreading and compacting ATPB must comply with section .C except compact ATPB in layer using one of the following methods .
One complete coverage with a steeltired axle tandem roller that has an operating weight below lb per linear inch of steeltire width .
Compact when the base mixture is from to degrees F. . One complete coverage with a steeltired axle tandem roller weighing from to tons .
Compact when the base mixture is from to degrees F. SECTION TREATED PERMEABLE BASES Do not use water to cool the ATPB .
Vibratory rollers complying with the above requirements may be used if the vibratory unit is turned off. . PAYMENT The Department adjusts the unit price of asphalt treated permeable base if an ordered increase or decrease in asphalt content exceeds the specified amount by more than .
percent by weight of dry aggregate .
CEMENT TREATED PERMEABLE BASE .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing cement treated permeable bases. . MATERIALS .A General Cement must comply with section .BType II .
The cement content of CTPB must be at least lbcu yd .
The watercement ratio must be approximately ..
The Engineer determines the exact watercement ratio .
.B Aggregate Aggregate for CTPB must comply with section .C .
Aggregate gradation must comply with the specifications for the x no .
primary aggregate nominal size coarse gradation in section .Cb. . CONSTRUCTION Store proportion mix and transport aggregates cement and water under sections .F and .G except aggregate does not have to be separated into sizes and the quantity of water and penetration requirements do not apply .
Place CTPB under section .F except the rd paragraph does not apply .
Spread compact and shape CTPB under section .F or under section .F .
Vibrators must not be used .
Compact with a axle steeltired roller weighing from to tons .
Compact within minutes after spreading the CTPB .
Compaction must consist of complete passes of the CTPB .
Cure CTPB by sprinkling the completed surface with a fine spray of water every hours for a period of hours .
Start curing the morning after base has been placed. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED RECLAIMED PAVEMENT GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing reclaimed pavement bases .
.B Definitions OMC Optimum moisture content .C Submittals .C General At least days before starting pavement reclamation work submit the QC plan .
The QC plan must describe the organization responsible parties and procedures you will use to .
Perform QC including sampling testing and reporting .
Determine action limits if corrective actions are needed .
Implement corrective actions .
Ensure pulverizing compacting grading and finishing activities are coordinated The QC plan must include copies of the forms that will be used to provide the required inspection records and sampling and testing results .
Forms must show project requirements .
The form for recording and reporting the QC measurements must show the proportions of materials used .
The QC plan must include a contingency plan that describes the corrective actions you will take in the event of equipment break down .
The corrective actions must include repairing and reopening the roadway to traffic using minor HMA under section .
.C Asphaltic Emulsion For each dilution of asphaltic emulsion used on the finished reclaimed pavement surface submit as an informational submittal .
Asphaltic emulsion type .
Weight ratio of water to bituminous material in the original asphaltic emulsion .
Weight of asphaltic emulsion before diluting .
Weight of added water .
Final dilution weight ratio of water to asphaltic emulsion .C Quality Assurance Submittals .Ca General Reserved .Cb Test Strip Submit a summary of the determinations made from test strips .
.Cc Quality Control Reporting For each lot submit a report daily that includes the following items based on the frequencies specified in the table for sampling locations and testing frequencies for the type of pavement reclamation work performed or if not specified once per lot .
General Information ..
Lot number ..
Location description .. Beginning and ending stations .. Lane number and offset from centerline .
A summary of any weight or load slips for each weighed material indicating truck and trailer numbers tare weight gross weight net weight and date .
For asphalt emulsion used on finished reclaimed pavement surface if asphaltic emulsion is specified .. Emulsion type SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .. Emulsion application rate in galsq yd .. Emulsion dilution as the weight ratio of added water to the original asphaltic emulsion .
Calculated supplementary aggregate application rate in lbsq yd and percent of dry weight of reclaimed processed material if supplementary aggregate is specified .
Calculated cement application rate by lbsq yd and percent dry weight of reclaimed processed material if cement is specified .
QC test results for .. Gradation .. Moisture content if applicable .. Inplace wet density ..
Relative compaction ..
Depth of cut .
Note on the daily report the postmile or station limits of any unsuitable materials locations and when the Engineer was notified Update each days submitted report within hours of obtaining test results .
Consolidate all lots completed in a day into one report with each lot reported separately .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Divide the area to be reclaimed into lots except the st test strip is the st lot and must be at least sq yd .
A quantity placed at the end of a work shift greater than sq yd is considered lot .
If a quantity of reclaimed pavement placed at the end of a work shift is less than sq yd you may either count this quantity as lot or include the test results for quality control in the previous lot .
For any lot including the test strip stop reclaimed pavement activities and immediately inform the Engineer if any test result does not comply with the specifications .
Stop reclaimed pavement activities for noncompliance with the specifications .
Before resuming activities .
Notify the Engineer of the adjustments you will make .
Remedy or replace the noncompliant lot until it complies with specifications .
Construct a sq yd test strip with proposed adjustments demonstrating ability to comply with the specifications .
Obtain authorization .D Preoperation Meeting Schedule a preoperation meeting at a mutually agreed time at the job site to meet with the Engineer .
Discuss the project specifications and methods of performing each item of the work .
Items discussed must include the processes for .
Determining the mix design .
Production .
Compacting .
Grading .
Finishing .
Implementing the authorized QC plan .
Implementing the contingency plan .
QC sampling and testing .
Acceptance criteria Preoperation meeting attendees must sign an attendance sheet provided by the Engineer .
The preoperation meeting must be attended by your .
Project superintendent .
Project manager .
QC manager .
Workers and your subcontractors workers including ..
Foremen ..
Ground supervisors SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .. Representative from testing lab Do not start pavement reclamation activities including test strips until the listed personnel have attended a preoperation meeting .
.D Test Strip On the st day of pavement reclamation activities and using the same equipment and materials that will be used during production construct at least feet in a single lane width to determine the .
Equipment materials and processes can produce reclaimed pavement in compliance with the specifications .
Effect of varying the pulverizing machines forward speed and drum rotation rate on the consistency of the pulverized material .
Optimal proportions as applicable of supplementary aggregate stabilizing agents and water .
Rolling method and sequence complies with the compaction and finishing specifications .
Application rate of asphaltic emulsion as applicable Do not proceed with reclaimed pavement activities until the Engineer informs you the test strip is authorized .
For production adjustments to the equipment material and process determined by the test strip must be authorized .
If QC or acceptance test results are not available you may proceed at your own risk .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Sampling and Testing Take samples under California Test .
Testing must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
Testing personnel for QC must be qualified under the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
Measure and record the actual cut depth at both ends of the pulverizing drum at least once every feet along the cut length .
Take measurements in the Engineers presence .
.D Department Acceptance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Supplementary Aggregate If supplementary aggregate is specified supplementary aggregate must comply with inch maximum gradation specified in section ..
Supplementary aggregate must not include cinders .
Do not use supplementary aggregate with more than percent by volume of reclaimed asphalt concrete .
Supplementary aggregate must weigh at least lbcu ft determined under California Test Compacted Method by Rodding .
.C Water Notify the Engineer if a water source other than potable water is used and perform testing for chlorides and sulfates before starting work .
If potable water is not used water must be clean and contain no more than parts per million of chlorides as Cl determined under California Test and no more than parts per million of sulfates as SO determined under California Test .
.D Cement If cement is specified cement must be Type II or Type V portland cement as specified in ASTM CM .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .E Asphaltic Emulsion Asphaltic emulsion must be Grade SSh or CSSh .
For dilution the weight ratio of water added to asphaltic emulsion must not exceed to . . CONSTRUCTION .A General Except for pulverized roadbed before starting daily pavement reclaiming activities sweep the area constructed the previous day to remove loose material .
Do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
.B Equipment Do not interrupt traffic while servicing equipment .
Grading equipment must be a motor grader with automatic grade controls for profile elevation and cross slope .
If specified supplementary aggregate or cement spreading equipment must uniformly distribute the supplementary aggregate or cement throughout the area to receive it .
The spreader must be equipped with working scales or proportioning and distance measuring devices to control the spread rate .
If supplementary aggregate or cement is spread before pulverizing the existing pavement the pulverizing equipment must produce a uniform mixture without segregation .
.C Surface Preparation Before pavement reclamation activities start prepare the existing roadway surface by .
Clearing foreign matter including vegetation .
Removing standing water .
Referencing the profile and cross slope .
Marking the proposed longitudinal cut lines on the existing pavement as follows .. Cut lines must coincide with points where the existing cross slope changes approximately at the centerline and edge of traveled way .. Cut lines must indicate the sequence of the cuts .
Referencing existing lane lines and striping layout If excess material is to be stored adjacent to the shoulder clear and dispose of the weeds grass and debris from the area .
.D Pulverizing and Mixing If the established grade will cause noncompliance with the thickness requirements notify the Engineer .
If you encounter unstable subgrade or rocks greater than inches in the roadway section notify the Engineer .
The Engineer determines the extent of the problem and the corrective measures to be taken .
.E Compacting and Grading Remove any solids that are larger than inches in the pulverized roadbed mixture before shaping and compacting .
.F Finishing The finished roadbed surface must not vary more than .
foot from the lower edge of a foot straight edge laid in directions parallel and perpendicular to the centerline. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for supplementary aggregate is determined as specified for aggregate base in section .
The payment quantity for asphaltic emulsion is measured under section .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS PULVERIZED ROADBED .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a uniform reclaimed pavement base by pulverizing the asphalt concrete pavement and underlying material .
.B Definitions Lot sq yd of pulverized roadbed .C Submittals At least days before starting pulverized roadbed activities submit the QC plan .
The QC plan must include a pulverizing and paving plan outlining the sequence of work including the maximum production rate for pulverizing activities .
Submit the test results for the quality characteristics within the times after sampling shown in the following table Quality characteristic Maximum reporting time allowance Gradation hours Depth of cut Inplace wet density Relative compaction .D Quality Assurance .D General The specifications for a preoperation meeting under section .D do not apply to pulverized roadbed .
.D Quality Control .Da General Meet with the Engineer week before starting pulverized roadbed activities to review the QC plan .
Perform sampling and testing for each test strip and production work at the specified frequency for the quality characteristics shown in the following table Pulverized Roadbed Quality Characteristic Sampling Locations and Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum sampling and testing frequency Sampling location Gradation California Test Test strip and per lot Loose mix after pulverizing and mixing Depth of cut NA feet Both sides of reclaiming machine along cut length Inplace wet density California Test The same locations as relative compaction tests Relative compaction California Test One per test strip and random locations per lot Compacted roadbed .Db Test Strip Allow hours for authorization of the test strip .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts pulverized roadbed based on SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .
Visual inspection including .. Segregation tearing and scarring of the finished surface .. Variance of more than .
foot measured from the lower edge of a foot straightedge ..
Uniform surface texture throughout the work limits ..
Repaired areas .
Compliance with the following table Pulverized Roadbed Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Relative compaction min California Test Thickness ft Field measurement Not more than .
ft less than the thickness shown .
MATERIALS .A General The quality characteristics of pulverized roadbed must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Pulverized Roadbed Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Gradation passing Sieve Size inch inch California Test Depth of cut ft NA Not more than .
ft less than the thickness shown Inplace wet density lbcu ft California Test Report only Relative compaction min California Test .B Sand Cover Reserved .C Supplementary Aggregate If supplementary aggregate is specified supplementary aggregate must comply with the specifications for Class aggregate base in section . . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Equipment Pulverizing equipment must .
Be a selfpropelled reclaiming machine .
Pulverize the existing pavement and underlying material to the required size .
Mix the pulverized pavement underlying material and water into a homogeneous and uniform mixture .
Be equipped with automatic depth controls capable of maintaining the cutting depth to within .
foot of the depth shown .
Have a minimum foot wide cutter that can remove the existing pavement to the specified depths SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS Compacting equipment must be a sheepsfoot roller a vibratory steeltired roller and a pneumatictired roller .
All compacting equipment must be selfpropelled and reversible .
The frequency of amplitude of vibrating rollers must be adjustable and exceed a static force of tons in vibratory mode .
.C Spreading Reserved .D Compacting and Grading Reserved .E Finishing The finished surface must be free from segregation tearing and scarring and have a uniform surface texture throughout the work limits .
Maintain the pulverized roadbed surface free of ruts bumps indentations raveling and segregation .
Repair damaged pulverized roadbed with minor HMA. . PAYMENT Not Used FULL DEPTH RECLAMATIONFOAMED ASPHALT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a reclaimed pavement base using FDRfoamed asphalt .
Constructing an FDRfoamed asphalt base includes .
Pulverizing existing asphalt concrete and existing underlying materials .
Mixing with water foamed asphalt cement and if required supplementary aggregate .
Grading and compacting the mixture .
Applying asphaltic emulsion .B Definitions Lot sq yd of FDRfoamed asphalt .C Submittals .C General With the QC plan submit the mix design .
.C Quality Assurance Submittals .Ca General Reserved .Cb Mix Design Submit FDRfoamed asphalt mix design under California Test .
With the mix design forms include actual test results worksheets photographs and graphs .
The mix design submittal must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
.Cc Quality Control Reporting With the daily report specifed in section .Cc submit the following based on the testing frequencies specified or if not specified once per lot .
General Information .
Weather Ambient air temperature before starting daily FDRfoamed asphalt activities including time of temperature reading Road surface temperature before starting daily FDRfoamed asphalt activities including time of temperature reading SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .
Asphalt binder .. Injection rate from controller ..
Temperature in degrees F from thermometer in the asphalt binder feed line for each truck load .
Water application rate by percent dry weight of FDRfoamed asphalt from the controller .
Average forward speed of pulverizing equipment .
FDRfoamed asphalt core thickness in feet and location of coring With the daily report submit the test results for the quality characteristics within the times after sampling shown in the following table FDRFoamed Asphalt Quality Characteristic Test Results Reporting Time Allowances Quality characteristic Maximum reporting time allowance Water sulfates Before work starts Water chlorides Moisture content before HMA paving Asphalt binder expansion ratio hours Asphalt binder halflife Gradation Moisture content Inplace wet density Relative compaction Indirect dry tensile strength business days Indirect wet tensile strength Tensile strength ratio Before each day of HMA paving submit a report of the moisture content at mid depth based on the frequency specified in section .Dc for the area to be paved that day .
.D Quality Assurance .D General .Da General Relative compaction must be determined under California Test and the following .
Nuclear gauge counts are taken at elevations within the FDRfoamed asphalt layer identified as E E and E measured from the finished FDRfoamed asphalt surface as follows .. E x FDRfoamed asphalt thickness inch .
.. E x FDRfoamed asphalt thickness inch .
.. E FDRfoamed asphalt thickness inch .
.. Do not take nuclear gauge counts at elevations less than inches below finished surface . .
Correction for oversize material does not apply. . A sample must contain no more than percent retained on the inch sieve and percent retained on the inch sieve. . Use the laboratory wet test maximum density closest in proximity to the lot to determine relative compaction .
If the relative compaction for a lot is less than percent perform California Test and California Test for each noncompliant lot and recalculate the relative compaction. . Measure relative compaction at each elevation E E and E. Do not average the elevation compaction measurements at each location .
Before starting FDRfoamed asphalt activities calibrate the asphalt meter in the presence of the Engineer in compliance with the material plant quality program .
The Engineer determines the frequency of testing and calibration .
Before placing HMA test moisture content at mid depth of the FDRfoamed asphalt layer under California Test .
Sampling must not introduce water to the material .
Test in the Engineers presence .
.Db Preoperation Meeting In addition to the listed personnel in section .D the preoperation meeting must be attended by your SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .
FDRfoamed asphalt machine operators .
Grading and compacting equipment operators .Dc Test Strip The Engineer tests each test strip under section .D and California Test .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Mix Design Sampling and Testing The FDRfoamed asphalt mix design process must comply with California Test .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before sampling for a mix design .
Obtain representative pavement and underlying base material samples for FDRfoamed asphalt from the test pits .
If additional samples of subgrade material are needed test pits can be excavated outside the edge of pavement to variable dimensions .
Characterize and record test pit features such as layer thicknesses and types distresses interlayers thin or thick areas digouts and adhesion to the base .
Use the sampled material to determine the mix design according to the proportions of the pavement structure shown .
Before opening the mix design sampling locations to traffic backfill test pits by replacing and compacting the remaining excavated materials .
Place and compact authorized material or minor HMA complying with section .
to the existing grade and thickness of AC in the Engineers presence .
When mix design sampling is complete at all locations remove authorized backfill material at test pit locations and place and compact with minor HMA to existing grade .
.Dc Quality Control Sampling and Testing Assign a ground supervisor whose sole purpose is to monitor the FDRfoamed asphalt activities advise project personnel and interface with the quality control testing personnel .
The ground supervisor must not have any sampling or testing duties .
Perform sampling and testing for each test strip and at the specified frequency for the quality characteristics shown in the following table FDRFoamed Asphalt Quality Characteristic Sampling Locations and Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Sampling location Minimum testing frequency Moisture content before HMA paving California Test Mid depth One per lots Asphalt binder expansion ratio Asphalt binder spray bar One before start of FDRfoamed asphalt work each day and per day Asphalt binder halflife Gradation California Test Loose mix after pulverizing and mixing Test strip and per lot Moisture content California Test Test strip and per daya Inplace wet density California Test Test strip and per daya Relative compaction California Test Compacted mix Test strip and per lot Indirect dry tensile strength California Test Loose mix after pulverizing and mixing Test strip Indirect wet tensile strength California Test Tensile strength ratio California Test aIf lot fails minimum test frequency is one per lot .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS Take a quart asphalt binder sample and record the temperature from the truck for each load delivered to the job site .
Sample asphalt binder in the Engineers presence and provide the sample to the Engineer .
Take thickness core for every lot .
Record the location and station or postmile for each thickness core .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts FDRfoamed asphalt based on .
Visual inspection for .. Segregation raveling and loose material .. Variance of more than .
foot measured from the lower edge of a foot straightedge ..
Uniform surface texture throughout the work limits ..
Repaired areas .
Compliance with the quality characteristics shown in the following table FDRFoamed Asphalt Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirements Relative compaction min California Test at each elevation E E and E Thickness ft a Core measurements .
ft of the specified thickness aTake or inch cores from random locations the Engineer selects .
The Engineer may require locations per lot coring more than three locations per lot is change order work .
At time of coring submit cores to the Engineer for measurement. . MATERIALS .A General The quality characteristics of the FDRfoamed asphalt must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS FDRFoamed Asphalt Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Moisture content before HMA paving California Test of OMC Asphalt binder expansion ratio min Note a Asphalt binder halflife seconds min Gradation passing Sieve Size inch inch inch California Test Moisture content California Test OMC Inplace wet density lbcu ft California Test Report only Relative compaction min California Test Indirect dry tensile strength psib California Test of mix design value Indirect wet tensile strength psib California Test of mix design value Tensile strength ratio California Test of mix design value aTest at the foaming temperature and percentage of foaming water by dry weight of FDRfoamed asphalt material designated in the mix design .
To test asphalt binder expansion ratio and halflife use a pail of known volume and a dipstick calibrated for the pail .
From the inspection nozzle on the asphalt binder spray bar inject foamed asphalt into the pail without exceeding the pails capacity .
With the dipstick immediately measure and record the level of foamed asphalt in the pail .
Record the halflife in seconds from the time the injection of foamed asphalt in the pail is turned off to half the dip stick reading after peak .
Calculate the expansion ratio as the volume of the foamed asphalt upon injection divided by the volume of the unfoamed asphalt binder .
bFrom material passing the inch sieve compact specimens under California Test Part .
Cure the specimens at degrees F for hours and allow the specimens to cool to room temperature .
Test specimens for dry tensile strength under California Test .
Test specimens for wet tensile strength under California Test after moisture conditioning .
.B Asphalt Binder Asphalt binder must be PG .
Do not heat asphalt binder above degree F. .C Core Backfill Material Material to fill cored holes for thickness measurements must be packaged rapidhardening cementitious material under ASTM C Type R or R. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not start FDRfoamed asphalt activities if the ambient air temperature is below degrees F or the road surface is below degrees F. If the ambient air temperature falls below degrees F during FDRfoamed asphalt activities you may only compact and finish FDRfoamed asphalt .
.B Equipment The FDRfoamed asphalt machine must have independent and interlocked systems for water and foamed asphalt and each must include .
Digital electronic controller system .
Pumping system SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .
Spray bar system Based on the mix design of the material being reclaimed and the equipments forward speed .
Controller pumping and spray bar systems must regulate the foamed asphalt and the moisture content of the pulverized material. . Rate by weight of foaming water must be controlled with the same controller .
Spray bars must be fitted with selfcleaning nozzles or nozzles that indicate flow .
Space the nozzles evenly at a rate of nozzle for every to inches of mixing chamber width .
Apply the asphalt binder atomized under pressure through individual and separate small orifices .
Fit an inspection nozzle at end of the asphalt binder spray bar .
The inspection nozzle must produce a representative sample of foamed asphalt .
Asphalt binder storage equipment must .
Be attached to the FDRfoamed asphalt machine .
Not leak .
Have a sampling valve .
Have a heating system to maintain the temperature of asphalt binder above degrees F including when the asphalt binder is injected .
Have a thermometer in the asphalt binder feed line before introduction of water Use a mass flow Coriolis effect type asphalt meter with a visible readout display and printing capabilities .
The distance from the foamed asphalt spray nozzle to the top of the cutter tooth holder must be at least equal to the cut depth .
Storage equipment for compaction water must be attached to the FDRfoamed asphalt machine and not leak .
The FDRfoamed asphalt machine must spread the mixed material or a screed mounted on the machine may be used .
Compacting equipment must consist of vibratory sheepsfoot roller with a blade for each FDRfoamed asphalt machine a vibratory steel drum roller and a pneumatictired roller .
All compacting equipment must be selfpropelled and reversible .
The frequency and amplitude of vibrating rollers must be adjustable and exceed a force of tons in vibratory mode .
.C Spreading Materials Reserved .D Pulverizing and Mixing Do not leave a wedge where the pulverizing drum cuts into the existing material .
The st cut width must use the full width of the pulverizing drum .
Subsequent cuts must overlap by at least inches .
Do not leave a gap of unpulverized material between cuts .
With each cut adjust the quantity of water and foamed asphalt proportionally to the actual cut width .
If a cut deviates more than inches outside the cut line immediately adjust .
If a cut deviates more than inches inside the cut line immediately back up and pulverize the deviation along the correct cut line without adding water or foamed asphalt .
Mark the existing pavement where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
Start the following cut on this alignment at least feet behind the mark .
The injection rate of asphalt binder must be the percent by dry weight of pulverized material designated in the mix design but not less than .
percent .
Notify the Engineer if adjustments to the asphalt binder injection rate are necessary .
The injection rate of mixing water must be sufficient to produce the FDRfoamed asphalt material moisture content shown in table titled FDRFoamed Asphalt Quality Characteristic Requirements at time of compaction .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS Do not apply water to an uncompacted surface .
Do not allow more than hours between mixing the pulverized material with foamed asphalt and cement and completion of compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers .
.E Compacting and Grading Immediately after pulverizing and mixing compact FDRfoamed asphalt with a sheepsfoot roller .
Each sheepsfoot roller must stay within feet of its FDRfoamed asphalt train .
Do not add water or use a motor grader to spread material until initial compaction with sheepsfoot rollers is complete .
During grading and final compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers add water to maintain the moisture content as shown in the table titled FDRFoamed Asphalt Quality Characteristic Requirements .
.F Finishing Immediately after compaction apply water and roll with pneumatictired rollers or steel drum roller with no vibration .
The finished surface must be free of ruts bumps indentations segregation raveling and any loose material .
Keep the compacted surface damp by lightly watering until asphaltic emulsion is applied .
Apply a coat of diluted asphaltic emulsion to the finished surface when it is damp but free of standing water .
The application rate of asphaltic emulsion must be from .
to .
galsq yd .
Do not water after applying asphaltic emulsion .
Place temporary traffic control .
Do not open to traffic without the Engineers authorization .
Maintain the FDRfoamed asphalt surface free of ruts bumps indentations raveling and segregation .
Repair damaged FDRfoamed asphalt material with minor HMA .
Take cores to determine the finished FDRfoamed asphalt thickness before placing HMA .
If a core indicates FDRfoamed asphalt thickness is less than the specified thickness by more than .
foot core in the vicinity of the noncompliant core to determine the extent of the deficient thickness .
Remove the FDRfoamed asphalt material deficient in thickness by cold planing to a depth of .
foot below the finished FDRfoamed asphalt grade .
Replace the planed FDRfoamed asphalt with the HMA specified for the project and compact under the method compaction specifications in section .C .
Immediately before placing HMA apply asphaltic emulsion at a rate from .
to .
percent residual binder content .
Do not place HMA until authorized. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for asphalt binder is measured as specified for asphalt in section ..
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in cement or asphalt binder quantities .
FULL DEPTH RECLAMATIONCEMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a reclaimed pavement base using FDRcement .
Constructing an FDRcement base includes .
Pulverizing existing asphalt concrete pavement and underlying materials .
Mixing with water cement and if specified supplementary aggregate .
Grading and compacting the mixture .
Applying asphaltic emulsion .B Definitions Lot sq yd of FDRcement SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .C Submittals .C General With the QC plan submit the mix design .
.C Quality Assurance Submittals .Ca General Reserved .Cb Mix Design Submit each FDRcement mix design on a form you create specifically for FDRcement .
Each mix design submittal must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
You may submit multiple mix designs to optimize the cement content and adjust for varying underlying materials .
Each mix design submittal must include .
Area represented by the mix design by beginning and ending stations .
Gradation of the mixture before addition of cement .
Cement content in percent by weight of the dry mixture and in lbsq yd surface application rate .
Supplementary aggregate in percent by weight of the dry mixture if supplementary aggregate is specified .
Moisture content of the material when mixing relative to OMC .
Test results and any worksheets photographs and graphs .Cc Quality Control Reporting With the daily report submit the following based on the testing frequencies specified or if not specified once per lot .
General Information ..
Weather Ambient air temperature before starting daily FDRcement activities including time of temperature reading Road surface temperature before starting daily FDRcement activities including time of temperature reading .
Average forward speed of pulverizing equipment .
FDRcement quality control test results for unconfined compressive strength With the daily report submit the test results for the quality characteristics within the times after sampling shown in the following table FDRCement Quality Characteristic Test Result Reporting Time Allowances Quality characteristic Maximum reporting time allowance Water sulfates Before work starts Water chlorides Gradation hours Moisture content Laboratory maximum wet density Relative compaction Unconfined compressive strength hours after testing specimens .D Quality Assurance .D General Relative compaction must be determined under California Test and the following .
Test in .foot depth intervals from the bottom of the FDRcement layer regardless of the layer thickness SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .
Correction for oversize material does not apply .
A sample must contain no more than percent retained on the inch sieve and percent retained on the inch sieve .
Use the laboratory wet test maximum density closest in proximity to the lot to determine relative compaction .
If the relative compaction for a lot is less than percent perform California Test and California Test for each noncompliant lot and recalculate the relative compaction The Engineer tests each test strip under section .D .
.D Mix Design The mix design must include day unconfined compressive strength tests on specimens with cement contents using the proposed cement and optimum mixing moisture content .
The cement contents must be percent of specified content specified content and percent of specified content by dry weight of FDRcement .
Manufacture specimens for each cement content and average the results for each .
Plot the average day compressive strengths on the ordinate versus the cement contents in percent on the abscissa on a graph .
Indicate the cement contents from the line corresponding to the minimum and maximum day compressive strengths from the specified range .
Based on the mix design test results you may propose a cement content different from the specified cement content .
If you propose a different cement content your mix design submittal must include data to support the specified cement content will not produce FDRcement that complies with the specifications or there is variability in the FDRcement materials resulting in risk of not complying with the specifications .
The revised cement content must be authorized .
Compensation or deductions for an ordered increase or decrease is specified in section ..
Notify the Engineer at least business days before sampling .
Use materials from the specified FDRcement mixing depth .
If any portion of existing asphalt concrete pavement is to be removed before pulverizing remove that portion of asphalt concrete pavement from the samples used in the mix design .
If additional samples of subgrade material are needed sampling locations can be excavated outside the edge of pavement to variable dimensions .
Characterize and record sampling location features such as layer thicknesses and types distresses interlayers thin or thick areas digouts and adhesion to the base .
Use the sampled material to determine the mix design represented by the sampling location according to the proportions of the pavement structure shown .
Before opening the mix design sampling locations to traffic backfill sampling locations by replacing and compacting with an authorized material or minor HMA that complies with section .. Backfill and compact to the existing grade and thickness of asphalt concrete pavement in the Engineers presence .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Sampling and Testing Assign a ground supervisor whose sole purpose is to monitor the FDRcement activities advise project personnel and interface with the quality control testing personnel .
The ground supervisor must not have any sampling or testing duties .
Test the quality characteristics of FDRcement shown in the following table SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS FDRCement Quality Characteristic Sampling Locations and Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum sampling and testing frequency Sampling location Gradation California Test Test strip and per lot Loose mix after pulverizing and mixing Moisture content California Test Test strip and per daya Loose mix after pulverizing and mixing b Unconfined compressive strength ASTM D Test strip and per lots Loose mix after pulverizing and mixing b Laboratory maximum wet density California Test Test strip and per day Same location as a California Test test Relative compaction c California Test Test strip and per lot Compacted mix aIf test fails minimum test frequency is per lot b Sample immediately after mixing is complete cVerify the moisture content reading made under California Test with California Test .
Measure and record the actual cut depth at both ends of the pulverizing drum at least once every feet along the cut length .
Take measurements in the Engineers presence .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts FDRcement based on .
Visual inspection for the following .. Segregation raveling and loose material .. Variance of more than .
foot measured from the lower edge of a foot straightedge ..
Uniform surface texture throughout the work limits ..
Repaired areas .
Compliance with the quality characteristics shown in the following table FDRCement Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Value Cement application rate lbsq yd Calibrated tray or equal Mix design rate Relative compaction min wet density California Test Thickness ft a Core measurements .
of the thickness shown a Take or inch diameter cores from random locations the Engineer selects .
The Engineer may require locations per lot coring more than locations per lot is change order work .
At time of coring submit cores to the Engineer for measurement. . MATERIALS .A General The quality characteristics for the FDRcement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS FDRCement Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Gradation passing Sieve Size inch inch inch California Test Moisture content California Test Mix design percent Unconfined compressive strength psi ASTM Da Specified in section .Da Laboratory maximum wet density lbcu ft California Test Use for relative compaction calculation Relative compaction min wet densityb California Test a Method A except .
Test specimens must be compacted under ASTM D Method A or B. . Test specimens must be cured by sealing each specimen with layers of plastic at least mil thick .
The plastic must be tight around the specimen .
Seal all seams with duct tape to prevent moisture loss .
Sealed specimens must be placed in an oven for days at degrees F. At the end of the cure period specimens must be removed from the oven and aircooled .
Duct tape and plastic wrap must be removed before capping .
Specimens must not be soaked before testing .
bVerify the moisture content reading made under California Test with California Test .
.B Cement Reserved .C Water Reserved .D Supplementary Aggregate If supplementary aggregate is specified supplementary aggregate must comply with the specifications for Class aggregate base in section .
.E Core Backfill Material Material to fill cored holes for thickness measurements must be packaged rapidhardening cementitious material under ASTM C Type R or R. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not start FDRcement activities if the ambient air temperature is below degrees F or the road surface is below degrees F. If the ambient air temperature falls below degrees F during FDR cement activities you may only compact and finish FDRcement .
.B Equipment The FDRcement machine must have independent and interlocked systems for water and must include the following .
Digital electronic controller system .
Pumping system .
Spray bar system Storage equipment for water must not leak and must be attached to the FDRcement machine with a tow bar and hose .
Grading and compacting equipment must be selfpropelled and reversible .
The frequency and amplitude of vibrating rollers must be adjustable and exceed a force of tons in vibratory mode .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .C Pulverizing Do not pulverize more material than can be mixed with cement and compacted in one day .
Do not leave a wedge where the pulverizing drum cuts into the existing material .
The st cut width must use the full width of the pulverizing drum .
Subsequent cuts must overlap at least inches .
Do not leave a gap of unpulverized material between cuts .
If an overlap is more than inches immediately adjust .
If an overlap is less than inches immediately back up and pulverize the deviation along the correct cut line .
Mark the existing pavement where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
Start the following cut on this alignment at least feet behind the mark .
.D Spreading Materials Spread cement uniformly over the full roadway surface width .
Do not spread cement more than minutes before mixing .
Do not apply dry cement in windy conditions that will result in dust outside the FDRcement area .
The spread rate must be the mix design rate or the ordered rate in lbsq yd percent .
Do not spread cement and supplementary aggregate before pulverizing .
.E Mixing The overlap requirements in section .C apply to mixing .
With each cut adjust the quantity of water proportionally to the actual cut width .
If an overlap is less than inches immediately back up and pulverize the deviation along the correct line without adding water or cement .
Water must be injected through the pulverizing machine .
The injection rate of mixing water must be sufficient to produce the FDRcement material mixing moisture content described in the mix design .
Mark where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
Start the following cut on this alignment at least feet behind the mark .
.F Compacting and Grading Immediately after pulverizing and mixing compact FDRcement to the minimum relative compaction .
Do not allow more than hours between final mixing of the pulverized material with cement and completion of compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers .
During grading and final compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers add water to maintain the mixing moisture content as described in the mix design .
.G Finishing Immediately after compaction apply water and roll with pneumatictired rollers or steel drum roller with no vibration .
The finished surface must be free of ruts bumps indentations segregation raveling and any loose material .
Keep the compacted surface damp by lightly watering until asphaltic emulsion is applied .
During the period from to hours after compaction microcrack the surface by applying single passes with a ton vibratory steel drum roller at maximum amplitude travelling from to mph regardless of whether asphaltic emulsion has been applied .
Apply a coat of diluted asphaltic emulsion to the finished surface when it is damp but free of standing water .
The application rate of asphaltic emulsion must be from .
to .
galsq yd .
Do not water after applying asphaltic emulsion .
Do not open to traffic without authorization .
Maintain the FDRcement surface free of ruts bumps indentations raveling and segregation .
Repair damaged FDRcement material with minor HMA .
Take cores to determine the finished FDRcement thickness before placing HMA .
If a core indicates FDRcement thickness is less than the specified thickness by more than .
foot core in the vicinity of the noncompliant core to determine the extent of the deficient thickness .
Remove the FDRcement material deficient in thickness by cold planing to a depth of .
foot below the finished FDRcement grade .
Replace the planed FDRcement with the HMA specified for the project and compact under section .C .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS Immediately before placing HMA apply asphaltic emulsion at a rate from .
to .
percent residual binder content .
Do not place HMA until authorized. . PAYMENT If an increase or decrease in the specified cement content is ordered payment for the increase or decrease in cement is the cost of cement per ton FOB from the cement mill including sales tax plus the freight cost per ton for delivery from the mill to the job site .
If any cash or trade discount is offered or available regardless of whether it is taken that discount is deducted .
Maintain records that allow a clear determination of the cement costs associated with an ordered increase or decrease .
Submit evidence of the cost of cement used for the increase or decrease .
If your records show an excessive cost for the increase or decrease of cement or you furnish inadequate evidence for the cost the Engineer determines the cost to be the lowest wholesale price the cement was available for in the quantities delivered to the point of production less any available discounts .
The quantity of cement subject to an increase or decrease in payment is the difference between the specified theoretical quantity of cement and the quantity of cement ordered .
RESERVED CRACK AND SEAT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing a base by cracking seating and preparing the surface of existing concrete pavement .
Section does not apply to crack and seat .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit each core in a plastic bag or tube for authorization at the time of sampling .
Mark each core with a location description .
.D Quality Assurance .D General If cracking is noncompliant .
Stop crack and seat work .
Modify your equipment and procedures and crack the noncompliant pavement again .
Construct another test section .
Take additional core samples to verify compliance .
Construct an inspection strip if the concrete pavement has HMA on the surface .D Test Section The Engineer determines and marks a test section up to sq ft within the crack and seat area shown .
Construct the test section and obtain the Engineers verbal authorization before starting crack and seat work .
Immediately before cracking the test section apply water to the pavement surface so that cracking can be readily evaluated .
Crack the test section and vary impact energy and striking patterns to verify your procedure .
.D Quality Control Drill cores at least inches in diameter under ASTM C to verify cracking in the Engineers presence .
Take at least cores per test section and core per lane mile for each pavement cracking machine used .
The Engineer determines the core locations .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .D Department Acceptance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Use fastsetting or polyester concrete to fill core holes. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Cracking Crack existing concrete pavement using the procedures and equipment from the authorized test section .
Do not allow flying debris during cracking operations .
Crack existing concrete pavement into segments that nominally measure feet transversely by feet longitudinally .
If the existing pavement is already cracked into segments crack it into equalsized square or rectangular pieces that nominally measure not more than feet transversely and from to feet longitudinally .
Do not impact the pavement within foot of another break line pavement joint or edge of pavement .
Cracks must be vertical continuous and penetrate the full depth of pavement .
Cracks must be within inches of vertical along the full depth of pavement .
Do not cause surface spalling over .foot deep or excessive shattering of the pavement or base .
Cracking equipment must impact the pavement with a variable force in a controlled location .
Do not use unguided freefalling weights such as headache balls .
If the concrete pavement has no more than .
foot of asphalt concrete on the surface you may crack the pavement without removing the asphalt concrete .
After cracking construct an inspection strip by removing at least square feet of asphalt concrete at a location determined by the Engineer .
Construct additional inspection strips to demonstrate compliance where ordered by the Engineer .
After cracking allow public traffic on the cracked or initial pavement layer for no more than days .
.C Seating Seat cracked concrete by making at least passes over the cracked concrete with either .
Oscillating type pneumatictired roller at least feet wide .
Pneumatic tires must be of equal size diameter type and ply .
The tires must be inflated to psi minimum and maintained so that the air pressure does not vary more than psi .
The rollers gross static weight must be at least tons. . Vibratory padfoot roller exerting a dynamic centrifugal force of at least tons .
A pass is movement of a roller in either direction at mph or less .
After all segments have been seated clean loose debris from joints and cracks using compressed air free of moisture and oil .
Reseat any segment of cracked pavement that has not been overlaid within hours of seating .
.D Surface Preparation Before opening cracked and seated pavement to traffic or overlaying .
Fill joints cracks and spalls wider than inch and deeper than inch by applying tack coat and placing minor HMA under section except use the no .
gradation instead of inch . .
Remove all loose debris and sweep the pavement .
SECTION RECLAIMED PAVEMENTS .E Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for crack and seat is the area measured with no deductions for existing cracked segments .
RESERVED DIVISION V SURFACINGS AND PAVEMENTS GENERAL GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing surfacings and pavements .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Preconstruction Meetings At least business days before the start of surfacing and pavement operations hold a preconstruction meeting with the Engineer and your .
Project manager .
QC manager .
Project superintendent .
Project foreman .
Plant manager .
Traffic control foreman .
Subcontractors foremen Meeting attendees must sign an attendance sheet provided by the Engineer .
The Engineer retains the attendance sheet .
Discuss the project specifications and the processes for producing materials and constructing each item of work including .
Quality assurance .. Quality control .. Department acceptance .
Placement of materials .. Training .. Checklists .. Test sections or trial slabs .
Contingency plan .
Issues specific to the project including ..
Weather .. Alignment and geometrics .. Traffic control issues ..
Haul distances ..
Presence and absence of shaded areas .. Other local issues Do not place trial slabs construct test strips or start paving activities until the listed personnel have attended the meeting. . MATERIALS Not Used SECTION GENERAL .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used BASE BOND BREAKER .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying or placing a base bond breaker between a base and concrete pavement .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of base bond breaker material delivered .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS The base bond breaker must be one of the following Base bond breaker no .
Description PG asphalt binder Grade PG Curing compound no .
White opaque polyethylene film under ASTM C except the minimum thickness must be mils White curing paper under ASTM C Geosynthetic bond breaker .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Before applying or placing a base bond breaker remove foreign and loose materials from the base .
Do not place a base bond breaker until the base has cured .
Pave over the base bond breaker within hours of placing it .
.B Applying and Placing Base Bond Breaker Select a bond breaker to apply or place over the base material as shown in the following table Base material Bond breaker no .
LCB Concrete base LCB rapid setting RSC base CTPB Existing base Apply base bond breaker no .
in a single application at a uniform rate from .
to .
galsq yd over the entire surface of the base .
Cure for at least hours before paving .
Mix base bond breaker no .
as specified for mixing curing compound for concrete .
Apply the bond breaker in or more applications to achieve a coverage rate of at least .
galsq yd over the entire surface of the base .
Cure for at least hours before paving .
SECTION GENERAL Place base bond breakers no .
and without wrinkles .
Overlap adjacent sheets a minimum of inches in the same direction as the concrete pour .
Tape or bond the sheets together as needed to prevent the sheets from folding or wrinkling .
Secure the bond breaker such that it remains in place during concrete placement .
Ensure that no concrete gets under the bond breaker .
Place base bond breaker no .
without wrinkles .
Overlap adjacent sheets a minimum of inches in the same direction as the concrete pour .
Overlap no more than layers at any location .
Secure the base bond breaker to the base with pins or nails punched through galvanized washers or discs from to .
inches in diameter .
Place fasteners less than feet apart along the edges and feet apart elsewhere .
If the bond breaker moves or wrinkles during concrete pavement placement use more fasteners at a smaller spacing .
Ensure that no concrete gets under the bond breaker. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for base bond breaker does not include the quantity used for overlaps .
PAVEMENT SMOOTHNESS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for measuring the smoothness of pavement surfaces .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Inertial Profiler Certification At least business days before starting initial profiling or changing the inertial profiler or operator submit .
Inertial profiler certification issued by the Department .
Operator certification for the inertial profiler issued by the Department .
Manufacturers instructions and test procedures for calibration and verification of the inertial profiler Within business days after crosscorrelation testing submit a ProVAL profiler certification analysis report for the test results to the Engineer and to the electronic mailbox address smoothnessdot.ca.gov .
.C Inertial Profiler Data At least days before inertial profiling you must register with the Departments secure file sharing system .
To obtain information on the registration process send an email with your contact information to smoothnessdot.ca.gov .
Within business days after each day of profiling submit the profile information to the Engineer and to the Departments secure file sharing system .
After submitting the profile information to the Departments file sharing system send a notification of your electronic submittal to the Engineer and to the above electronic mailbox address with the names of the files submitted .
The profiling information must include .
Raw profile data for each lane. . ProVAL ride quality analysis report for the International Roughness Index of the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
Submit each report as a PDF file. . ProVAL ride quality analysis report for the Mean Roughness Index of each lane .
Submit each report as a PDF file. . ProVAL smoothness assurance analysis report for the International Roughness Index of the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
Submit each report as a PDF file. . ProVAL smoothness assurance analysis reports for the grinding locations of the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
Submit each report as a PDF file. . GPS data file for each lane .
Submit the data file in GPS eXchange file format. . Manufacturers recommended calibration and verification test results for the inertial profiler .
SECTION GENERAL .
Inertial profilers calibration and verification test results including results for bounce block and the distance measurement instrument .
Submit the raw profile data in an unfiltered electronic pavement profile file format .
Use the following file naming convention YYYYMMDD_TTCCCRRR_EA_D_L_W_B_E_X_PT.PPF where YYYY year MM month leading zero DD day of month leading zero TT district leading zero CCC county or letter abbreviation as shown in section .
RRR route number with no leading zeros EA Contract number excluding the district identification number expressed as characters D traffic direction NB SB WB or EB L lane number from left to right in the direction of travel W wheel path L for left R for right or B for both B beginning station to the nearest foot such as or beginning post mile to the nearest hundredth such as .
with no leading zero E ending station to the nearest foot such as or ending post mile to the nearest hundredth such as .
with no leading zero X profile operation EXIST for existing pavement INTER for after prepaving smoothness correction PAVE for after paving and CORR for after final surface pavement correction PT type of HMA or concrete pavement such as Type A HMA RHMAG JPCP or CRCP If you are submitting multiple inertial profiler data files compress the files into a .ZIP file format and submit them using the filenaming convention TT_EA_X_YYYYMMDD.zip .
.C Straightedge Measurements Within business days of measuring smoothness with a straightedge submit a list of the areas requiring smoothness correction .
Identify the areas by .
Location number .
DistrictCountyRoute .
Beginning station or post mile to the nearest .
mile .
For correction areas within a traffic lane .. Lane direction NB SB EB or WB .. Lane number from left to right in the direction of travel .. Wheel path L for left R for right or B for both .
For correction areas not within a traffic lane .. Identify the pavement area such as shoulder weigh station or turnout ..
Direction and distance from the centerline L for left or R for right .
Estimated size of correction area .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Certifications The inertial profiler must display a current certification decal showing the expiration date .
The certifications for the inertial profiler and operator must not be more than months old .
The operator must be certified for each model of inertial profiler operated .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved SECTION GENERAL .Db Smoothness .Dbi General Test pavement smoothness using an inertial profiler except use a foot straightedge for the pavement at .
Traffic lanes less than feet in length including ramps turn lanes and acceleration and deceleration lanes .
Areas within feet of manholes .
Shoulders .
Weighinmotion areas .
Miscellaneous areas such as medians gore areas turnouts and maintenance pullouts Where inertial profiler testing is required .
Determine the pavement smoothness for each traffic lane by obtaining the International Roughness Index for the left and right wheel paths in an individual lane .
The average of the International Roughness Index values for the left and right wheel paths for the same traffic lane is the Mean Roughness Index of the lane .
The wheel paths are a pair of lines feet from and parallel to the edge of a traffic lane .
Left and right wheel paths are based on the direction of travel. . Identify the areas of localized roughness using the FHWAs engineering software ProVAL to perform smoothness assurance analysis .
Calculate the continuous International Roughness Index values for each wheel path with a foot interval using a mm filter .
Where OGFC is required test pavement smoothness of the final HMA or concrete pavement surface before placing OGFC and after placing OGFC .
.Dbii Inertial Profiler Calibration and Verification Tests Notify the Engineer at least business days before performing calibration and verification testing of the inertial profiler .
Conduct the following calibration and verification tests in the Engineers presence each day before profiling .
Block test to verify the accuracy of the height sensor under California Test . .
Bounce test to verify the combined accuracy of the height sensor and accelerometer under California Test . .
Distance measurement instrument test to verify the accuracy of the distance measuring instrument under California Test . . Manufacturers recommended tests .
Conduct a crosscorrelation verification test of the inertial profiler in the Engineers presence before performing the initial profiling .
A verification test must be performed at least annually .
Conduct repeat runs of the inertial profiler on an authorized test section .
The test section must be a .mile segment of existing concrete pavement if you are measuring new concrete pavement or existing asphalt concrete pavement if you are measuring new asphalt concrete pavement .
Calculate a crosscorrelation to determine the repeatability of your device under California Test using a ProVAL profiler certification analysis with a foot maximum offset .
The crosscorrelation must be a minimum of .. .Dbiii Performing Analyzing and Collecting Data Operate the inertial profiler under the manufacturers instructions and AASHTO R at inch recording intervals .
For concrete pavement use a minimum inch line laser sensor .
Collect profiling data under AASHTO R and analyze it using mm and International Roughness Index filters .
While collecting the profile data to determine the International Roughness Index values record the following locations in the raw profile data at the beginning and end of all .
Bridge approach slabs .
Bridges .
Culverts visible on the roadway surface SECTION GENERAL .
Atgrade intersections Profile the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
Determine the Mean Roughness Index for .mile fixed sections using the ProVAL ride quality analysis with a mm filter .
Calculate the Mean Roughness Index of each lane .
A partial section less than .
mile that is the result of an interruption to a continuous pavement surface must comply with the Mean Roughness Index specifications for a full section .
Adjust the Mean Roughness Index for a partial section to reflect a full section based on the proportion of a paved section .
Determine the areas of localized roughness using ProVAL with a continuous International Roughness Index for each wheel path with a foot interval using a mm filter .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts pavement surfaces for smoothness based on compliance with the smoothness specifications for the type of pavement surface specified .
For areas that require pavement smoothness determined using a foot straightedge the pavement surface must not vary from the lower edge of the straightedge by more than . . foot when the straightedge is laid parallel with the centerline . . foot when the straightedge is laid perpendicular to the centerline and extends from edge to edge of a traffic lane . . foot when the straightedge is laid within feet of a pavement conform For each .mile section your International Roughness Index values must be within percent of the Departments International Roughness Index values .
The Engineer may order you to recalibrate your inertial profiler equipment and reprofile .
If your results are inaccurate due to operator error the Engineer may disqualify your inertial profiler operator. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Notify the Engineer of the start location by station and start time at least business days before profiling .
Before profiling remove foreign objects from the pavement surface and mark the beginning and ending station on the pavement shoulder .
The stationing must be the same when profiling more than one surface. . PAYMENT Not Used RESIDUE CONTAINING LEAD FROM PAINT AND THERMOPLASTIC Reserved RESERVED BITUMINOUS SEALS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for applying bituminous seals .
Section does not apply .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance The emulsion and binder suppliers must attend the preconstruction meeting. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Asphaltic emulsion for seal coats may be reheated if necessary .
After loading the asphaltic emulsion into a tank car or truck for transport to the job site do not heat it above degrees F. During reheating agitate the asphaltic emulsion to prevent localized overheating .
Except for fog seal coats apply Setting Grade asphaltic emulsions at a temperature from to degrees F and apply Setting Grade asphaltic emulsions from to degrees F. Asphaltic emulsion must not cool to a temperature below degrees F. .B Equipment Distributor trucks must be equipped with .
Pressuretype system with insulated tanks .
Spray bars .. With minimum length of feet and fullcirculating type .. With fullcirculatingtype extensions if needed to cover a greater width .. Adjustable to allow positioning at various heights above the surface to be treated ..
Operated by levers such that or all valves may be quickly opened or closed in one operation .
Devices and charts to provide for accurate and rapid determination and control of asphaltic emulsion quantities being applied .
Include an auxiliary wheel type bitumeter that registers ..
Speed in ftmin .. Trip by count .. Total distance in feet .
Distribution system ..
Capable of producing a uniform application of liquid asphalt in controlled amounts ranging from .
to galsq yd of surface and a pressure range from to psi .. With a hose and nozzle for application to areas inaccessible to the distributor .. With pressure gauges and a thermometer for determining temperatures of the asphaltic emulsion The use of gravity distributors is not allowed .
You may use cabcontrolled valves for the application of seals .
The valves controlling the flow from nozzles must act positively to provide a uniform unbroken application of asphaltic emulsion on the surface .
Maintain distributor and storage tanks at all times to prevent dripping .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .
PAYMENT Not Used SEAL COATS .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for applying seal coats .
Signs for seal coat work must comply with section .. .A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Quality Control Reserved .Ac Department Acceptance The Department accepts screenings based on the quality characteristic requirements specified in section .B .
If test results for the screenings gradation do not comply with the requirements in the table titled Seal Coat Screenings you may remove the seal coat represented by these tests or request that it remain in place with a payment deduction .
If your request is authorized .
per ton for noncompliant screenings left in place is deducted .
.B Materials Screenings must be broken stone crushed gravel or both .
At least percent of screenings by weight must be crushed particles as determined under California Test .
Screenings for seal coats must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Seal Coat Screenings Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at revolutions Loss at revolutions California Test Film stripping max California Test .C Construction .C General For seal coats on lane twoway roadways place a W LOOSE GRAVEL sign and a WP MPH plaque at foot maximum intervals along each side of the traveled way where screenings are spread on a traffic lane and at public roads or streets entering the seal coat area .
Place the st W sign in each direction where traffic first encounters the loose screenings regardless of which lane the screenings are spread .
A WP MPH plaque is not required where the posted speed limit is less than mph .
For seal coats on freeways expressways and multilane conventional highways place a W LOOSE GRAVEL sign and a WP MPH plaque at foot maximum intervals along the outside edge of the traveled way nearest to the lane worked on at entrance ramps and at public roads or streets SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS entering the seal coat area .
Place the st W sign where the screenings start with respect to the direction of travel on that lane .
A WP MPH plaque is not required where the posted speed limit is less than mph .
Maintain signs in place at each location until the final brooming of the seal coat surface for that location is complete .
Signs may be set on temporary portable supports with the WP plaque below the W sign or on barricades with the WP plaque alternating with the W sign .
Schedule the seal coat activities such that seal coat is placed on both lanes of the traveled way each work shift and such that way traffic control is discontinued hour before darkness .
At the end of the work shift the end of the seal coat on both lanes must generally match .
If traffic is routed over a surface where a seal coat application is intended the seal coat must not be applied to more than half the width of the traveled way at a time and the remaining width must be kept free of obstructions and open to traffic until the previously applied width is ready for traffic use .
Wherever final sweeping or brooming of the seal coat surface is complete place permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings within days .
If you fail to place the permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings within the specified time the Department withholds percent of the estimated value of the seal coat work completed that has not received permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings .
.C Equipment Equipment for seal coats must include and comply with the following .
Screenings haul trucks .
Haul trucks must have .. Tailgates that discharge screenings .. Devices to lock onto the rear screenings spreader hitch ..
Dump beds that will not push down on the spreader when fully raised ..
Dump beds that will not spill screenings on the roadway when transferred to the spreader hopper .. Tarpaulins to cover precoated screenings if haul distance exceeds minutes or ambient temperature is less than degrees F . Selfpropelled screenings spreader .
The spreader must have ..
Screenings hopper in the rear .. Belt conveyors that carry the screenings to the front ..
Spreading hopper capable of providing a uniform screening spread rate over the entire width of the traffic lane in application. . Selfpropelled power brooms .
Do not use gutter brooms or steeltined brooms .
Brooms must be capable of removing loose screenings adjacent to barriers that prevent screenings from being swept off the roadway including curbs gutters dikes berms and railings. . Pneumatictired rollers .
Pneumatictired rollers must be an oscillating type at least feet wide .
Each roller must be selfpropelled and reversible .
Pneumatic tires must be of equal size diameter type and ply .
The roller must carry at least lb of load on each wheel and each tire must have an air pressure of psi .
.C Surface Preparation Before applying seal coat cover manholes valve and monument covers grates or other exposed facilities located within the area of application with plastic or oilresistant construction paper secured by tape or adhesive to the facility being covered .
Reference the covered facilities with enough control points to locate the facilities after the application of the seal coat .
After completion of seal coat activities remove covers from the facilities .
Immediately before applying seal coat clean the surface to receive seal coat by removing extraneous material and drying .
Use brooms to clean the existing pavement .
.C Applying Emulsion and Asphalt Binder Cover the edges of existing pavement not receiving seal coat using a material such as kraft paper .
Remove the paper after the seal coat application .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Align longitudinal joints between seal coat applications with designated traffic lanes .
For emulsion overlap longitudinal joints by not more than inches .
You may overlap longitudinal joints up to inches if authorized .
For areas not accessible to a truck distributor bar apply the emulsion with a squeegee or other authorized means .
For asphalt binder hand spray nonaccessible areas .
You may overlap the emulsion or asphalt binder applications before the application of screenings at longitudinal joints .
Do not apply the emulsion or asphalt binder unless enough screenings are at the job site to cover the emulsion or asphalt binder .
Apply emulsion or asphalt binder to lane at a time and cover the lane entirely with screening within the same work shift .
.C Spreading Screenings Prevent vehicles from driving on asphaltic emulsion or asphalt binder before spreading screenings .
Spread screenings at a uniform rate over the full lane width in application .
Broom excess screenings at joints before spreading adjacent screenings .
Operate the spreader at speeds slow enough to prevent screenings from rolling over after dropping .
If the spreader is not moving screenings must not drop .
If you stop spreading and screenings drop remove the excess screenings before resuming activities .
.C Finishing Remove piles ridges or unevenly distributed screenings .
Repair permanent ridges bumps or depressions in the finished surface .
Spread additional screenings and roll if screenings are picked up by rollers or vehicles .
Seal coat joints between adjacent applications of seal coat must be smooth straight uniform and completely covered .
Longitudinal joints must be at lane lines and not overlap by more than inches .
Blend the adjacent applications by brooming .
A coverage must consist of the number of passes a roller needs to cover the width .
A pass must be roller movement parallel to the seal coat application in either direction .
Overlapping passes are part of the coverage being made and are not part of a subsequent coverage .
Do not start a coverage until completing the previous coverage .
Before opening to traffic finish seal coat in the following sequence .
Perform initial rolling consisting of coverage with a pneumatictired roller .
Perform final rolling consisting of coverages with a pneumatictired roller .
Broom excess screenings from the roadway and adjacent abutting areas .
Apply flush coat if specified The Engineer may order salvaging and stockpiling excess screenings .
Salvaging and stockpiling excess screenings is change order work .
Dispose of excess screenings the Engineer determines are not salvageable or dispose of them on embankment slopes or in authorized areas .
.C Seal Coat Brooming Broom seal coat surfaces for at least consecutive days starting from the day screenings are applied .
Brooming must .
Keep the surface free from loose screenings .
Distribute screenings over the surface so as to absorb any free asphaltic material .
Cover any areas deficient in cover coat material .
Prevent formation of corrugations SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS The Engineer determines the exact time of brooming .
As a minimum brooming is required at the following times .
On lane way roadways from to hours after traffic controlled with pilot cars has been routed on the seal coat .
On multilane roadways from to hours after screenings have been placed .
In addition to previous brooming immediately before opening any lane to traffic not controlled with pilot cars .
On the morning following the application of screenings on any lane that has been open to traffic not controlled with pilot cars and before starting any other activities For lane way roadways under way traffic control upon completion of secondary rolling traffic must be controlled with pilot cars and routed over the new seal coat for a period of to hours .
The Engineer determines the exact period of time .
On multilane roadways start initial brooming after the screenings have been in place for a period of to hours .
If the initial brooming is not completed during the work shift in which the screenings were placed complete the initial brooming at the start of the next work shift .
Control traffic with pilot cars and route on the new seal coat surface of the lane for a minimum of hours after completion of the initial brooming and before opening the lane to traffic not controlled with pilot cars .
If traffic is controlled with pilot cars a maximum of lane in the direction of travel must be open to traffic .
Once traffic controlled with pilot cars is routed over the seal coat at a particular location continuous control must be maintained at that location until the seal coat placement and brooming on adjacent lanes to receive seal coat are completed .
After the days remove excess screenings from the paved areas .
Brooming must not displace screenings set in asphaltic material .
.D Payment If a bid item for traffic control system is shown in the Bid Item List payment for furnishing and operating a pilot car is not included in the payment for any type of seal coat. . FOG SEAL COAT .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for applying a fog seal coat .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a gal sample of the asphaltic emulsion in a plastic container .
Take the sample from the distributor truck spray bar at midload .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials The Engineer selects the grade of slowsetting asphaltic emulsion to be used .
If additional water is added to the asphaltic emulsion the resultant mixture must not be more than part asphaltic emulsion to part water .
The Engineer determines the exact quantity of additional water .
.C Construction Apply asphaltic emulsion for the fog seal coat at a residual asphalt rate from .
to .
galsq yd .
The Engineer determines the exact rate .
Apply the fog seal coat when the ambient air temperature is above degrees F. If the fog seal coat becomes tacky sprinkle water at a rate determined by the Engineer .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS If a fog seal coat and seal coat with screenings are on the same project apply the fog seal coat at least days before applying the adjoining seal coat with screenings .
The joint between the seal coats must be neat and uniform .
.D Payment The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the asphaltic emulsion fog seal coat quantity . .
FLUSH COATS .A General Section .
includes specifications for applying a flush coat .
Applying a flush coat includes applying a fog seal coat followed by sand .
.B Materials The Engineer selects the grade of slowsetting or quicksetting asphaltic emulsion to be used .
Sand for flush coat must comply with the material specifications for fine aggregate gradation in section .C .
Sand must not include organic material or clay .
.C Construction Apply asphaltic emulsion for flush coat at a residual asphalt rate from .
to .
galsq yd .
The Engineer determines the exact rate .
During flush coat activities close adjacent lanes to traffic .
Do not track asphaltic emulsion on existing pavement surfaces .
Apply sand immediately after the asphaltic emulsion application .
Spread sand with a selfpropelled screenings spreader equipped with a mechanical device that spreads sand at a uniform rate over the full width of a traffic lane in a single application .
Spread sand at a rate from to lbsq yd .
The Engineer determines the exact rate .
.D Payment The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the sand cover seal quantity. . ASPHALTIC EMULSION SEAL COAT .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section .
includes specifications for applying an asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
Applying an asphaltic emulsion seal coat includes applying asphaltic emulsion followed by screenings followed by a flush coat .
An asphaltic emulsion seal coat must be a nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat or a polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
A double asphaltic emulsion seal coat consists of the application of asphaltic emulsion followed by screenings applied twice in sequence .
.Ab Definitions Reserved .Ac Submittals At least days before starting asphaltic emulsion seal coat application submit the name of an authorized laboratory that will be performing asphaltic emulsion QC testing .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Submit a gal sample of asphaltic emulsion in a plastic container to the Engineer and to the authorized laboratory .
Each sample must be submitted in an insulated shipping container within hours of sampling .
Within days after taking samples submit the authorized laboratorys test results for asphaltic emulsion .
.Ad Quality Assurance Samples for the screenings gradation and cleanness value must be taken from the spreader conveyor belt .
Within business days of sampling the authorized laboratory must test the asphaltic emulsion for .
Viscosity under AASHTO T . Sieve test under AASHTO T . Demulsibility under AASHTO T . Torsional recovery under California Test for polymer asphaltic emulsion .
Elastic recovery under AASHTO T for polymer asphaltic emulsion Circulate asphaltic emulsion in the distributor truck before sampling .
Take samples from the distributor truck at midload or from a sampling tap or thief .
Before taking samples draw and dispose of gal .
In Engineers presence take two gal samples every tons or at least days production .
.A Materials Not Used .A Construction The Engineer determines the exact application rate .
Apply the asphaltic emulsion at an emulsion temperature from to degrees F. When tested under California Test the application rate for asphaltic emulsion must not vary from the average by more than .
percent in the transverse direction .
percent in the longitudinal direction You may stockpile screenings for asphaltic emulsion seal coat if you prevent contamination .
Screenings must have damp surfaces at spreading .
If water visibly separates from the screenings do not spread .
You may redampen them in the delivery vehicle .
.A Payment Not Used .B Nonpolymer Asphaltic Emulsion Seal Coat .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for applying a nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Reserved .Bd Quality Assurance .Bdi General Reserved .Bdii Quality Control Reserved SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .Bdiii Department Acceptance The Department accepts screenings for nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat based on compliance with the cleanness value requirements specified in section .B .
If a test result for the screenings cleanness value is from to less than you may remove the seal coat represented by this test or request that it remain in place with a payment deduction .
If your request is authorized the Department deducts the corresponding amount for the cleanness value shown in the following table Asphaltic Emulsion Seal Coat Cleanness Value Deductions Cleanness value Deduction Less than .ton .ton .ton If the screenings cleanness value is less than remove the asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
.B Materials Screenings for nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat must have the gradation as determined under California Test in the following table Nonpolymer Asphaltic Emulsion Seal Coat Screenings Gradation Percentage passing Sieve size Coarse max Medium max Medium fine max Fine max No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
The cleanness value determined under California Test must be or greater .
.B Construction Asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rate ranges shown in the following table Asphaltic Emulsion Application Rates Screenings Application rate range galsq yd Fine ..
Medium fine ..
Medium .. Coarse ..
Apply asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air temperature is from to degrees F and the pavement surface temperature is at least degrees F. Do not apply asphaltic emulsion when weather forecasts predict the ambient air temperature will fall below degrees F within hours after application .
For double asphaltic emulsion seal coat the asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rates shown in the following table SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Asphaltic Emulsion Application Rates Screenings Application rate range galsq yd Double st application .. nd application ..
Spread screenings before the asphaltic emulsion sets or breaks .
The screenings spread rate must be within the ranges shown in the following table Screening Spread Rates Seal coat type Range lbsq yd Fine Medium fine Medium Coarse The Engineer determines the exact screenings spread rate .
Spread screenings within percent of the rate determined by the Engineer .
Do not spread screenings more than feet ahead of the completed initial rolling .
For double asphaltic emulsion seal coat screenings must have a spread rate within the ranges shown in the following table Screening Spread Rates Seal coat type Range lbsq yd Double st application nd application Remove excess screenings on the st application before the nd application of asphaltic emulsion .
.B Payment Not Used .C Polymer Asphaltic Emulsion Seal Coat .C General .Ca Summary Section .C includes specifications for applying a polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
.Cb Definitions Reserved .Cc Submittals At least days before starting polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat application submit a signed copy of the test result report of the Vialit test method for aggregate retention in chip seals french chip to the Engineer and to Department of Transportation Division of Maintenance Roadway Maintenance Office N Street MS Sacramento CA SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .Cd Quality Assurance The authorized laboratory must test screenings for retention under the Vialit test method for aggregate in chip seals french chip .
The Vialit test results are not used for acceptance .
The Vialit test is available at the METS website .
A test for polymer asphaltic emulsion represents the smaller of tons or days production .
A test for the screenings gradation or cleanness value represents the smaller of tons or days production .
If the test results for polymer asphaltic emulsion do not comply with the specifications the Engineer assesses a pay factor value for the following quality characteristics and increments Polymer Asphaltic Emulsion Pay Factor Table Quality characteristic Test method Increment Pay factor Test on polymer asphaltic emulsion Viscosity at C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Each seconds above max or below min Settlement in days AASHTO T Each .
above max sieve test AASHTO T Each .
above max demulsibility AASHTO T Each below min Test on residue from evaporation Penetration at C AASHTO T Each dm above max or below min Field softening point C ASTM DDM C below min Torsional recoverya California Test For each increment below the min value of For each increments below the min value of For each increments below the min value of Elastic recovery AASHTO T For each increment below the min value of For each increments below the min value of For each increments below the min value of aThe highest pay factor applies .
The Engineer assesses a pay factor of for sampling not performed in compliance with the specifications including shipping and sampling containers .
For noncompliant polymer asphaltic emulsion you may request seal coat to remain in place .
If the request is authorized the Department makes a payment deduction corresponding to the total pay factor value shown in the following table Polymer Asphaltic Emulsion Pay Factor Deductions Total pay factor value Deduction none .ton .ton .ton .ton .ton You must remove polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat with a total pay factor value greater than .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS For polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat if a test result for the screenings cleanness value is from to less than you may request that the seal coat remain in place .
If the request is authorized the Department makes a payment deduction corresponding to the cleanness value shown in the following table Polymer Asphaltic Emulsion Seal Coat Cleanness Value Deductions Cleanness value Deduction or over None .ton .ton .ton If the test results for polymer asphaltic emulsion aggregate gradation and cleanness value do not comply with the specifications both payment deductions are made .
.C Materials Polymer asphaltic emulsion must include elastomeric polymer .
Polymer asphaltic emulsion must comply with section Table under the test on residue from evaporation test for Grades PMRS PMRSh PMCRS and PMCRSh and the following .
Penetration at .
degrees F g for seconds determined under AASHTO T must be at least . . Elastic recovery of at least percent when tested under AASHTO T . . Polymer content in percent by weight does not apply. . Ring and ball softening point temperature determined under AASHTO T for Test on Residue from Evaporation Test must comply with the following minimum temperature requirement .. degrees F for a geographical ambient temperature from to degrees F .. degrees F for a geographical ambient temperature from to degrees F .. degrees F for a geographical ambient temperature from to greater than degrees F Screenings for polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat must have the gradation as determined under California Test in the following table Polymer Asphaltic Emulsion Seal Coat Screenings Gradation Percentage passing Sieve size Coarse max Medium max Medium fine max Fine max No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
The cleanness value determined under California Test must be or greater .
.C Construction Polymer asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rate ranges shown in the following table SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Polymer Asphaltic Emulsion Application Rates Screenings Application rate range galsq yd Fine ..
Medium fine ..
Medium .. Coarse ..
Apply polymer asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air temperature is from to degrees F and the pavement surface temperature is at least degrees F. Do not apply polymer asphaltic emulsion when weather forecasts predict the ambient air temperature will fall below degrees F within hours after application .
For double asphaltic emulsion seal coat polymer asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rates shown in the following table Polymer Asphaltic Emulsion Application Rates Screenings Application rate range galsq yd Double st application .. nd application .. You may stockpile screenings for polymer emulsion seal coat if you prevent contamination .
Screenings must have damp surfaces at spreading .
If water visibly separates from the screenings do not spread them .
You may redampen them in the delivery vehicle .
Spread screenings before the polymer emulsion sets or breaks .
Screenings must have a spread rate within the ranges shown in the following table Screening Spread Rates Seal coat type Range lbsq yd Fine Medium fine Medium Coarse The Engineer determines the exact application rate .
Spread screenings within percent of the rate determined by the Engineer .
Do not spread screenings more than feet ahead of the completed initial rolling .
For a double seal coat screenings must have a spread rate within the ranges shown in the following table Screening Spread Rates Seal coat type Range lbsq yd Double st application nd application Remove excess screenings on the st application before the nd application of asphaltic emulsion .
.C Payment Not Used SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .
ASPHALT BINDER SEAL COATS .A General Reserved .B Asphalt Rubber Binder Seal Coats .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for applying asphalt rubber binder seal coat .
Asphalt rubber binder seal coat consists of applying asphalt rubber binder followed by heated screenings precoated with asphalt binder followed by a flush coat .
.Bb Definitions crumb rubber modifier Combination of ground or granulated high natural crumb rubber and scrap tire crumb rubber .
descending viscosity reading Subsequent viscosity reading at least percent lower than the previous viscosity reading .
high natural crumb rubber Material containing to percent natural rubber .
scrap tire crumb rubber Any combination of .
Automobile tires .
Truck tires .
Tire buffing .Bc Submittals At least business days before use submit the permit issued by the local air district for asphalt rubber binder field blending equipment and application equipment .
If an air quality permit is not required by the local air district for producing asphalt rubber binder submit verification from the local air district that an air quality permit is not required .
At least days before starting seal coat activities submit the name of an authorized laboratory to perform QC testing for asphalt rubber binder .
The authorized laboratory must comply with the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
For each delivery of asphalt rubber binder ingredients and asphalt rubber binder to the job site submit a certificate of compliance and a copy of the specified test results .
Submit a certified volume or weight slip for each delivery of asphalt rubber binder ingredients and asphalt rubber binder .
Submit SDS for each asphalt rubber binder ingredient and the asphalt rubber binder .
At least days before use submit .
Four qt cans of mixed asphalt rubber binder .
Samples of each asphalt rubber binder ingredient .
Asphalt rubber binder formulation and data as follows .. For asphalt binder and asphalt modifier include Source and grade of asphalt binder Source and type of asphalt modifier Percentage of asphalt modifier by weight of asphalt binder Percentage of combined asphalt binder and asphalt modifier by weight of asphalt rubber binder Test results for the specified quality characteristics .. For crumb rubber modifier include Each source and type of scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural rubber Percentage of scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural rubber by total weight of asphalt rubber binder SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Test results for the specified quality characteristics .. For asphalt rubber binder include Test results for the specified quality characteristics Minimum reaction time and temperature Submit a certificate of compliance and accuracy verification of test results for viscometers .
Submit notification minutes before each viscosity test or submit a schedule of testing times .
Submit the log of asphalt rubber binder viscosity test results each day of asphalt rubber binder seal coat work .
Submit viscosity rest results within business days after testing .
Submit resilience and softening point test results within business days after testing .
.Bd Quality Assurance .Bdi General The equipment used in producing asphalt rubber binder and the equipment used in spreading asphalt rubber binder must be permitted for use by the local air district .
.Bdii Quality Control .BdiiA General Reserved .BdiiB Asphalt Modifier Test asphalt modifier under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Asphalt Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Frequency Viscosity ASTM D per shipment Flash point ASTM D Molecular analysis Asphaltenes ASTM D per shipment Aromatics ASTM D .BdiiC Crumb Rubber Modifier Sample and test scrap tire CRM and high natural CRM separately .
Test CRM under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Crumb Rubber Modifier Quality characteristic Test method Frequency Scrap tire crumb rubber gradation California Test per tons or per project whichever is greater High natural crumb rubber gradation California Test per tons or per project whichever is greater Wire in CRM California Test per lb Fabric in CRM California Test CRM particle length CRM specific gravity California Test Natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber ASTM D per lb .BdiiD Asphalt Rubber Binder Test asphalt rubber binder under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Quality characteristic Test method Sampling location Frequency Descending viscositya ASTM DDM Reaction vessel per lotb Viscosity at F ASTM DDM Distribution truck minutes before use per lotb Cone penetration ASTM D Distribution truck per lotb Resilience ASTM D Softening point ASTM DDM aStart taking viscosity readings at least minutes after adding crumb rubber modifier and continue taking viscosity readings every minutes until consecutive descending viscosity readings have been obtained and the final viscosity complies with the specification requirement .
bThe lot is defined in the Departments MPQP .
Retain the sample from each lot .
Test for cone penetration resilience and softening point for the first lots and if all lots pass the testing frequency may be reduced to once for every lots .
If QC test results indicate that the asphalt rubber binder does not meet the specifications take corrective action and notify the Engineer .
.Bdiii Department Acceptance .BdiiiA General Reserved .BdiiiB Crumb Rubber Modifier The Department accepts CRM based on the gradation requirements shown in the following table when tested under California Test Crumb Rubber Modifier Gradation Requirements Sieve size Scrap tire crumb rubber High natural crumb rubber Operating range Contract compliance Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
If a test result for CRM gradation does not comply with the specifications the Department deducts the corresponding amount for each gradation test as shown in the following table Material Test result a Deduction Scrap tire crumb rubber Operating range TR Contract compliance Scrap tire crumb rubber TR Contract compliance High natural crumb rubber Operating range TR Contract compliance High natural crumb rubber TR Contract compliance a Test Result TR Each gradation test for scrap tire crumb rubber represents lbs or the quantity used in that days production whichever is less .
Each gradation test for high natural crumb rubber represents lbs or the quantity used in that days production whichever is less .
.BdiiiC Asphalt Rubber Binder For Department acceptance testing take a sample of asphalt rubber binder in the Engineers presence every lots or once a day whichever is greater .
Each sample must be in a qt can with open top and friction lid .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS The Department accepts asphalt rubber binder based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Cone penetration at C . mm ASTM D Resilience at C rebound ASTM D Softening point C ASTM DDM Viscosity at F Pas x a ASTM DDM aPrepare sample for viscosity test under California Test .
.BdiiiD Precoated Screenings The Department accepts precoated screenings based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table Precoated Screenings Acceptance Criteria Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Los Angeles Rattler Loss max Loss at revolutions Loss at revolutions California Test Film stripping max California Test Cleanness value min California Test Durability min California Test Gradation passing by weight Sieve size California Test Coarse max Medium max Fine max No .
No .
No .
.B Materials .Ba General Reserved .Bb Asphalt Binder Asphalt binder must comply with the specifications for asphalt binder .
Do not modify asphalt binder with polymer .
.Bc Asphalt Modifier Asphalt modifier must be a resinous high flash point and aromatic hydrocarbon .
Asphalt modifier must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Asphalt Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Viscosity at C ms x ASTM D X a Flash point CL.O.C .
C ASTM D min Molecular analysis Asphaltenes by mass max ASTM D . Aromatics by mass min ASTM D a X denotes the proposed asphalt modifier viscosity from to .
A change in X requires a new asphalt rubber binder submittal .
.Bd Crumb Rubber Modifier CRM must be ground or granulated at ambient temperature .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber must be delivered to the asphalt rubber binder production site in separate bags .
Steel and fiber must be separated .
If steel and fiber are cryogenically separated it must occur before grinding and granulating .
Cryogenicallyproduced CRM particles must be large enough to be ground or granulated .
Wire must not be more than .
percent by weight of CRM when tested under California Test .
CRM must be free of contaminants except fabric which must not exceed .
percent by weight of CRM .
The length of an individual CRM particle must not exceed inch .
CRM must be dry freeflowing particles that do not stick together .
A maximum of percent calcium carbonate or talc by weight of CRM may be added .
CRM must not cause foaming when combined with the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier .
Specific gravity of CRM must be from .
to .
determined under California Test .
The CRM must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Crumb Rubber Modifier Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Scrap tire crumb rubber High natural crumb rubber Acetone extract ASTM D .. .. Rubber hydrocarbon ASTM D .. . min Natural rubber content ASTM D .. ..
Carbon black content ASTM D .. Ash content ASTM D . min When tested under California Test scrap tire crumb rubber must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Scrap Tire Crumb Rubber Gradation Percentage passing Sieve size Gradation limit Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
When tested under California Test high natural crumb rubber must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table High Natural Crumb Rubber Gradation Percentage passing Sieve size Gradation limit Operating range Contract compliance No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
.Be Asphalt Rubber Binder Asphalt rubber binder must be a combination of SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .
Asphalt binder .
Asphalt modifier .
Crumb rubber modifier Asphalt rubber binder blending equipment must be authorized under the Departments Material Plant Quality Program .
The blending equipment must allow the determination of weight percentages of each asphalt rubber binder ingredient .
Asphalt rubber binder must be percent by weight asphalt binder and percent by weight of CRM .
The minimum percentage of CRM must be .
percent and lower values may not be rounded up .
CRM must be percent by weight scrap tire crumb rubber and percent by weight high natural crumb rubber .
Asphalt modifier and asphalt binder must be blended at the production site .
Asphalt modifier must be from .
to .
percent by weight of the asphalt binder in the asphalt rubber binder .
The asphalt rubber binder supplier determines the exact percentage .
If blended the asphalt binder must be from to degrees F when asphalt modifier is added and the mixture must circulate for at least minutes .
Asphalt binder asphalt modifier and CRM may be proportioned and combined simultaneously .
The blend of asphalt binder and asphalt modifier must be combined with the CRM at the asphalt rubber binder production site .
The asphalt binder and asphalt modifier blend must be from to degrees F when the CRM is added .
Combined ingredients must be allowed to react at least minutes at temperatures from to degrees F except the temperature must be at least degrees F below the flash point of the asphalt rubber binder .
After reacting the asphalt rubber binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Cone penetration at C . mm ASTM D Resilience at C rebound ASTM D Softening point C ASTM DDM Viscosity at F Pas x a ASTM DDM aPrepare sample for viscosity test under California Test .
Maintain asphalt rubber binder at a temperature from to degrees F. Stop heating unused asphalt rubber binder hours after the minute reaction period .
Reheating asphalt rubber binder that cools below degrees F is a reheat cycle .
Do not exceed reheat cycles .
If reheating asphalt rubber binder must be from to degrees F before use .
During reheating you may add scrap tire crumb rubber .
Scrap tire crumb rubber must not exceed percent by weight of the asphalt rubber binder .
Allow added scrap tire crumb rubber to react for at least minutes .
Reheated asphalt rubber binder must comply with the specifications for asphalt rubber binder .
.Bf Screenings Before precoating with asphalt binder screenings for asphalt rubber binder seal coat must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Asphalt Rubber Binder Seal Coat Screenings Gradation Percentage passing by weight Sieve size Medium max Fine max No .
No .
No .
The seal coat screenings must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Seal Coat Screenings Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Cleanness value min California Test Durability min California Test .B Construction .Ba General Reserved .Bb Equipment Selfpropelled distributor truck for applying asphalt rubber binder must have the following features .
Heating unit .
Internal mixing unit .
Pumps that spray asphalt rubber binder within .
galsq yd of the specified rate .
Fully circulating spray bar that applies asphalt rubber binder uniformly .
Tachometer .
Pressure gauges .
Volume measuring devices .
Thermometer .
Observation platform on the rear of the truck for an observer on the platform to see the nozzles and unplug them if needed .Bc Precoating Screenings Precoating of screenings must be performed at a central mixing plant .
The plant must be authorized under the Departments Material Plant Quality Program .
For asphalt rubber binder seal coat do not recombine fine materials collected in dust control systems except cyclone collectors or knockout boxes with any other aggregate used in the production of screenings .
For asphalt rubber binder seal coat screenings must be preheated from to degrees F. Coat with any of the asphalts specified in the table titled Performance Graded Asphalt Binder in section .
The asphalt must be from .
to .
percent by weight of dry screenings .
The Engineer determines the exact rate .
Do not stockpile preheated or precoated screenings .
.Bd Asphalt Rubber Binder Application Apply asphalt rubber binder immediately after the reaction period .
At the time of application the temperature of asphalt rubber binder must be from to degrees F. Apply asphalt rubber binder at a rate from .
to .
galsq yd .
The Engineer determines the exact rate .
You may reduce the application rate by .
galsq yd in the wheel paths .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Apply asphalt rubber binder when the ambient temperature is from to degrees F and the pavement surface temperature is at least degrees F. Do not apply asphalt rubber binder unless enough screenings are available at the job site to cover the asphalt rubber binder within minutes .
Intersections turn lanes gore points and irregular areas must be covered within minutes .
Do not apply asphalt rubber binder when pavement is damp or during high wind conditions .
If authorized you may adjust the distributor bar height and distribution speed and use shielding equipment during high wind conditions .
.Be Screenings Application During transit cover precoated screenings for asphalt rubber binder seal coat with tarpaulins if the ambient air temperature is below degrees F or the haul time exceeds minutes .
At the time of application screenings for asphalt rubber binder seal coat must be from to degrees F. Spread screenings at a rate from to lbsq yd .
The exact rate is determined by the Engineer .
Spread to within percent of the determined rate .
.Bf Rolling and Sweeping Perform initial rolling within seconds of spreading screenings .
Do not spread screenings more than feet ahead of the initial rolling .
If authorized for final rolling you may use a steelwheeled roller weighing from to tons in static mode only .
Perform a final sweeping before Contract acceptance .
The final sweeping must not dislodge screenings .
.B Payment The payment quantity for precoated screenings is the weight measured after the screenings are preheated and precoated with asphalt binder .
If recorded batch weights are printed automatically the payment quantity for screenings is the weight determined from the printed batch weights if .
Total aggregate weight for the screenings per batch is printed .
Total asphalt binder weight per batch is printed .
Each truckloads zero tolerance weight is printed before weighing the first batch and after weighing the last batch .
Time date mix number load number and truck identification are correlated with a load slip .
Copy of the recorded batch weights is certified by a licensed weighmaster Asphalt rubber binder is measured as specified for asphalt binder .
.C Reserved .
STRESS ABSORBING MEMBRANE INTERLAYER .A General Section .
includes specifications for a stress absorbing membrane interlayer .
The stress absorbing membrane interlayer must comply with section .B except a flush coat is not required .
.B Materials Screenings must comply with the inch maximum gradation .
.C Construction Section .C does not apply .
Final rolling and sweeping are not required for the stress absorbing membrane interlayer .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED SLURRY SEAL AND MICROSURFACING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying slurry seal and microsurfacing .
Applying a slurry seal consists of spreading a mixture of asphaltic emulsion or polymer modified asphaltic emulsion aggregate setcontrol additives and water on a surface or pavement .
Applying a microsurfacing consists of spreading a mixture of microsurfacing emulsion water additives mineral filler and aggregate on the pavement .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General The testing laboratory must sign the original laboratory report and mix design .
If the mix design consists of the same materials covered by a previous laboratory report you may submit the previous laboratory report that must include material testing data performed within the previous months for authorization .
If you change any of the materials in the mix design submit a new mix design and laboratory report at least days before starting slurry seal and microsurfacing work .
.C Slurry Seal Submit a laboratory report of test results and a proposed mix design days before starting placement of slurry seal .
The report and mix design must include the specific materials to be used .
The laboratory report must include .
Test results used in the mix design .
Proportions of the following materials based on the aggregates dry weight ..
Aggregate .. Filler determined from tests minimum and maximum .. Water minimum and maximum .. Asphalt solids content .. Set control agent .
Comparison of slurry seal test results to the specified values Each day submit moisture data for the aggregate collected every hours if you are unable to maintain the moisture content to within a maximum daily variation of .
percent .
.C Microsurfacing Submit a laboratory report of test results and a proposed mix design days before starting placement of microsurfacing .
The report and mix design must include the specific materials to be used and show a comparison of test results and specifications .
The report must also include .
Test results used in the mix design .
Proportions of the following materials based on the aggregates dry weight ..
Aggregate .. Water minimum and maximum ..
Additives ..
Mineral filler minimum and maximum SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .. Microsurfacing emulsion residual asphalt content minimum and maximum .
Recommended changes to the following proportions based on heating the mixture to degrees F and mixing for seconds .. Water ..
Additives ..
Mineral filler .
Comparison of each individual materials test results to its specified values .
Quantitative moisture effects on the aggregates unit weight determined under ASTM CM The recommended changes in item in the list above do not apply to nighttime applications or if atmospheric temperatures below degrees F are forecast for daytime applications .
Submit a certificate of compliance with each shipment of microsurfacing emulsion as specified for asphaltic emulsion in section .C .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Your laboratory must be able to perform International Slurry Surfacing Association tests and mix designs .
In the presence of the Engineer calibrate each mixerspreader used .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before calibrating .
Calibration must comply with the Departments Material Plant Quality Program .
If the Department authorizes a mixerspreader its calibration is valid for months provided you .
Use the same truck verified with a unique identifying number .
Use the same materials in compliance with the authorized mix design .
Do not perform any repair or alteration to the proportioning systems .D Slurry Seal Calibrate the adjustable cutoff gate settings of each mixerspreader truck on the project to achieve the correct delivery rate of aggregate and emulsion per revolution of the aggregate feeder in compliance with California Test .
Checks must be performed for each aggregate source using an approved California Test vehicle scale .
Individual checks of the aggregate belt feeders delivery rate to the pugmill mixer must not vary more than percent from the average of runs of at least tons each .
Individual checks of the emulsion pumps delivery rate to the pugmill mixer must not vary more than percent from the average of runs of at least gal each .
Measure aggregate moisture every hours during slurry seal placement or maintain the moisture content within a maximum daily variation of .
percent .
.D Microsurfacing Before using a variablerate emulsion pump the pump must be calibrated and sealed in the calibrated condition under the Departments Material Plant Quality Program .
For the aggregate belt feeder the delivery rate for any individual check run must not deviate more than percent from the average of the rates of runs of at least tons each .
For the emulsion pump the delivery rate for any individual check run must not deviate more than percent from the average of the rates of runs of at least gal each .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts aggregate for slurry seal and microsurfacing based on compliance with the aggregate gradation and sand equivalent requirements .
An aggregate gradation or cleanness value test represents tons or days production whichever is less .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS If the test results for aggregate gradation or sand equivalent do not comply with the specified requirements you may remove the installed microsurfacing represented by the test results or request it remain in place with a payment deduction .
If your request is authorized the Department deducts . . per ton of slurry seal for each noncompliant aggregate gradation and sand equivalent test . . per ton of microsurfacing for each noncompliant aggregate gradation and sand equivalent test .
MATERIALS .A General Aggregate for slurry seal and microsurfacing must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements Sieve size Percentage passing by aggregate type I II III No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
Aggregate must be rock dust or sand such as plaster sand .
Aggregate larger than the no .
sieve must be percent crushed rock .
Aggregate must be free from vegetable matter deleterious substances caked or clay lumps and oversized particles .
.B Slurry Seal .B General The slurry seal mix design must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Slurry Seal Mix Design Requirements Quality characteristic Test methoda Requirement Consistency max mm Technical Bulletin Wet stripping Technical Bulletin Pass Compatibility Technical Bulletin Passb Cohesion test c within hour min kgmm Technical Bulletin Wet track abrasion max gm Technical Bulletin aTest methods are by the International Slurry Surfacing Association .
bMixing test must pass at the maximum expected air temperature at the job site during placement .
cUsing project source aggregate asphaltic emulsion and setcontrol agents if any .
The mix design must have the percent of asphaltic emulsion based on percentage by weight of the dry aggregate within the ranges shown in the following table Asphaltic Emulsion Percentage Aggregate type Range I II III The Engineer determines the exact percentage based on the design asphalt binder content and the asphalt solids content of the asphaltic emulsion furnished .
.B Aggregate If the specific gravities differ by .
or more California Test is replaced with California Test for blends of different aggregates .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Aggregate for slurry seal must comply with the requirements for the type shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement by aggregate type I II III Sand equivalent min California Test Durability index min California Test Each days aggregate moisture content measurements must not vary more than .
percent .
.B Polymer Modified Asphaltic Emulsion Polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must .
Consist of a polymer mixed with a bituminous material uniformly emulsified with water and an emulsifying or stabilization agent. . Use either neoprene polymer or butadiene and styrene copolymer .
The polymer must be homogeneous and milled into the asphaltic emulsion at the colloid mill. . Polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must be Grade PMCQSh cationic and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Polymer Modified Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tests on emulsion Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Sieve test AASHTO T . Storage stability after day AASHTO T Residue by evaporation min California Test Particle charge AASHTO T Positive Tests on residue by evaporation Penetration at C AASHTO T Ductility at C min mm AASHTO T Torsional recovery min California Test or Polymer content min California Test .
.C Microsurfacing .C General The microsurfacing mix design must have the material proportion limits shown in the following table Microsurfacing Mix Design Proportion Limits Material Proportion limits Microsurfacing emulsion residual asphalt .. of aggregate dry weight Water and additives No limit Mineral filler of aggregate dry weight The microsurfacing mix design must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Microsurfacing Mix Design Tests Quality characteristics Test methoda Requirement Wet cohesion minute set min kgcm minute traffic min kgcm Technical Bulletin Excess asphalt max gm Technical Bulletin Wet stripping min Technical Bulletin Wet track abrasion loss day soak max gm Technical Bulletin Displacement Lateral max Specific gravity after cycles of kg max Technical Bulletin A .
Classification compatibility min grade points Technical Bulletin AAA BAA Mix time C min Technical Bulletin Controllable to seconds aTest methods are by the International Slurry Surfacing Association .
.C Aggregate If you blend aggregate from different sources the aggregate from each source aggregate must comply with the aggregate specifications except gradation .
Aggregate for microsurfacing except mineral filler must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Microsurfacing Aggregate Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Sand equivalent min California Test Durability index min California Test Percentage of crushed particles min a California Test Los Angeles Rattler Loss at revolutions max b California Test aCrushed particles must have at least fractured face .
bCalifornia Test must be performed on the aggregate before crushing .
.C Microsurfacing Emulsion Microsurfacing emulsion must be a homogeneous mixture of asphalt polymer and emulsifier solution .
Add polymer modifier to asphalt or emulsifier solution before emulsification .
Polymer solids must be a minimum percent by weight of the microsurfacing emulsions residual asphalt .
Microsurfacing emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Microsurfacing Emulsion Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Saybolt Furol viscosity at C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Sieve test max AASHTO T . Settlement after days max a ASTM D Storage stability after day max AASHTO T Residue by evaporation min California Test aWaived if used within hours of shipment .
The microsurfacing emulsions residue by evaporation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Microsurfacing Emulsion Residue By Evaporation Quality characteristic Test method Requirement G at C radsec MPa AASHTO T Report only Penetration at C AASHTO T Phase angle at C radsec PA max PA base AASHTO T Report only Softening point min C AASHTO T Stiffness at C MPa and Mvalue AASHTO T Report only .C Mineral Filler If portland cement is used as mineral filler it must be any combination of Type I Type II or Type III cement. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Before applying slurry seal or microsurfacing cover manholes valve and monument covers grates or other exposed facilities located within the area of application using plastic or oil resistant construction paper secured by tape or adhesive to the facility being covered .
Reference the covered facilities with enough control points to relocate the facilities after application of the seal coat .
In areas inaccessible to spreading equipment spread the slurry seal or microsurfacing mixture with hand tools or other authorized methods .
If placing with hand tools lightly dampen the area first .
Do not handle or shift the material .
.B Proportioning .B General The Engineer determines the asphalt ratio under California Test .
The asphalt ratio in kilograms of asphalt per kg of dry aggregate must not vary by more than .
kg of asphalt from the determined amount .
.B Slurry Seal Proportion slurry seal ingredients in compliance with the authorized mix design .
Proportion and blend different aggregate types before adding other ingredients .
After proportioning the slurry seal mixture must be workable .
The slurry seal surface must be cured to allow traffic within hour after placement .
The slurry seal must not show bleeding raveling separation or other distresses for days after placing .
.B Microsurfacing Proportion the microsurfacing materials using the authorized mix design .
Field conditions may require adjustments to the proportions during construction .
Obtain authorization before adjusting proportions .
.C Mixing and Spreading Equipment .C General Mixing and spreading equipment for slurry seal and microsurfacing must proportion asphaltic emulsion water aggregate and any setcontrol additives by volume and mix them in continuous pugmill mixers .
Continuous pugmill mixers must be of adequate size and power for the type of materials to be mixed .
.C Truck Mounted Mixer Spreaders Truck mounted mixer spreaders must comply with the following .
Rotating and reciprocating equipment must be covered with metal guards .
Proportion aggregate using a belt feeder with an adjustable cutoff gate .
The Engineer verifies the height of the gate opening. . Belt feeder must have a depth monitor device .
The depth monitor device must automatically shut down power to the belt feeder when the aggregate depth is less than percent of the target depth .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .
Separate monitor device must detect the revolutions of the belt feeder .
This device must automatically shut down power to the belt feeder if it detects no revolutions .
If the belt feeder is an integral part of the equipments drive chain the monitor device is not required . .
Aggregate belt feeder must be connected directly to the drive on the emulsion pump .
The aggregate feeder drive shaft must have a revolution counter reading the nearest .
revolution for micro surfacing and nearest revolution for slurry seal. . Emulsion storage must be equipped with a device that automatically shuts down power to the emulsion pump and aggregate belt feeder when the level of stored emulsion is lowered .
To allow for normal fluctuations there may be a delay of seconds between detection of low emulsion storage levels or low aggregate depths and automatic power shut down. . Emulsion storage must be located immediately before the emulsion pump. . Emulsion storage tank must have a temperature indicator at the pump suction level .
The indicator must be accurate to degrees F. . Noflow and revolution warning devices must be in working condition and comply with California Test .
Lowflow indicators must be visible while walking alongside the equipment .
.C Continuous SelfLoading Mixing Machine Continuous selfloading mixing machines must be automatically sequenced and selfpropelled .
The mixing machine must deliver each material to a double shafted mixer and discharge the mixed material on a continuous flow basis .
The mixing machine must have sufficient storage capacity to maintain a continuous supply of material to the proportioning controls .
The mixing machine operator must have full control of forward and reverse speeds during placement .
.C Slurry Seal Equipment .Ca General Introduce emulsion into the mixer with a positive displacement pump .
If you use a variablerate pump the adjusting unit must be sealed in its calibrated position .
Introduce water into the mixer with a meter that measures gallons .
Identifying numbers for equipment must be at least inches high and located on the front and rear of the vehicle .
.Cb Spreader Box The spreader box used to spread the slurry mixture must be .
Capable of spreading an entire lane width . .
Equipped with flexible rubber belting on each side .
The belting must contact the pavement to prevent loss of slurry from the box . .
If wider than .
feet equipped with baffles reversible motordriven augers or equivalent features to uniformly apply the slurry seal on superelevated sections and shoulder slopes . .
Equipped with rear flexible strikeoff blades in close contact with the pavement and adjustable to various crown shapes to uniformly apply the slurry seal . .
Equipped with flexible drags attached to the rear and cleaned daily and changed if longitudinal scouring occurs. . Clean and free of slurry seal or emulsion at the start of each work shift .
.C Microsurfacing Equipment .Ca General Choose a continuous selfloading mixing machine or truck mounted mixerspreader .
Proportion microsurfacing emulsion using a positive displacement pump .
Identifying numbers for equipment must be at least inches high and located on the front and rear of the vehicle .
.Cb Spreader Box The spreader box must be capable of spreading the microsurfacing a minimum of feet wide and preventing the loss of microsurfacing .
Spreader boxes over feet in application width must have a device such as baffles or reversible motor driven augers to ensure uniform application on superelevated SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS sections and shoulder slopes .
Clean microsurfacing and microsurfacing emulsion from the spreader box before each work shift .
The spreader box must have a series of strikeoff devices at its rear .
The leading strikeoff device must be .
Fabricated of a suitable material such as steel or stiff rubber .
Designed to maintain close contact with the pavement during spreading .
Capable of obtaining the specified thickness .
Capable of being adjusted to the various pavement cross sections The final strikeoff device must be .
Fabricated of flexible material that produces a uniform texture in the finished surface .
Cleaned daily and changed if longitudinal scouring occurs in the microsurfacing Do not use flexible drags attached to the rear of the spreader box .
.Cc Shoulder Equipment Spread microsurfacing on shoulders with a device such as an edge box that forms clean and straight joints and edges .
.Cd Scratch Course Box Spread scratch course with the same type of spreader box used to spread microsurfacing except use an adjustable steel strikeoff device instead of a final strikeoff device .
.Ce Wheel Path Depression Boxes Each wheel path depression box must have adjustable strikeoff device between and feet wide to regulate depth .
The rut box must also have devices such as hydraulic augers capable of .
Moving the mixed material from the rear to the front of the filling chamber .
Guiding larger aggregate into the deeper section of the wheel path depression .
Forcing the finer material towards the outer edges of the spreader box .D Placing .D General If truckmounted mixerspreaders are used keep at least operational spreaders at the job site during placement .
In areas inaccessible to spreading equipment spread the slurry seal or microsurfacing mixture with hand tools .
If placing with hand tools lightly dampen the area first .
Do not handle or shift the mixture .
.D Surface Preparation .Da General Before you place slurry seal or microsurfacing clean the pavement surface by removing loose particles of extraneous materials including paving and dirt .
Use any nondestructive method such as flushing or sweeping .
.Db Slurry Seal If slurry seal activities affect access to public parking residential property or commercial property notify residents businesses and local agencies at least hours before starting activities .
The notice must .
Describe the work to be performed .
Detail streets and limits of activities .
Indicate work hours .
Be authorized Before starting slurry seal activities post signs at foot intervals on the affected streets .
Signs must display No Parking Tow Away .
Signs must state the day of the week and hours parking or access will be restricted .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Within hour after placement slurry seal must be set enough to allow traffic without pilot cars .
Slurry seal must not exhibit distress from traffic such as bleeding raveling separation or other distresses .
.Dc Microsurfacing .Dci General You may fog the roadway surface with water ahead of the spreader box .
The fog spray must be adjusted for pavement .
Temperature .
Surface texture .
Dryness .Dcii Repair Wheel Path Depression If repairing a wheel path depression is shown fill wheel path depressions and irregularities with micro surfacing material before spreading microsurfacing .
If the depressions are less than .
foot deep fill with a scratch course .
If the depressions are .
foot deep or more fill the depressions using with a wheel path depression rut box .
Spread scratch course by adjusting the steel strikeoff of a scratch course box until it is directly in contact with the pavement surface .
Spread microsurfacing with a wheel path depression rut box leaving a slight crown at the surface .
Use multiple applications to fill depressions more than .
foot deep .
Do not apply more than .
foot in a single application .
Allow traffic to compact each filled wheel path depression for a minimum of hours before placing additional microsurfacing .
.D Test Strips .Da General Reserved .Db Slurry Seal Test strips do not apply to slurry seal .
.Dc Microsurfacing Reserved .D Placement .Da General Reserved .Dai General Longitudinal and transverse joints must be .
Uniform .
Straight .
Neat in appearance .
Butttype joints .
Without material buildup .
Without uncovered areas Place longitudinal joints .
On centerlines lane lines edge lines or shoulder lines .
With overlaps not more than inches Set the leading edge of kraft paper on transverse joints to create a straight butt joint with the next application when the paper is removed .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .Daii Weather Conditions Only place slurry seal or microsurfacing if both the pavement and air temperatures are at least degrees F and rising .
Do not place slurry seal or microsurfacing if either the pavement or air temperature is below degrees F and falling .
The expected high temperature must be at least degrees F within hours after placement .
Do not place slurry seal or microsurfacing if rain is imminent or the air temperature is expected to be below degrees F within hours after placement .
.Db Slurry Seal Spread slurry seal uniformly within the specified spread rate range .
Do not spot rehandle or shift the mixture .
If there is a bid item for tack coat coat the pavement surface with an SS or CSS grade asphaltic emulsion mixed with additional water .
The ratio of water to asphaltic emulsion must be to .
Apply the tack coat at a rate from .
to .
galsq yd .
The exact rate must be authorized .
The Engineer determines the exact spread rate for slurry seal .
The completed rate must be within percent of the Engineers determined spread rate .
The slurry seal spread rates must be within the ranges shown in the following table Slurry Seal Spread Rates Type of aggregate Range lb of dry aggregatesq yd I II III Longitudinal joints must correspond with lane lines .
You may request other longitudinal joint patterns if they do not adversely affect the slurry seal .
Spread slurry seal in full lane widths .
Do not overlap slurry seal between adjacent lanes more than inches .
Use kraft paper at transverse joints and over previously placed slurry seal to prevent double placement .
Remove the paper after use .
Use hand tools to remove spillage .
The finished surface must be smooth .
The mixture must be uniform and homogeneous after spreading and there must not be separation of the emulsion and aggregate after setting .
Protect the slurry seal from damage until it has cured and will not adhere or be picked up by vehicle tires .
.Dc Microsurfacing .Dci General The Engineer determines the exact spread rate for microsurfacing .
The completed spread rate must be within percent of the Engineers determined spread rate .
The microsurfacing spread rates must be within the ranges shown in the following table Microsurfacing Spread Rates Microsurfacing type Location Range lb of dry aggregatesq yd Type II Full lane width Type IIIa Full lane width Type IIIb Full lane width a Over asphalt concrete pavement b Over concrete pavement and concrete bridge decks SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Spread microsurfacing either in the direction of traffic or in the opposite direction .
Keep hand tools available to remove spillage .
.Dcii Joints The maximum difference between the pavement surface and the bottom edge of a foot straightedge placed perpendicular to the joint must be . . foot for longitudinal joints . . foot for transverse joints .Dciii Finished Surface Finished microsurfacing must be free of irregularities such as scratch or tear marks .
You may leave up to marks that are inch wide or less and inches long or less per linear feet of microsurfacing placed .
Do not leave any marks that are over inch wide or inches long .
Sweep the microsurfacing hours after placement without damaging the microsurfacing .
For days afterward sweep the microsurfacing daily .
.Dciv Repair of Early Distress If bleeding raveling delaminating rutting or washboarding occurs after placing the microsurfacing make repairs using an authorized method. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for slurry seal is the weight determined by combining the weights of the aggregate and asphaltic emulsion .
The payment quantity for slurry seal does not include the weights of the added water and setcontrol additives .
The payment quantity for microsurfacing is the weight determined by combining the weights of the aggregate and microsurfacing emulsion .
The payment quantity for microsurfacing does not include the weights of added water and setcontrol additives .
PARKING AREA SEALS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for sealing parking areas .
Sealing a parking area consists of spreading a mixture of asphaltic emulsion aggregate polymer and water on a parking area pavement surface .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals At least days before starting placement submit samples of the aggregate to be used .
The samples must be processed the same way as the aggregate to be used in the work .
At least days before starting placement submit the name of a laboratory to perform testing and mix design .
At least days before starting placement submit a laboratory report of test results and a proposed mix design .
The report and mix design must include the specific materials to be used and show a comparison of test results and specifications .
The mix design report must include the quantity of water allowed to be added at the job site .
The laboratory performing the tests must sign the original laboratory report and mix design .
If the mix design consists of the same materials covered by a previous laboratory report you may submit the previous laboratory report which must include material testing data performed within the previous months for authorization .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS If you request substitute materials submit a new laboratory report and mix design at least days before starting placement .
At least days before use submit the manufacturers data for oil seal primer and polymer .
Submit a certificate of compliance for the parking area seal material .
.D Quality Assurance Sample the undiluted parking area seal material. . MATERIALS .A General Aggregate must be clean hard durable uncoated and free from organic and deleterious substances .
One hundred percent of the aggregate must pass the no .
sieve .
Asphaltic emulsion must be either Grade SSh or CSSh except the values for penetration at degrees C for tests on residue from distillation must be from to .
You may use claystabilized emulsion with a solids content not less than percent by weight .
Polymer must be either neoprene ethylene vinyl acetate or a blend of butadiene and styrene .
Oil seal primer must be a quickdrying emulsion with admixtures .
Oil seal primer must be manufactured to isolate the parking area slurry seal from pavement with residual oils petroleum grease and spilled gasoline .
Crack sealant must comply with section .
Water must be potable and not separate from the emulsion before the material is placed .
.B Mix Design The proposed mix design for parking area seals must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Parking Area Seal Mix Design Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Mass per liter min kg ASTM D . Cone penetration mm California Test Nonvolatile min ASTM Da Nonvolatile soluble in triclorethylene Wet track abrasion max gm ASTM D Dried film color Black Viscosity min KUb ASTM D aWeigh g of homogenous material into a previously tared small ointment can .
Place in a constant temperature oven at C for minutes .
Cool reweigh and calculate nonvolatile components as a percent of the original weight .
bKrebs units Parking area seals must contain a minimum of percent polymer by volume of undiluted asphaltic emulsion .
.C Proportioning Parking area seal ingredients must be mixed at a central plant .
The plant must include mechanical or electronic controls that consistently proportion the ingredients .
Mix asphaltic emulsion with the other ingredients mechanically .
Store the parking area seal in a tank equipped with mixing or agitation devices .
Keep stored materials thoroughly mixed .
Protect stored materials from freezing conditions .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .C Surface Preparation If cracks in the existing parking area pavement surface are from to inch wide treat the cracks under section .
Do not place the parking area seal until the Engineer determines that the crack treatment is cured .
If cracks in the existing parking area pavement surface are greater than inch wide the Engineer orders the repair .
This work is change order work .
After any crack treatment and before placing parking area seal clean the pavement surface including removal of oil and grease spots .
Do not use solvents .
If cleaning the pavement surface with detergents thoroughly rinse with water .
Allow standing water to dry before placing parking area seal .
You must seal oil and grease spots that remain after cleaning .
Use an oil seal primer and follow the manufacturers instructions .
If the pavement surface has oil or grease spots that do not come clean and sealing is insufficient the Engineer orders the repair of the pavement .
This work is change order work .
.D Placement Do not place parking area seal when the ambient temperature is less than degrees F or the surface temperature is less than degrees F. Do not place seal within hours of rain or within hours of forecast rain or freezing temperatures .
Request that the Engineer shut off the irrigation control system at least days before placing the seal and keep it shut off at least hours after the seal coat placement .
Add polymer at the job site in the Engineers presence .
If adding water at the job site based on the manufacturers instructions for consistency and spreadability do not exceed percent by volume of undiluted asphaltic emulsion .
Before placing the parking area seal dampen the pavement surface using a distributor truck .
Place the seal on the damp pavement but do not place it with standing water on the pavement .
Place the parking area seal in or more application .
The seal must be uniform and smooth free of ridges or uncoated areas .
If placing in multiple applications allow the last application to thoroughly dry before the subsequent application .
Do not allow traffic on the parking area seal for at least hours after placement .
Do not stripe the parking area seal until it is dry. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for parking area seal is the weight determined by combining the weights of the aggregate and asphaltic emulsion .
The payment quantity for parking area seal does not include the added water and setcontrol additive .
CRACK TREATMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for treating cracks in asphalt concrete pavement .
.B Definitions Reserved SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS .C Submittals If your selected crack treatment material is on the Authorized Material List for flexible pavement crack treatment material submit a certificate of compliance including .
Manufacturers name .
Production location .
Brand or trade name .
Designation .
Batch or lot number .
Crack treatment material type .
Contractor or subcontractor name .
Contract number .
Lot size .
Shipment date .
Manufacturers signature If your selected crack treatment material is not on the Authorized Material List submit a sample and test results from each batch or lot days before use .
Testing must be performed by an authorized laboratory and test results must show compliance with the specifications .
Test reports must include the information specified for the certificate of compliance submittal .
Each hotapplied crack treatment material sample must be a minimum of lb and submitted in a silicone release container .
Each coldapplied crack treatment material sample must be a minimum of qt and submitted in a plastic container .
Submit the following with each delivery of crack treatment material to the job site .
Manufacturers heating and application instructions .
Manufacturers SDS .
Name of the manufacturers recommended detackifying agent .D Quality Assurance Hotapplied crack treatment material must be sampled at least once per project in the Engineers presence .
Collect two lb minimum samples of crack treatment material from the dispensing wand into silicone release boxes .
Coldapplied crack treatment material must be sampled at least once per project in the Engineers presence .
Collect two qt samples of crack treatment material from the dispensing wand into plastic containers. . MATERIALS The crack treatment material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS Crack Treatment Material Quality characteristica Test methodb Requirement Type Type Type Type Type Softening point min C ASTM DDM Cone penetration at F max ASTM D Resilience at F unaged ASTM D Flexibility cC ASTM D Tensile adhesion min ASTM D Specific gravity max ASTM D . . . . . Asphalt compatibility ASTM D Pass Pass Pass Pass Pass Sieve test passing See note d aColdapplied crack treatment material residue collected under ASTM D Method B and sampled under ASTM D must comply with the grade specifications .
bExcept for viscosity cure each specimen at a temperature of C and a relative humidity of percent for hours before testing .
cFor the flexibility test the specimen size must be . . mm thick by .
mm wide by .
mm long .
The test mandrel diameter must be . . mm .
The bend arc must be degrees .
The bend rate must be seconds .
At least of test specimens must pass at the specified test temperature without fracture crazing or cracking .
dFor hotapplied crack treatment dilute with toluene and sieve through a no .
sieve .
For coldapplied crack treatment sieve the material asreceived through a no .
sieve .
If the manufacturer provides a statement that added components passed the no .
sieve before blending this requirement is void .
Crack treatment material must be delivered to the job site with the information listed below .
If crack treatment material is delivered to the job site in containers each container must be marked with the following information. . Manufacturers name .
Production location .
Brand or trade name .
Designation .
Crack treatment trade name .
Batch or lot number .
Maximum heating temperature .
Expiration date for cold application only Hotapplied crack treatment must be delivered to the job site premixed in cardboard containers with meltable inclusion liners or in a fully meltable package .
Coldapplied crack treatment must have a minimum shelf life of months from the date of manufacture .
Sand applied to tacky crack treatment material must be clean free of clay and comply with the gradation shown in the following table Sand Gradation Sieve size Percent passing No .
No .
No. . CONSTRUCTION Treat cracks from to inch in width for the entire length of the crack .
Fill or repair cracks wider than inch as ordered .
Filling cracks wider than inch is change order work .
For a traffic lane adjacent to a shoulder treat the cracks on the shoulder .
SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALS For hotapplied crack treatment material rout cracks or saw cut to form a reservoir .
Cracks must be clean and dry before treating .
Before treating blast cracks with oilfree compressed air at a pressure of at least psi .
If the pavement temperature is below degrees F or if there is evidence of moisture in the crack use a hot air lance immediately before applying crack treatment .
The hot air lance must not apply flame directly on the pavement .
Heat and apply hotapplied crack treatment material under the manufacturers instructions .
Apply coldapplied crack treatment material with a distributor kettle a piston or a diaphragm barrel pump that can deliver from to psi .
The application line must have a pressure gauge and a filter .
The pressure in the application line must not exceed psi .
The pressure gauge must have a regulator .
Use a highpressure hose with a inch National Pipe Tapered Thread NPT swivel connection and a dispensing wand .
Apply crack treatment with a nozzle inserted into the crack .
Fill the crack flush .
If after days the crack treatment is more than inch below the specified level the sealant fails or the crack reopens retreat the crack .
Immediately remove crack treatment material that is spilled or deposited on the pavement surface .
Before opening to traffic apply sand or the manufacturers recommended detackifying agent to tacky crack treatment material on the traveled way .
Sweep up excess sand before opening to traffic. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for crack treatment is the length measured in lane lines along the edge of each paved lane parallel to the pavements centerline .
RESERVED ASPHALT CONCRETE GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for performing asphalt concrete work. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used HOT MIX ASPHALT .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for producing and placing hot mix asphalt .
HMA includes one or more of the following types .
Type A HMA .
RHMAG .
OGFC .
BWC .
Minor HMA If the use of a WMA technology is allowed or required by a special provision the WMA technology to be used must be on the Authorized Material List for approved technologies .
Wherever reference is made to the following test methods the year of publication for these test methods is as shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Test method Year of publication AASHTO M AASHTO M AASHTO R AASHTO R AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T AASHTO T ASTM DDM  ASTM D b ASTM D ASTM D ASTM D ASTM D ASTM D Reapproved ASTM D Reapproved ASTM D ASTM D ASTM DDM  .A Definitions binder replacement Binder from RAP expressed as a percent of the total binder in the mix .
coarse aggregate Aggregate retained on a no .
sieve .
fine aggregate Aggregate passing a no .
sieve .
leveling course Thin layer of HMA used to correct minor variations in the longitudinal and transverse profile of the pavement before placement of other pavement layers .
miscellaneous areas Areas outside the traveled way and shoulders such as .
Median areas not including inside shoulders .
Island areas .
Sidewalks .
Gutters .
Ditches .
Overside drains .
Aprons at ends of drainage structures processed RAP RAP that has been fractionated .
supplemental fine aggregate Mineral filler consisting of rock dust slag dust hydrated lime hydraulic cement or any combination of these and complying with AASHTO M . SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Job Mix Formula .Abi General Except for the HMA to be used in miscellaneous areas and dikes submit your proposed JMF for each type of HMA to be used .
The JMF must be submitted on the Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form along with .
Mix design documentation on Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form dated within months of submittal .
JMF verification on a Caltrans Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form if applicable .
JMF renewal on a Caltrans Job Mix Formula Renewal form if applicable .
SDS for .. Asphalt binder ..
Supplemental fine aggregate except fines from dust collectors .. Antistrip additives The Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form must show documentation on aggregate quality .
If you can not submit a Departmentverified JMF on a Caltrans Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form dated within months before HMA production the Engineer verifies the JMF .
Submit a new JMF if you change any of the following .
Target asphalt binder percentage greater than .
percent .
Asphalt binder supplier .
Combined aggregate gradation .
Aggregate sources .
Liquid antistrip producer or dosage .
Average binder content in a new processed RAP stockpile by more than .
percent from the average RAP binder content reported on page of your Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form .
Average maximum specific gravity in a new processed RAP stockpile by more than .
from the average maximum specific gravity value reported on page of your Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form .
Any material in the JMF Allow the Engineer business days from a complete JMF submittal for document review of the aggregate qualities mix design and JMF .
The Engineer notifies you if the proposed JMF submittal is accepted .
If your JMF fails verification testing submit an adjusted JMF based on your testing .
The adjusted JMF must include a new Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form and the results of the failed verification testing .
You may submit an adjusted aggregate gradation TV on a Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form before verification testing .
Aggregate gradation TV must be within the TV limits specified .
.Abii Job Mix Formula Renewal You may request a JMF renewal by submitting .
Proposed JMF on a Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form .
Previously verified JMF documented on a Caltrans Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form dated within months .
Mix design documentation on a Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form used for the previously verified JMF .Abiii Job Mix Formula Modification For an authorized JMF submit a modified JMF if you change any of the following SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Asphalt binder supplier .
Liquid antistrip producer .
Liquid antistrip dosage You may change any of the above items only once during the Contract .
Submit your modified JMF request at least days before production .
Each modified JMF submittal must include .
Proposed modified JMF on Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form marked Modified . .
Mix design records on Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form for the authorized JMF to be modified. . JMF verification on Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form for the authorized JMF to be modified. . Test results for the modified JMF in compliance with the mix design specifications .
Perform tests at the mix design OBC as shown on the Contractor Asphalt Mix Design Data form .
With an accepted modified JMF submittal the Engineer verifies each modified JMF within days of receiving all verification samples .
.Ac Quality Control Plan With your proposed JMF submittal submit a QC plan for HMA .
The QC plan must describe the organization and procedures for .
Controlling HMA quality characteristics .
Taking samples including sampling locations .
Establishing implementing and maintaining QC .
Determining when corrective actions are needed .
Implementing corrective actions .
Using methods and materials for backfilling core locations The QC plan must address the elements affecting HMA quality including .
Aggregates .
Asphalt binder .
Additives .
Production .
Paving The QC plan must include aggregate QC sampling and testing during lime treatment .
Allow business days for review of the QC plan .
If you change QC procedures personnel or sample testing locations submit a QC plan supplement before implementing the proposed change .
Allow business days for review of the QC plan supplement .
.Ad Test Results For mix design JMF verification production startup and each tons submit AASHTO T and AASHTO T Modified test results to the Engineer and electronically to Moisture_Testsdot.ca.gov Submit all QC test results except AASHTO T and AASHTO T Modified within business days of a request .
Submit AASHTO T QC tests within days of sampling .
For tests performed under AASHTO T Modified submit test data and tested sample set within business days of sampling .
If coarse and fine durability index tests are required submit test results within business days of testing .
If a tapered notched wedge is used submit compaction test result values within hours of testing .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .Ae Reserved .Af Liquid Antistrip Treatment If liquid antistrip treatment is used submit the following with your proposed JMF submittal .
One pt sample .
Infrared analysis including copy of absorption spectra .
Certified copy of test results .
Certificate of compliance for each liquid antistrip shipment .
On each certificate of compliance include ..
Your signature and printed name ..
Shipment number .. Material type .. Material specific gravity .. Refinery .. Consignee .. Destination ..
Quantity ..
Contact or purchase order number ..
Shipment date .
Proposed proportions for the liquid antistrip For each delivery of liquid antistrip to the HMA production plant submit a pt sample to METS .
Submit shipping documents .
Label each liquid antistrip sampling container with .
Liquid antistrip type .
Application rate .
Sample date .
Contract number At the end of each days production shift submit production data in electronic and printed media .
Present data on electronic media in a tab delimited format .
Use line feed carriage return with separate record per line for each production data set .
Allow enough fields for the specified data .
Include data titles at least once per report .
For each HMA mixing plant type submit the following information in the order specified .
For batch plant mixing .. Production date .. Time of batch completion ..
Mix size and type .. Each ingredients weight .. Asphalt binder content as a percentage of the total weight of mix ..
Liquid antistrip content as a percentage of the asphalt binder weight .
For continuous mixing plant .. Production date .. Data capture time ..
Mix size and type .. Flow rate of wet aggregate collected directly from the aggregate weigh belt ..
Aggregate moisture content as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight .. Flow rate of asphalt binder collected from the asphalt binder meter .. Flow rate of liquid antistrip collected from the liquid antistrip meter .. Asphalt binder content as a percentage of the total weight of mix calculated from Aggregate weigh belt output Aggregate moisture input Asphalt binder meter output ..
Liquid antistrip content as a percentage of the asphalt binder weight calculated from Asphalt binder meter output Liquid antistrip meter output .Ag Lime Treatment If aggregate lime treatment is used submit the following with your proposed JMF submittal and each time you produce limetreated aggregate SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Exact lime proportions for fine and coarse virgin aggregates .
If marination is required the averaged aggregate quality test results within hours of sampling .
For dry lime aggregate treatment a treatment data log from the dry lime and aggregate proportioning device in the following order ..
Treatment date .. Time of day the data is captured ..
Aggregate size being treated .. HMA type and mix aggregate size ..
Wet aggregate flow rate collected directly from the aggregate weigh belt ..
Aggregate moisture content expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight .. Flow rate of dry aggregate calculated from the flow rate of wet aggregate .. Dry lime flow rate .. Lime ratio from the authorized JMF for each aggregate size being treated .. Lime ratio from the authorized JMF for the combined aggregates .. Actual lime ratio calculated from the aggregate weigh belt output aggregate moisture input and dry lime meter output expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight ..
Calculated difference between the authorized lime ratio and the actual lime ratio .
For lime slurry aggregate treatment a treatment data log from the slurry proportioning device in the following order ..
Treatment date .. Time of day the data is captured ..
Aggregate size being treated ..
Wet aggregate flow rate collected directly from the aggregate weigh belt .. Moisture content of the aggregate just before treatment expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight .. Dry aggregate flow rate calculated from the wet aggregate flow rate .. Lime slurry flow rate measured by the slurry meter .. Dry lime flow rate calculated from the slurry meter output ..
Authorized lime ratio for each aggregate size being treated .. Actual lime ratio calculated from the aggregate weigh belt and slurry meter output expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight ..
Calculated difference between the authorized lime ratio and actual lime ratio .. Dry lime and water proportions at the slurry treatment time Each day during lime treatment submit the treatment data log on electronic media in tab delimited format on a removable CDROM storage disk .
Each continuous treatment data set must be a separate record using a line feed carriage return to present the specified data on line .
The reported data must include data titles at least once per report .
.Ah Warm Mix Asphalt Technology If a WMA technology is used submit the following with your proposed JMF submittal .
SDS for the WMA technology .
For water injection foam technology .. Name of technology ..
Proposed foaming water content ..
Proposed HMA production temperature range .. Certification from binder supplier stating no antifoaming agent is used .
For additive technology .. Name of technology ..
Percent admixture by weight of binder and percent admixture by total weight of HMA as recommended by the manufacturer ..
Methodology for inclusion of admixture in laboratoryproduced HMA ..
Proposed HMA production temperature range Collect and hold data for the duration of the Contract and submit the electronic media daily .
The snapshot of production data must include the following .
Production date .
Production location SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Time of day the data is captured .
HMA mix type being produced and target binder rate .
HMA additive type brand and target rate .
Temperature of the binder and HMA mixture .
For a continuous mixing plant the rate of flow of the dry aggregate calculated from the wet aggregate flow rate as determined by the conveyor scale .
For a continuous mixing plant the rate of flow of the asphalt meter .
For a continuous mixing plant the rate of flow of HMA additive meter .
For batch plant mixing actual batch weights of all ingredients .
Dry aggregate to binder ratio calculated from metered ingredient output .
Dry aggregate to HMA additive ratio calculated from metered output At the end of each days production shift submit electronic and printed media from the HMA plant process controller .
Present data on electronic media in commaseparated values or tabseparated values format .
The captured data for the ingredients represented by the production snapshot must have allowances for sufficient fields to satisfy the amount of data required by these specifications and include data titles at least once per report .
.Ai Samples For the samples taken for JMF verification submit parts to the Engineer and use part for your testing .
At production startup and within tons of the halfway point of production of HMA submit samples split from your HMA production sample for AASHTO T and AASHTO T Modified tests .
.Aj.Ak Reserved .Al Data Cores Section .Al applies if a bid item for a data core is shown on the Bid Item List .
Submit a summary of data cores taken and a photograph of each data core to the Engineer and to Coringdot.ca.gov For each data core the summary must include .
Project identification number .
Date cored .
Core identification number .
Type of materials recovered .
Type and approximate thickness of unstabilized material not recovered .
Total core thickness .
Thickness of each individual material to within .. inch for recovered material .. . inch for unstabilized material .
Location including .. County .. Route .. Post mile .. Lane number .. Lane direction .. Station Each data core digital photograph must include a ruler laid adjacent to the data core .
Each photograph must include .
Core .
Project identification number .
Core identification number .
Date cored .
County .
Route SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Post mile .
Lane number .
Lane direction .Am.Ao Reserved .A Quality Assurance .Aa General AASHTO T Modified is AASHTO T with the following parameters .
Target air voids must equal . . percent .
Specimen height must be mm .
Number of test specimens must be to run tests .
Do not average the test results .
Test specimen must be a mm gyratory compacted specimen .
Test temperature must be set at .. degrees F for PG .. degrees F for PG .. degrees F for PG and above .
Measurements for impression must be taken at every passes along the total length of the sample .
Inflection point is the number of wheel passes at the intersection of the creep slope and the stripping slope at maximum rut depth .
Testing shut off must be set at passes .
Submersion time for samples must not exceed hours Take samples under California Test .
If a WMA technology is used a technical representative for the WMA technology must attend the preconstruction meeting .
.Ab Job Mix Formula Verification The Engineer verifies the JMF from samples taken from HMA produced by the plant to be used .
The production set point at the plant must be within .
from the asphalt binder percentage TV shown in your Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before sampling materials .
Samples may be taken from a different project including a nonDepartment project if you make arrangements for the Engineer to be present during sampling .
In the Engineers presence and from the same production run take samples of .
Aggregates .
Coarse fine and supplemental fine aggregates must be taken from the combined cold feed belt or the hot bins .
If lime treatment is required samples must be taken from individual stockpiles before lime treatment .
Samples must be at least lb for each coarse aggregate lb for each fine aggregate and lb for each type of supplemental fine aggregate .
For hotbin samples the Department combines these aggregate samples to verify the TV submitted on a Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form. . Asphalt binder .
Take at least two qt samples .
Each sample must be in a cylindricalshaped can with an open top and friction lid .
If the asphalt binder is modified or rubberized the asphalt binder must be sampled with the components blended in the proportions to be used. . RAP .
Samples must be at least lb from each fractionated stockpile used or lb from the belt. . Plantproduced HMA .
The HMA samples must be at least lb .
For aggregate RAP and HMA split the samples into at least parts and label their containers .
Three parts are for the Departments verification testing and part is for your testing .
After acceptance of the JMF submittal the Engineer verifies each proposed JMF within days of receiving all verification samples .
For JMF verification the Engineer tests the following for compliance with the specifications .
Aggregate quality .
Aggregate gradation SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Voids in mineral aggregate on laboratoryproduced HMA .
HMA quality characteristics for Department acceptance To verify the HMA for air voids voids in mineral aggregate and dust proportion the Engineer uses an average of briquettes .
The Engineer tests plantproduced material .
If the Engineer verifies the JMF the Engineer furnishes you a Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form .
If the Engineers test results on plantproduced samples do not show compliance with the specifications the Engineer notifies you .
Adjust your JMF based on your testing unless the Engineer authorizes reverification without adjustments .
JMF adjustments may include a change in .
Asphalt binder content TV up to .
percent from the OBC value submitted on the Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form .
Aggregate gradation TV within the TV limits specified in the aggregate gradation table You may adjust the JMF only once due to a failed verification test .
For each HMA type and aggregate size specified the Engineer verifies up to proposed JMF submittals including a JMF adjusted after verification failure .
If you submit more than JMFs for each type of HMA and aggregate size the Engineer deducts from payments for each verification exceeding this limit .
This deduction does not apply to verifications initiated by the Engineer or if a JMF expires while HMA production is stopped longer than days .
A verified JMF is valid for months .
.Ac Job Mix Formula Authorization You may start HMA production if .
Engineers review of the JMF shows compliance with the specifications .
Department has verified the JMF within months before HMA production .
Engineer authorizes the verified JMF .Ad Job Mix Formula Renewal For a JMF renewaland upon request in the Engineers presence and from the same production run take samples of .
Aggregates .
Coarse fine and supplemental fine aggregates must be taken from the combined cold feed belt or the hot bins .
If lime treatment is required samples must be taken from individual stockpiles before lime treatment .
Samples must be at least lb for each coarse aggregate lb for each fine aggregate and lb for each type of supplemental fines .
For hotbin samples the Department combines these aggregate samples to verify the TV submitted on a Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form. . Asphalt binder .
Take at least two qt samples .
Each sample must be in a cylindricalshaped can with an open top and friction lid .
If the asphalt binder is modified or rubberized the asphalt binder must be sampled with the components blended in the proportions to be used. . RAP .
Samples must be at least lb from each fractionated stockpile. . Plantproduced HMA .
The HMA samples must be at least lb .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before sampling materials .
For aggregate RAP and HMA split samples into at least parts .
Submit parts and use part for your testing .
Allow the Engineer business days from a complete JMF reverification submittal for document review of the aggregate qualities mix design and JMF .
The most recent aggregate quality test results within the past months may be used for verification of JMF renewal or upon request the Engineer may perform aggregate quality tests for verification of JMF renewal .
The Engineer verifies the JMF for renewal under section .Ab except SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Engineer keeps the samples until you provide test results for your part on a Contractor Job Mix Formula Renewal form. . Department tests samples of materials obtained from the HMA production unit after you submit test results that comply with the mix design specifications. . After completion of the JMF verification renewal document review the Engineer verifies each proposed JMF within days of receiving the verification renewal samples and the complete Contractor Job Mix Formula Renewal form. . You may not adjust the JMF due to a failed verification. . For each HMA type and aggregate gradation specified the Engineer verifies at no cost to you proposed JMF renewal within a month period .
If the Engineer verifies the JMF renewal the Engineer furnishes you a Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form .
The Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form is valid for months .
.Ae Job Mix Formula Modification The Engineer verifies the modified JMF after the modified JMF HMA is placed and verification samples are taken within the first tons .
The Engineer tests verification samples for compliance with .
Hamburg wheel track mix design specifications .
Air void content .
Voids in mineral aggregate on plantproduced HMA mix design specifications .
Dust proportion mix design specifications The Engineer may test for moisture susceptibility for compliance with the mix design specifications .
If the modified JMF is verified the Engineer revises your Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form to include the new asphalt binder source new liquid antistrip producer or new liquid antistrip dosage .
Your revised form will have the same expiration date as the original form .
If a modified JMF is not verified stop production and any HMA placed using the modified JMF is rejected .
The Engineer deducts from payments for each JMF modification .
.Af Certifications .Afi General Laboratories testing aggregate and HMA qualities used to prepare the mix design and JMF must be qualified under AASHTO Materials Reference Laboratory program and the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
.Afii Hot Mix Asphalt Plants Before production the HMA plant must have a current qualification under the Departments Material Plant Quality Program .
.Afiii.Afv Reserved .Ag Reserved .Ah Quality Control .Ahi General QC test results must comply with the specifications for Department acceptance .
Prepare briquettes for air voids content and voids in mineral aggregate determination .
Report the average of tests .
Except for smoothness if consecutive QC test results or any QC test results for days production do not comply with the materials specifications .
Stop HMA production .
Notify the Engineer .
Take corrective action .
Demonstrate compliance with the specifications before resuming production and placement SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE For QC tests performed under AASHTO T results are considered QC test regardless of number of sieves out of compliance .
Do not resume production and placement until the Engineer authorizes your corrective action proposal .
.Ahii Reserved .Ahiii Aggregates .AhiiiA General Reserved .AhiiiB Aggregate Lime Treatments If lime treatment is required sample coarse and fine aggregates from individual stockpiles before lime treatment .
Combine aggregate in the JMF proportions .
Test the aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Control During Lime Treatment Quality characteristic Test method Minimum sampling and testing frequency Sand equivalenta b AASHTO T per tons of untreated aggregate Percent of crushed particles AASHTO T per tons or per project whichever is greater Los Angeles Rattler AASHTO T Fine aggregate angularity AASHTO T Method A Flat and elongated particles ASTM D aReport test results as the average of tests from a single sample .
bUse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
For lime slurry aggregate treatment determine the aggregate moisture content at least once every hours of treatment .
Calculate moisture content under AASHTO T and report it as a percent of dry aggregate weight .
Use the moisture content calculations as a set point for the proportioning process controller .
The device controlling lime and aggregate proportioning must produce a treatment data log .
The log must consist of a series of data sets captured at minute intervals throughout daily treatment .
The data must be a treatment activity register and not a summation .
The material represented by a data set is the quantity produced minutes before and minutes after the capture time .
Collected data must be stored by the controller for the duration of the Contract .
If consecutive sets of recorded treatment data indicate a deviation of more than .
percent above or below the lime ratio in the authorized JMF stop treatment and take corrective action .
If a set of recorded treatment data indicates a deviation of more than .
percent above or below the lime ratio in the authorized JMF stop treatment and do not use the material represented by that set of data in HMA .
If percent or more of the total daily treatment indicates a deviation of more than .
percent above or below the lime ratio in the authorized JMF stop treatment and do not use that days treated aggregate in HMA .
The Engineer may order you to stop aggregate treatment activities for any of following .
You fail to submit treatment data log. . You fail to submit aggregate QC data for marinated aggregate. . You submit incomplete untimely or incorrectly formatted data. . You do not take corrective actions. . You take late or unsuccessful corrective actions. . You do not stop treatment when proportioning tolerances are exceeded. . You use malfunctioning or failed proportioning devices .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE If you stop treatment for noncompliance notify the Engineer of any corrective actions taken and conduct a successful minute test run before resuming treatment .
.Ahiv Liquid Antistrip Treatment For continuous mixing or batchplant mixing sample asphalt binder before adding liquid antistrip .
For continuous mixing sample the combined asphalt binder and liquid antistrip after the static mixer .
.Ahv Production Startup Evaluation You and the Engineer evaluate HMA production and placement at production startup .
Within the first tons produced on the st day of HMA production in the Engineers presence and from the same production run take samples of .
Aggregates .
Asphalt binder .
RAP .
HMA Sample aggregates from the combined coldfeed belt or hot bin .
Take RAP samples from the RAP system .
For aggregates RAP and HMA split the samples into at least parts and label their containers .
Submit parts and keep part .
You and the Engineer must test the samples and report test results except for AASHTO T Modified and AASHTO T test results within business days of sampling .
For AASHTO T Modified and AASHTO T test results report test results within days of sampling .
If you proceed before receipt of the test results the Engineer may consider the HMA placed to be represented by these test results .
Take one or inch diameter density core for each tons or portion thereof of HMA placed .
For each density core the Engineer reports the bulk specific gravity determined under AASHTO T Method A in addition to the percent of theoretical maximum density .
.Ahvi Hot Mix Asphalt Density During HMA placement determine HMA density using a nuclear gauge .
On the st day of production develop a correlation factor between cores and nuclear gauge under California Test .
Test for inplace density using cores and a nuclear gauge .
Test at random locations you select and include the test results in your QC production tests reports .
.Ahvii Tapered Notched Wedge Perform QC testing on the completed tapered notched wedge joint as follows .
Perform density tests using a calibrated nuclear gauge at a rate of test for every foot section along the joint .
Select random locations for testing within each foot section . .
Perform density tests at the centerline of the joint inches from the upper vertical notch after the adjacent lane is placed and before opening the pavement to traffic . .
Determine theoretical maximum density . .
Determine percent compaction of the longitudinal joint as the ratio of the daily average density to the maximum density test results .
Determine percent compaction values each day the tapered notched wedge joint is completed .
If the percent compaction of days production is less than percent that days notched wedge joint is rejected .
Discontinue placement of the tapered notched wedge and notify the Engineer of changes you will make to your construction process to comply with the specifications .
.Ahviii Density Cores Except for HMA pavement placed using method compaction take or inch diameter density cores at least once every business days .
Take density core for every tons of HMA from random locations the Engineer selects .
Take density cores in the Engineers presence and backfill and compact holes with SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE authorized material .
Before submitting a density core mark it with the density cores location and place it in a protective container .
If a density core is damaged replace it with a density core taken within foot longitudinally from the original density core location .
Relocate any density core located within foot of a rumble strip to foot transversely away from the rumble strip .
For a tapered notched wedge joint take or inch diameter density cores inches from the upper vertical notch of the completed longitudinal joint for every feet at locations selected by the Engineer .
Take cores after the adjacent lane is placed and before opening the pavement to traffic .
Take cores in the presence of the Engineer and backfill and compact holes with authorized material .
Before submitting a density core mark it with the cores location and place it in a protective container .
.Ahix Pavement Smoothness For HMA pavement within feet from and parallel to the construction joint formed between curbs gutters or existing pavement test pavement smoothness using a foot straightedge .
.Ahx Reserved .Ai Department Acceptance .Aii General The Department tests treated aggregate for acceptance before lime treatment except for gradation .
The Engineer takes HMA samples for AASHTO T and AASHTO T Modified from any of the following locations .
Plant .
Truck .
Windrow The Engineer takes HMA samples for all other tests from any of the following locations .
Plant .
Truck .
Windrow .
Mat behind the paver To obtain workability of the HMA sample for splitting the Engineer reheats each sample of HMA mixture not more than cycles .
Each reheat cycle is performed by placing the loose mixture in a mechanical forceddraft oven for hours or less after the sample reaches degrees F. The Engineer conditions each attheplant sample of HMA mixture in compliance with sections .. .. and .. of AASHTO R . The Engineer splits samples and provides you with a part if you request this .
No single test result may represent more than tons or one days production whichever is less except AASHTO T and AASHTO T Modified .
Except for smoothness if consecutive Department acceptance test results or any Department acceptance test results for days production do not comply with the specifications .
Stop HMA production .
Take corrective action .
Demonstrate compliance with the specifications before resuming production and placement For Department acceptance tests performed under AASHTO T results are considered Department acceptance test regardless of the number of sieves out of compliance .
The Engineer accepts HMA based on .
Authorized JMF .
Authorized QC plan SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Asphalt binder compliance .
Asphalt emulsion compliance .
Visual inspection .
Pavement smoothness .Aiii InPlace Density Except for HMA pavement placed using method compaction the Engineer tests the density core you take from each tons of HMA .
The Engineer determines the percent of theoretical maximum density for each density core by determining the density cores density and dividing by the theoretical maximum density .
Density cores must be taken from the final layer cored through the entire pavement thickness shown .
Where OGFC is required take the density cores before placing OGFC .
If the percent of theoretical maximum density does not comply with the specifications the Engineer may accept the HMA and take a payment deduction as shown in the following table Reduced Payment Factors for Percent of Maximum Theoretical Density HMA percent of maximum theoretical density Reduced payment factor HMA percent of maximum theoretical density Reduced payment factor .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Remove and replace .
Remove and replace For acceptance of a completed tapered notched wedge joint the Engineer determines density from cores you take every feet .
.Aiiii Pavement Smoothness For areas that require pavement smoothness determined using an inertial profiler the pavement surface must .
Have no areas of localized roughness with an International Roughness Index greater than inmi .
Comply with the Mean Roughness Index requirements shown in the following table for a . mile section SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE HMA Pavement Smoothness Acceptance Criteria HMA thickness Mean Roughness Index requirement .
foot inmi or less .
foot inmi or less Note These requirements do not apply to the OGFC surface .
Smoothness requirements for OGFC are specified in section .Aciii .
The final surface of HMA must comply with the Mean Roughness Index requirements before placing OGFC .
Correct pavement to the Mean Roughness Index specifications .
Areas of localized roughness greater than inmi must be corrected regardless of the Mean Roughness Index values of a .mile section .
.Aiiv Dispute Resolution You and the Engineer must work together to avoid potential conflicts and to resolve disputes regarding test result discrepancies .
Notify the Engineer within business days of receiving a test result if you dispute the test result .
If you or the Engineer dispute the others test results submit your test results and copies of paperwork including worksheets used to determine the disputed test results .
An independent third party performs referee testing .
Before the third party participates in a dispute resolution it must be qualified under AASHTO Materials Reference Laboratory program and the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
The independent third party must have no prior direct involvement with this Contract .
By mutual agreement the independent third party is chosen from .
Department laboratory in a district or region not in the district or region the project is located .
Transportation Laboratory .
Laboratory not currently employed by you or your HMA producer If the Departments portion of the split QC samples or acceptance samples are not available the independent third party uses any available material representing the disputed HMA for evaluation .
For a dispute involving JMF verification the independent third party performs referee testing as specified in the th paragraph of section .Ab .
If the independent third party determines the Departments test results are valid the Engineer deducts the independent third partys testing costs from payments .
If the independent third party determines your test results are valid the Department pays the independent third partys testing costs .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Mix Design .Ba General The HMA mix design must comply with AASHTO R except .
Notes and do not apply .
AASHTO M does not apply on combinations of aggregate gradation and asphalt binder contents to determine the OBC and HMA mixture qualities The Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form must show documentation on aggregate quality .
.Bb Hot Mix Asphalt Treatments If the test results for AASHTO T or AASHTO T Modified for untreated plantproduced HMA are less than the minimum requirements for HMA mix design determine the plasticity index of the aggregate blend under California Test .
Do not use an aggregate blend with a plasticity index greater than .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE If the plasticity index is from to treat the aggregate with dry lime with marination or lime slurry with marination .
If the plasticity index is less than treat the aggregate with dry lime or lime slurry with marination or treat the HMA with liquid antistrip .
.Bc Warm Mix Asphalt Technology For HMA with WMA additive technology produce HMA mix samples for your mix design using your methodology for inclusion of WMA admixture in laboratoryproduced HMA .
Cure the samples in a forced air draft oven at degrees F for hours minutes .
For WMA water injection foam technology the use of foamed asphalt for mix design is not required .
.B Asphalt Binder Asphalt binder must comply with section .
For a leveling course the grade of asphalt binder for the HMA must be PG or PG .
.B Aggregates .Ba General Aggregates must be clean and free from deleterious substances .
The aggregates for a leveling course must comply with the gradation specifications for Type A HMA in section .B .
.Bb Aggregate Gradations Aggregate gradation must be determined before the addition of asphalt binder and must include supplemental fine aggregates .
Test for aggregate gradation under AASHTO T . Do not wash the coarse aggregate .
Wash the fine aggregate only .
Use a mechanical sieve shaker .
Aggregate shaking time must not exceed minutes for each coarse and fine aggregate portion .
Choose a TV within the TV limits shown in the tables titled Aggregate Gradations .
Gradations are based on nominal maximum aggregate size .
.Bc Aggregate Lime Treatments .Bci General If aggregate lime treatment is required as specified in section .Bb the virgin aggregate must comply with the aggregate quality specifications .
Lime for treating aggregate must comply with section .. Water for lime treatment of aggregate with lime slurry must comply with section .B .
Notify the Engineer at least hours before the start of aggregate treatment .
Do not treat RAP .
The lime ratio is the pounds of dry lime per lb of dry virgin aggregate expressed as a percentage .
Water content of slurry or untreated aggregate must not affect the lime ratio .
Coarse and fine aggregate fractions must have the lime ratio ranges shown in the following table Aggregate fractions Lime ratio percent Coarse .. Fine ..
Combined ..
The lime ratio for fine and coarse aggregate must be within .
percent of the lime ratio in the accepted JMF .
The lime ratio must be within .
percent of the authorized lime ratio when you combine the SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE individual aggregate sizes in the JMF proportions .
The lime ratio must be determined before the addition of RAP .
If marination is required marinate treated aggregate in stockpiles from hours to days before using in HMA .
Do not use aggregate marinated longer than days .
Treated aggregate must not have lime balls or clods .
.Bcii Dry Lime If marination is required .
Treat and marinate coarse and fine aggregates separately .
Treat the aggregate and stockpile for marination only once .
Treat the aggregate separately from HMA production Proportion dry lime by weight with an automatic continuous proportioning system .
If you use a batchtype proportioning system for HMA production control proportioning in compliance with the specifications for continuous mixing plants .
Use a separate dry lime aggregate treatment system for HMA batch mixing including .
Pugmill mixer .
Controller .
Weigh belt for the lime .
Weigh belt for the aggregate If a continuous mixing plant for HMA production without limemarinated aggregates is used use a controller that measures the blended aggregate weight after any additional water is added to the mixture .
The controller must determine the quantity of lime added to the aggregate from the aggregate weigh belt input in connection with the manually input total aggregate moisture the manually input target lime content and the lime proportioning system output .
Use a continuous aggregate weigh belt and pugmill mixer for lime treatment in addition to the weigh belt for the aggregate proportioning to asphalt binder in the HMA plant .
If you use a water meter for moisture control for lime treatment the meter must comply with Departments MPQP manual .
When mixing dry lime with aggregate the aggregate moisture content must ensure complete lime coating .
The aggregate moisture content must not cause aggregate to be lost between the point of weighing the combined aggregate continuous stream and the dryer .
Add water to the aggregate for mixing and coating before dry lime addition .
Immediately before mixing lime with aggregate water must not visibly separate from the aggregate .
Mix aggregate water and dry lime with a continuous pugmill mixer with twin shafts .
Immediately before mixing lime with aggregate water must not visibly separate from the aggregate .
Store dry lime in a uniform and freeflowing condition .
Introduce dry lime to the pugmill in a continuous process .
The introduction must occur after the aggregate cold feed and before the point of proportioning across a weigh belt and the aggregate dryer .
Prevent loss of dry lime .
The pugmill must be equipped with paddles arranged to provide sufficient mixing action and mixture movement .
The pugmill must produce a homogeneous mixture of uniformly coated aggregates at mixer discharge .
If the aggregate treatment process is stopped longer than hour clean the equipment of partially treated aggregate and lime .
Aggregate must be completely treated before introduction into the mixing drum .
.Bciii Lime Slurry For lime slurry aggregate treatment treat aggregate separate from HMA production .
Stockpile and marinate the aggregate .
Proportion lime and water with a continuous or batch mixing system .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Add lime to the aggregate as slurry consisting of mixed dry lime and water at a ratio of part lime to from to parts water by weight .
The slurry must completely coat the aggregate .
Immediately before mixing lime slurry with the aggregate water must not visibly separate from the aggregate .
Proportion lime slurry and aggregate by weight in a continuous process .
.B Liquid Antistrip Treatment Liquid antistrip must be from .
to .
percent by weight of asphalt binder .
Do not use liquid antistrip as a substitute for asphalt binder .
Liquid antistrip total amine value must be minimum when tested under ASTM D. Use only liquid antistrip type or brand at a time .
Do not mix liquid antistrip types or brands .
Store and mix liquid antistrip under the manufacturers instructions .
.B.B Reserved .B Hot Mix Asphalt Production .Ba General Do not start HMA production before verification and authorization of JMF .
The HMA plant must have a current qualification under the Departments Material Plant Quality Program .
Weighing and metering devices used for the production of HMA modified with additives must comply with the Departments MPQP .
If a lossinweight meter is used for dry HMA additive the meter must have an automatic and integral material delivery control system for the refill cycle .
Calibrate the lossinweight meter by .
Including at least complete system refill cycle during each calibration test run .
Operating the device in a normal run mode for minutes immediately before starting the calibration process .
Isolating the scale system within the lossinweight feeder from surrounding vibration .
Checking the scale system within the lossinweight feeder for accuracy before and after the calibration process and daily during mix production .
Using a minimum minute or minimum lb test run size for a dry ingredient delivery rate of less than ton per hour . .
Complying with the limits of Table B Conveyor Scale Testing Extremes in the Departments MPQP Proportion aggregate by hot or coldfeed control .
Aggregate temperature must not be more than degrees F when mixed with the asphalt binder .
Asphalt binder temperature must be from to degrees F when mixed with aggregate .
Mix HMA ingredients into a homogeneous mixture of coated aggregates .
The temperature of HMA with or without RAP must not be more than degrees F. For HMA produced using WMA technology the temperature of HMA must from to degrees F. If method compaction is used HMA must be produced at a temperature from to degrees F. If you stop production for longer than days a production startup evaluation is required .
.Bb Liquid Antistrip If consecutive sets of recorded production data show that the actual delivered liquid antistrip weight is more than percent of the authorized mix design liquid antistrip weight stop production and take corrective action .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE If a set of recorded production data shows that the actual delivered liquid antistrip weight is more than percent of the authorized mix design liquid antistrip weight stop production .
If the liquid antistrip weight exceeds .
percent of the asphalt binder weight do not use the HMA represented by that data .
The continuous mixing plant controller proportioning the HMA must produce a production data log .
The log must consist of a series of data sets captured at minute intervals throughout daily production .
The data must be a production activity register and not a summation .
The material represented by the data is the quantity produced minutes before and minutes after the capture time .
For the duration of the Contract the collected data must be stored by the plant controller or a computers memory at the plant .
The Engineer orders proportioning activities stopped for any of the following reasons .
You fail to submit data .
You submit incomplete untimely or incorrectly formatted data .
You fail to take corrective actions .
You take late or unsuccessful corrective actions .
You fail to stop production when proportioning tolerances are exceeded .
You use malfunctioning or failed proportioning devices If you stop production notify the Engineer of any corrective actions taken before resuming .
.Bc Warm Mix Asphalt Technology Proportion all ingredients by weight .
The HMA plant process controller must be the sole source of ingredient proportioning control and be fully interfaced with all scales and meters used in the production process .
The addition of the HMA additive must be controlled by the plant process controller .
Liquid ingredient additive including a normally dry ingredient made liquid must be proportioned with a mass flow meter at continuous mixing plants .
Use a mass flow meter or a container scale to proportion liquid additives at batch mixing plants .
Continuous mixing plants using HMA additives must comply with the following .
Dry ingredient additives for continuous production must be proportioned with a conveyor scale or a lossinweight meter. . HMA plant process controller and ingredient measuring systems must be capable of varying all ingredientfeed rates proportionate with the dry aggregate delivery at all production rates and rate changes . .
Liquid HMA additive must enter the production stream with the binder .
Dry HMA additive must enter the production stream at or before the mixing area . .
If dry HMA additives are used at continuous mixing HMA plants baghouse dust systems must return all captured material to the mix .
This requirement is waived for limetreated aggregates. . HMA additive must be proportioned to within .
percent of the target additive rate .
Batch mixing plants using HMA additives must comply with the following .
Metered HMA additive must be placed in an intermediate holding vessel before being added to the stream of asphalt binder as it enters the pugmill . .
If a container scale is used weigh additive before combining with asphalt binder .
Keep the container scale separate from other ingredient proportioning .
The container scale capacity must be no more than twice the volume of the maximum additive batch size .
The container scales graduations must be smaller than the proportioning tolerance or .
times the container scale capacity. . Dry HMA additive proportioning devices must be separate from metering devices for the aggregates and asphalt binder .
Proportion dry HMA additive directly into the pugmill or place in an intermediate holding vessel to be added to the pugmill at the appropriate time in the batch cycle .
Dry ingredients for batch production must be proportioned with a hopper scale . .
Zero tolerance for the HMA additive batch scale is .
percent of the target additive weight .
The indicated HMA additive batch scale weight may vary from the preselected weight setting by up to .
percent of the target additive weight .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .B Geosynthetic Pavement Interlayer Geosynthetic pavement interlayer must comply with the specifications for pavement fabric paving mat paving grid paving geocomposite grid or geocomposite strip membrane as shown .
The asphalt binder for geosynthetic pavement interlayer must be PG PG or PG .
.B Tack Coat Tack coat must comply with the specifications for asphaltic emulsion or asphalt binder .
Choose the type and grade of emulsion or binder .
.B Miscellaneous Areas and Dikes For miscellaneous areas and dikes .
Choose either the inch or inch aggregate gradation for Type A HMA . .
Minimum asphalt binder content must be .
percent for inch aggregate and .
percent for inch aggregate .
You may reduce the minimum asphalt binder content if authorized . .
Choose asphalt binder Grade PG PG or PG .
For HMA used in miscellaneous areas and dikes sections .A .A .B .Bc and .B do not apply .
.C Construction .C General Do not place HMA on wet pavement or frozen surface .
You may deposit HMA in a windrow and load it in the paver if .
Paver is equipped with a hopper that automatically feeds the screed .
Loading equipment can pick up the windrowed material and deposit it in the paver hopper without damaging base material .
Activities for depositing pickup loading and paving are continuous .
HMA temperature in the windrow does not fall below degrees F HMA placed in a windrow on the roadway surface must not extend more than feet in front of the loading equipment or material transfer vehicle .
You may place HMA in or more layers on areas less than feet wide and outside the traveled way including shoulders .
You may use mechanical equipment other than a paver for these areas .
The equipment must produce uniform smoothness and texture .
HMA handled spread or windrowed must not stain the finished surface of any improvement including pavement .
Do not use petroleum products such as kerosene or diesel fuel to release HMA from trucks spreaders or compactors .
HMA must be free of .
Segregation .
Coarse or fine aggregate pockets .
Hardened lumps Complete finish rolling activities before the pavement surface temperature is .
Below degrees F for HMA with unmodified binder .
Below degrees F for HMA with modified binder .
Below degrees F for HMA with WMA technology .C Spreading and Compacting Equipment .Ca General Paving equipment for spreading must be SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Selfpropelled .
Mechanical .
Equipped with a screed or strikeoff assembly that can distribute HMA the full width of a traffic lane .
Equipped with a fullwidth compacting device .
Equipped with automatic screed controls and sensing devices that control the thickness longitudinal grade and transverse screed slope Install and maintain grade and slope references .
The screed must be heated and produce a uniform HMA surface texture without tearing shoving or gouging .
The paver must not leave marks such as ridges and indentations unless you can eliminate them by rolling .
Rollers must be equipped with a system that prevents HMA from sticking to the wheels .
You may use a parting agent that does not damage the HMA or impede the bonding of layers .
In areas inaccessible to spreading and compacting equipment .
Spread the HMA by any means to obtain the specified lines grades and cross sections .
Use a pneumatic tamper plate compactor or equivalent to achieve thorough compaction .Cb Material Transfer Vehicle If a material transfer vehicle is specified the material transfer vehicle must have sufficient capacity to prevent stopping the paver and must be capable of .
Either receiving HMA directly from trucks or using a windrow pickup head to load it from a windrow deposited on the roadway surface .
Remixing the HMA with augers before transferring into the pavers receiving hopper or feed system .
Transferring HMA directly into the pavers receiving hopper or feed system .Cc Method Compaction Equipment For method compaction each paver spreading HMA must be followed by rollers .
One vibratory roller specifically designed to compact HMA .
The roller must be capable of at least vibrations per minute and must be equipped with amplitude and frequency controls .
The rollers gross static weight must be at least .
tons. . One oscillatingtype pneumatictired roller at least feet wide .
Pneumatic tires must be of equal size diameter type and ply .
The tires must be inflated to psi minimum and maintained so that the air pressure does not vary more than psi. . One steeltired axle tandem roller .
The rollers gross static weight must be at least .
tons .
Each roller must have a separate operator .
Rollers must be selfpropelled and reversible .
.Cd.Cf Reserved .C Surface Preparation .Ca General Before placing HMA remove loose paving particles dirt and other extraneous material by any means including flushing and sweeping .
.Cb Subgrade Prepare subgrade to receive HMA under the sections for the material involved .
Subgrade must be free of loose and extraneous material .
.Cc Reserved .Cd Prepaving Inertial Profiler Section .Cd applies to existing asphalt concrete surfaces receiving an HMA overlay if a bid item for prepaving inertial profiler is shown on the Bid Item List .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Before starting paving activities perform prepaving inertial profiler measurements .
Prepaving inertial profiler work includes taking profiles of the existing pavement and analyzing the data with ProVAL to determine existing pavement International Roughness Index Mean Roughness Index and areas of localized roughness .
If the Contract includes cold planing take prepaving inertial profiler measurements before cold planning .
If the Contract includes replace asphalt concrete surfacing take prepaving inertial profiler measurements after replacing the asphalt concrete surfacing .
.Ce Prepaving Grinding Section .Ce applies to existing asphalt concrete surfaces .
That will not be cold planned or milled .
That will receive an HMA overlay less than or equal to .
foot exclusive of OGFC .
If a bid item for prepaving grinding day is shown on the Bid Item List After performing prepaving inertial profiling correct areas of localized roughness greater than inmi .
Notify the Engineer of those areas of localized roughness that can not be corrected by prepaving grinding according to the ProVAL smoothness assurance analysis grinding report .
The Engineer responds to your notification within business days .
For those areas of localized roughness that can not be corrected by grinding the Engineer may order you to either not correct the areas of localized roughness or correct areas of localized roughness by a different method and take profiles of the corrected areas with an inertial profiler .
Corrective work performed by a different method taking profiles of the corrected areas the associated traffic control is change order work .
If ordered not to correct areas of localized roughness the smoothness specifications do not apply to the final pavement surface placed in those areas .
After correcting areas of localized roughness take profiles of the corrected area and submit profile data as specified in section .Amiv .
Dispose of grinding residue .
Pave within days of correcting areas .
The final pavement surface must comply with section .Aiiii .
If the Engineer determines more time is required for prepaving grinding than the Contract allows for and if prepaving grinding is a controlling activity the Engineer makes a time adjustment .
.Cf Tack Coat Apply a tack coat .
To existing pavement including planed surfaces .
Between HMA layers .
To vertical surfaces of .. Curbs .. Gutters .. Construction joints Equipment for the application of tack coat must comply with section .B .
Before placing HMA apply a tack coat in application at the minimum residual rate shown in the following table for the condition of the underlying surface SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Tack Coat Application Rates for HMA HMA over Minimum residual rates galsq yd CSSCSSh SSSSh and QShCQSh asphaltic emulsion CRSCRS RSRS and QSCQS asphaltic emulsion Asphalt binder and PMRSPMCRS and PMRShPMCRSh asphaltic emulsion New HMA between layers .
. .
Concrete pavement and existing asphalt concrete surfacing .
. . Planed pavement .
. .
If a stress absorbing membrane interlayer as specified in section .
is applied the tack coat application rates for new HMA apply .
Notify the Engineer if you dilute asphaltic emulsion with water .
The weight ratio of added water to asphaltic emulsion must not exceed to .
Measure added water either by weight or volume under section .
or use water meters from water districts cities or counties .
If you measure water by volume apply a conversion factor to determine the correct weight .
With each dilution submit .
Weight ratio of water to bituminous material in the original asphaltic emulsion .
Weight of asphaltic emulsion before diluting .
Weight of added water .
Final dilution weight ratio of water to asphaltic emulsion Apply a tack coat to vertical surfaces with a residual rate that will thoroughly coat the vertical face without running off .
If authorized you may .
Change tack coat rates .
Omit tack coat between layers of new HMA during the same work shift if .. No dust dirt or extraneous material is present ..
Surface is at least degrees F Immediately in advance of placing HMA apply additional tack coat to damaged areas or where loose or extraneous material is removed .
Close areas receiving tack coat to traffic .
Do not allow the tracking of tack coat onto pavement surfaces beyond the job site .
If you use an asphalt binder for tack coat the asphalt binder temperature must be from to degrees F when applied .
.Cg Geosynthetic Pavement Interlayer Where shown place geosynthetic pavement interlayer over a coat of asphalt binder and in compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
Do not place the interlayer on a wet or frozen surface .
Before placing the interlayer and asphalt binder .
Repair cracks inch and wider spalls and holes in the pavement .
Repairing cracks is change order work. . Clean the pavement of loose and extraneous material .
Immediately before placing the interlayer apply . . gal of asphalt binder per square yard of interlayer or until saturated .
Apply asphalt binder the width of the interlayer plus inches on each side .
At SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE an interlayer overlap apply asphalt binder on the lower interlayer the same overlap distance as the upper interlayer .
Align and place the interlayer with no overlapping wrinkles except a wrinkle that overlaps may remain if it is less than inch thick .
If the overlapping wrinkle is more than inch thick cut the wrinkle out and overlap the interlayer no more than inches .
Overlap the interlayer borders between to inches .
In the direction of paving overlap the following roll with the preceding roll at any break .
You may use rolling equipment to correct distortions or wrinkles in the interlayer .
If asphalt binder tracked onto the interlayer or brought to the surface by construction equipment causes interlayer displacement cover it with a small quantity of HMA .
Before placing HMA on the interlayer do not expose the interlayer to .
Traffic except for crossings under traffic control and only after you place a small HMA quantity .
Sharp turns from construction equipment .
Damaging elements Pave HMA on the interlayer during the same work shift .
The minimum HMA thickness over the interlayer must be .
foot thick including at conform tapers .
.C Longitudinal Joints .Ca General Longitudinal joints in the top layer must match lane lines .
Alternate the longitudinal joint offsets in the lower layers at least .
foot from each side of the lane line .
Other longitudinal joint placement patterns are allowed if authorized .
A vertical longitudinal joint of more than .
foot is not allowed at any time between adjacent lanes open to traffic .
For an HMA thickness of .
foot or less the distance between the ends of the adjacent surfaced lanes at the end of each days work must not be greater than can be completed in the following day of normal paving .
For an HMA thickness greater than .
foot you must place HMA on adjacent traveled way lanes or shoulder such that at the end of each work shift the distance between the ends of HMA layers on adjacent lanes is from to feet .
Place additional HMA along the transverse edge at each lanes end and along the exposed longitudinal edges between adjacent lanes .
Hand rake and compact the additional HMA to form temporary conforms .
You may place kraft paper or other authorized release agent under the conform tapers to facilitate the taper removal when paving activities resume .
If placing HMA against the edge of existing pavement saw cut or grind the pavement straight and vertical along the joint and remove extraneous material .
.Cb Tapered Notched Wedge For divided highways with an HMA lift thickness greater than .
foot you may construct a foot wide tapered notched wedge joint as a longitudinal joint between adjacent lanes open to traffic .
A vertical notch of .
inch maximum must be placed at the top and bottom of the tapered wedge .
The tapered notched wedge must keep its shape while exposed to traffic .
Pave the adjacent lane within day .
Construct the tapered portion of the tapered notched wedge with an authorized strikeoff device .
The strikeoff device must provide a uniform slope and must not restrict the main screed of the paver .
You may use a device attached to the screed to construct longitudinal joints that will form a tapered notched wedge in a single pass .
The tapered notched wedge must be compacted to a minimum of percent compaction .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .C Pavement Edge Treatments Construct edge treatment on the HMA pavement as shown .
Where a tapered edge is required use the same type of HMA used for the adjacent lane or shoulder .
The edge of roadway where the tapered edge is to be placed must have a solid base free of debris such as loose material grass weeds or mud .
Grade the areas to receive the tapered edge as required .
The tapered edge must be placed monolithic with the adjacent lane or shoulder and must be shaped and compacted with a device attached to the paver .
The device must be capable of shaping and compacting HMA to the required cross section as shown .
Compaction must be accomplished by constraining the HMA to reduce the cross sectional area by to percent .
The device must produce a uniform surface texture without tearing shoving or gouging and must not leave marks such as ridges and indentations .
The device must be capable of transitioning to cross roads driveways and obstructions .
For the tapered edge the angle of the slope must not deviate by more than degrees from the angle shown .
Measure the angle from the plane of the adjacent finished pavement surface .
If paving is done in multiple lifts the tapered edge must be placed with each lift .
Short sections of hand work are allowed to construct tapered edge transitions .
.C Widening Existing Pavement If widening existing pavement construct new pavement structure to match the elevation of the existing pavements edge before placing HMA over the existing pavement .
.C Shoulders Medians and Other Road Connections Until the adjoining through lanes top layer has been paved do not pave the top layer of .
Shoulders .
Tapers .
Transitions .
Road connections .
Driveways .
Curve widenings .
Chain control lanes .
Turnouts .
Turn pockets If the number of lanes changes pave each through lanes top layer before paving a tapering lanes top layer .
Simultaneous to paving a through lanes top layer you may pave an adjoining areas top layer including shoulders .
Do not operate spreading equipment on any areas top layer until completing final compaction .
If shoulders or median borders are shown pave shoulders and median borders adjacent to the lane before opening a lane to traffic .
If shoulder conform tapers are shown place conform tapers concurrently with the adjacent lanes paving .
If a driveway or a road connection is shown place additional HMA along the pavements edge to conform to road connections and driveways .
Hand rake if necessary and compact the additional HMA to form a smooth conform taper .
.C Leveling Section .C applies if a bid item for hot mix asphalt leveling is shown on the Bid Item List .
Fill and level irregularities and ruts with HMA before spreading HMA over the base existing surfaces or bridge decks .
You may use mechanical equipment other than a paver for these areas .
The equipment must produce uniform smoothness and texture .
HMA used to change an existing surfaces cross slope or profile is not paid for as hot mix asphalt leveling .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .C Miscellaneous Areas and Dikes Prepare the area to receive HMA for miscellaneous areas and dikes including excavation and backfill as needed .
Spread the HMA in miscellaneous areas in layer and compact to the specified lines and grades .
In median areas adjacent to slotted median drains each layer of HMA must not exceed .
foot maximum compacted thickness .
The finished surface must be .
Textured uniformly .
Compacted firmly .
Without depressions humps and irregularities .C.C Reserved .C Compaction .Ca General Rolling must leave the completed surface compacted and smooth without tearing cracking or shoving .
If a vibratory roller is used as a finish roller turn the vibrator off .
Do not open new HMA pavement to traffic until its mid depth temperature is below degrees F. If the surface to be paved is both in sunlight and shade pavement surface temperatures are taken in the shade .
.Cb Method Compaction Use method compaction for any of the following conditions .
HMA pavement thickness shown is less than .
foot .
Replace asphalt concrete surfacing .
Leveling courses .
Areas the Engineer determines conventional compaction and compaction measurement methods are impeded HMA compaction coverage is the number of passes needed to cover the paving width .
A pass is rollers movement parallel to the paving in either direction .
Overlapping passes are part of the coverage being made and are not a subsequent coverage .
Do not start a coverage until completing the prior coverage .
Method compaction must consist of performing .
Breakdown compaction of each layer with coverages using a vibratory roller .
The speed of the vibratory roller in miles per hour must not exceed the vibrations per minute divided by .
If the HMA layer thickness is less than .
foot turn the vibrator off. . Intermediate compaction of each layer of HMA with coverages using a pneumatictired roller at a speed not to exceed mph . .
Finish compaction of HMA with coverage using a steeltired roller .
Start rolling at the lower edge and progress toward the highest part .
The Engineer may order fewer coverages if the layer thickness of HMA is less than .
foot .
.Cc.Ce Reserved .C Smoothness Corrections If the pavement surface does not comply with section .Aiiii grind the pavement to within specified tolerances remove and replace the pavement or place an overlay of HMA .
Do not start corrective work until your method is authorized .
Do not use equipment with carbide cutting teeth to grind the pavement unless authorized .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Smoothness corrections must leave at least percent of the specified HMA thickness .
If ordered core the pavement at the locations selected by the Engineer .
Coring including traffic control is change order work .
Remove and replace deficient pavement areas where the overlay thickness is less than percent of the thickness specified .
Corrected HMA pavement areas must be uniform rectangles with edges .
Parallel to the nearest HMA pavement edge or lane line .
Perpendicular to the pavement centerline On ground areas not to be overlaid with OGFC apply a fog seal coat under section .
Where corrections are made within areas requiring testing with inertial profiler reprofile the entire lane length with the inertial profiler .
Where corrections are made within areas requiring testing with a foot straightedge retest the corrected area with the straightedge .
.C Data Cores Section .C applies if a bid item for data core is shown on the Bid Item List .
Take data cores of the completed HMA pavement underlying base and subbase material .
Notify the Engineer business days before coring .
Protect data cores and surrounding pavement from damage .
Take inch or inch diameter data cores .
At the beginning end and every mile within the paving limits of each route on the project .
After all paving is complete .
From the center of the specified lane On a lane roadway take data cores from either lane .
On a lane roadway take data cores from the outermost lane in each direction .
On a roadway with more than lanes take data cores from the innermost lane and the outermost lane in each direction .
Each core must include the stabilized materials encountered .
You may choose not to recover unstabilized material but you must identify the material .
Unstabilized material includes any of the following .
Granular material .
Crumbled or cracked stabilized material .
Sandy or clayey soil Where data core samples are taken backfill and compact the holes with an authorized material .
After data core summary and photograph submittal dispose of cores .
.D Payment The payment quantity for geosynthetic pavement interlayer is the area measured from the actual pavement covered .
Except for tack coat used in minor HMA payment for tack coat is not included in the payment for hot mix asphalt .
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the tack coat quantity .
The payment quantity for HMA of the type shown on the Bid Item List is measured based on the combined mixture weight .
If recorded batch weights are printed automatically the bid item for HMA is measured by using the printed batch weights provided .
Total aggregate and supplemental fine aggregate weight per batch is printed .
If supplemental fine aggregate is weighed cumulatively with the aggregate the total aggregate batch weight must include the supplemental fine aggregate weight. . Total virgin asphalt binder weight per batch is printed .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Each truckloads zero tolerance weight is printed before weighing the first batch and after weighing the last batch. . Time date mix number load number and truck identification is correlated with a load slip . .
Copy of the recorded batch weights is certified by a licensed weigh master and submitted .
The payment quantity for place hot mix asphalt dike of the type shown on the Bid Item List is the length measured from end to end .
Payment for the HMA used to construct the dike is not included in the payment for place hot mix asphalt dike .
The payment quantity for place hot mix asphalt miscellaneous areas is the area measured for the in place compacted area .
Payment for the HMA used for miscellaneous areas is not included in the payment for place hot mix asphalt miscellaneous areas .
The Engineer does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the prepaving grinding day quantity . .
TYPE A HOT MIX ASPHALT .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for producing and placing Type A hot mix asphalt .
You may produce Type A HMA using an authorized WMA technology .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Job Mix Formula The JMF must be based on an HMA mix design determined as described in the Superpave Mix Design Superpave Series No .
manual by the Asphalt Institute .
.Ac Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement Submit QC test results for RAP gradation with the combined aggregate gradation within business days of taking RAP samples during Type A HMA production .
.Ad.Af Reserved .A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Quality Control .Abi General Reserved .Abii Aggregates Test the quality characteristics of aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Aggregate Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Gradationa AASHTO T per tons and any remaining part Sand equivalentb c AASHTO T Moisture contentd AASHTO T Crushed particles AASHTO T per tons or per project whichever is greater Los Angeles Rattler AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles ASTM D Fine aggregate angularity AASHTO T Method A aIf RAP is used test the combined aggregate gradation under California Test .
bReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
cUse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
dTest at continuous mixing plants only .
If RAP is used test the RAP moisture content at continuous mixing plant and batch mixing plant .
For lime treated aggregate test aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during HMA production .
.Abiii Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement Sample and test processed RAP at a minimum frequency of sample per tons with a minimum of samples per fractionated stockpile .
If the fractionated stockpile has not been augmented the RAP samples taken and tested for mix design can be part of this minimum sample requirement .
If a processed RAP stockpile is augmented sample and test processed RAP quality characteristics at a minimum frequency of sample per tons of augmented RAP .
The combined RAP sample when tested under AASHTO T must be within .
percent of the average asphalt binder content reported on page of your Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form .
If a new processed RAP stockpile is required the average binder content of the new processed RAP stockpile must be within .
percent of the average binder reported on page of your Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form .
The combined RAP sample when tested under AASHTO T must be within .
of the average maximum specific gravity reported on page of your Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data form .
During Type A HMA production sample RAP twice daily and perform QC testing for .
Aggregate gradation at least once a day under California Test .
Moisture content at least twice a day .Abiv.Abviii Reserved .Abix Type A Hot Mix Asphalt Production Test the quality characteristics of Type A HMA under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Type A HMA Production Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Asphalt binder content AASHTO T Method A per tons and any remaining part HMA moisture content AASHTO T per tons but not less than per paving day Air voids content AASHTO T per tons or every paving days whichever is greater Voids in mineral aggregate SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics per tons or per project whichever is greater Dust proportion SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics Density of core California Test per paving day Nuclear gauge density California Test per tons or per paving day whichever is greater Hamburg wheel track AASHTO T Modified per tons or per project whichever is greater Moisture susceptibility AASHTO T .Ac.Ad Reserved .Ae Department Acceptance The Department accepts Type A HMA based on compliance with .
Aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Aggregate gradationa AASHTO T JMF Tolerance Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing No .
sieve and retained on No .
sieve .
Onefractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Sand equivalent min.b c AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight at ASTM D Fine aggregate angularity min d AASHTO T Method A aThe Engineer determines combined aggregate gradations containing RAP under California Test .
bReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
cUse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
dThe Engineer waives this specification if HMA contains percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate .
Manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel . .
If RAP is used RAP quality requirements shown in the following table Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Binder content within the average value reported AASHTO T . Specific gravity within the average value reported AASHTO T . .
In place Type A HMA quality requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Type A HMA Acceptance In Place Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Asphalt binder content AASHTO T Method A JMF . . HMA moisture content max AASHTO T . Air voids content at Ndesign a b AASHTO T . . . . for inch aggregate Voids in mineral aggregate on laboratory produced HMA min d Gradation No .
inch inch inch inch with NMAS inch with NMAS inch SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics .. .. .. .. .. .. Voids in mineral aggregate on plantproduced HMA min a Gradation No .
inch inch inch inch with NMAS inch with NMAS inch SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetricsc .. .. .. .. .. .. Dust proportion SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics .. g Density of core of max theoretical densitye f California Test .. Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at .inch rut depth Binder grade PG PG PG PG or higher AASHTO T Modified Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at inflection point Binder grade PG PG PG PG or higher AASHTO T Modified Moisture susceptibility min psi dry strength AASHTO T Moisture susceptibility min psi wet strength AASHTO T aPrepare briquettes .
Report the average of tests .
bThe Engineer determines the bulk specific gravity of each labcompacted briquette under AASHTO T Method A and theoretical maximum specific gravity under AASHTO T Method A. cDetermine bulk specific gravity under AASHTO T Method A. dThe Engineer determines the laboratoryprepared Type A HMA value for only mix design verification .
eThe Engineer determines percent of theoretical maximum density under California Test except the Engineer uses .
AASHTO T to determine inplace density of each density core .
AASHTO T Method A to determine theoretical maximum density instead of calculating test SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE maximum density fThe Engineer determines theoretical maximum density under AASHTO T Method A at the frequency specified in California Test part section D. gFor limetreated aggregates the dust proportion requirement is .B Materials .B General Reserved .B Type A Hot Mix Asphalt Mix Design The mix design for Type A HMA must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Type A HMA Mix Design Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Air voids content AASHTO T a Ninitial .
Ndesign .
Ndesign .
for inch aggregate Nmax .
Gyration compaction no .
of gyrations AASHTO T Ninitial Ndesign .
Nmax Voids in mineral aggregate min b Gradation No .
inch inch inch inch with NMAS inch with NMAS inch SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics .. .. .. .. .. .. Dust proportion SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics .. Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at .inch rut depth Binder grade PG PG PG PG or higher AASHTO T Modifiedc Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at the inflection point Binder grade PG PG PG PG or higher AASHTO T Modifiedc Moisture susceptibility dry strength min psi AASHTO T c Moisture susceptibility wet strength min psi AASHTO T c d aCalculate the air voids content of each specimen using AASHTO T Method A to determine bulk specific gravity .
Use AASHTO T Method A to determine theoretical maximum specific gravity .
Use a digital manometer and pycnometer when performing AASHTO T . bMeasure bulk specific gravity using AASHTO T Method A. cTest plantproduced Type A HMA .
dFreeze thaw required .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE For Type A HMA mixtures using RAP the maximum allowed binder replacement is .
percent in the upper .
foot exclusive of OGFC and .
percent below .
The binder replacement is calculated as a percentage of the approved JMF target asphalt binder content .
For Type A HMA with a binder replacement percent less than or equal to percent of your specified OBC you may request that the performance graded asphalt binder grade with upper and lower temperature classifications be reduced by degrees C from the specified grade .
For Type A HMA with a binder replacement greater than percent of your specified OBC and less than or equal to percent of OBC you must use a performance graded asphalt binder grade with upper and lower temperature classifications reduced by degrees C from the specified grade .
.B Asphalt Binder Reserved .B Aggregates .Ba General Before the addition of asphalt binder and lime treatment the aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing No .
sieve and retained on No .
sieve .
Onefractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Sand equivalent mina AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight at ASTM D Fine aggregate angularity min b AASHTO T Method A aThe reported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
Use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
bThe Engineer waives this specification if the Type A HMA contains percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate except if your JMF fails verification .
Manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel .
.Bb Aggregate Gradations The aggregate gradations for Type A HMA must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements Type A HMA pavement thickness shown Gradation .
foot inch Greater than .
to less than .
foot inch .
to less than .
foot inch .
foot or greater inch or inch Aggregate gradation must be within the TV limits for the specified sieve size shown in the following tables SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Aggregate Gradations for Type A HMA Percentage Passing inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
No .
Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
.B Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement You may substitute RAP for part of the virgin aggregate in a quantity up to percent of the aggregate blend .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Provide enough space at your plant for complying with all RAP handling requirements .
Provide a clean graded base well drained area for stockpiles .
If RAP is from multiple sources blend the RAP thoroughly and completely before fractionating .
For RAP substitution greater than percent of the aggregate blend fractionate RAP stockpiles into sizes a coarse fraction RAP retained on inch sieve and a fine fraction RAP passing inch sieve .
For RAP substitution of percent of the aggregate blend or less fractionation is not required .
The RAP fractionation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table RAP Stockpile Fractionation Gradation Requirements Size Test method Requirement Coarse passing the inch sieve California Test a Fine passing the inch sieve California Test a aMaximum mechanical shaking time is minutes .
You may use the coarse fractionated stockpile the fine fractionated stockpile or a combination of the coarse and fine fractionated stockpiles .
Isolate the processed RAP stockpiles from other materials .
Store processed RAP in conical or longitudinal stockpiles .
Processed RAP must not be agglomerated or be allowed to congeal in large stockpiles .
.B.B Reserved .B Type A Hot Mix Asphalt Production If RAP is used the asphalt plant must automatically adjust the virgin asphalt binder to account for RAP percentage and RAP binder .
During production you may adjust hot or coldfeed proportion controls for virgin aggregate and RAP .
RAP must be within of RAP percentage described in your Contractor Job Mix Formula Proposal form without exceeding percent .
.C Construction Where the pavement thickness shown is greater than .
foot you may place Type A HMA in multiple lifts not less than .
foot each .
If placing Type A HMA in multiple lifts .
Aggregate gradation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements Type A HMA lift thickness Gradation .
to less than .
foot inch .
foot to less than .
foot inch .
foot or greater inch or inch .
Apply a tack coat before placing a subsequent lift .
The Engineer evaluates each HMA lift individually for compliance Spread Type A HMA at the ambient air and surface temperatures shown in the following table Minimum Ambient Air and Surface Temperatures Lift thickness feet Ambient air F Surface F Unmodified asphalt binder Modified asphalt binder Unmodified asphalt binder Modified asphalt binder . . For method compaction the maximum lift thickness must be .
foot .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE For Type A HMA placed under method compaction if the asphalt binder is .
Unmodified complete .. st coverage of breakdown compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F .. Breakdown and intermediate compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F ..
Finish compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F . Modified complete .. st coverage of breakdown compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F .. Breakdown and intermediate compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F ..
Finish compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F You may cool Type A HMA with water when rolling activities are complete if authorized .
.D Payment Not Used .
RUBBERIZED HOT MIX ASPHALTGAP GRADED .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for producing and placing rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded .
You may produce RHMAG using a WMA technology .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General At least business days before use submit the permit issued by the local air district for asphalt rubber binder blending equipment .
If an air quality permit is not required by the local air district for producing asphalt rubber binder submit verification from the local air district that an air quality permit is not required .
At least days before RHMAG production submit the name of an authorized laboratory to perform QC testing for asphalt rubber binder .
The authorized laboratory must comply with the Caltrans Independent Assurance Program .
.Ab Job Mix Formula With your proposed JMF include the SDS for .
Base asphalt binder .
CRM and asphalt modifier .
Blended asphalt rubber binder components The JMF must be based on an HMA mix design determined as described in the Superpave Mix Design Superpave Series No .
manual by the Asphalt Institute .
.Ac Asphalt Rubber Binder Submit a proposal for asphalt rubber binder design and profile .
In the design include the asphalt binder asphalt modifier and CRM and their proportions .
If you change asphalt rubber binder supplier or any component material used in asphalt rubber binder or its percentage submit a new JMF .
For the asphalt rubber binder used submit .
Log of production daily .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
Certificate of compliance with test results for CRM and asphalt modifier with each truckload delivered to the HMA plant .
The certificate of compliance for asphalt modifier must represent no more than lb. . Certified weight slips for the CRM and asphalt modifier furnished. . QC test results on viscosity within business days after sampling. . QC test results on cone penetration resilience and softening point within business days after sampling .
Submit a certificate of compliance for the CRM and asphalt modifier .
With the certificate of compliance submit test results for CRM and asphalt modifier with each truckload delivered to the HMA plant .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Job Mix Formula Verification If you request the Engineer verifies RHMAG quality requirements within days of receiving all verification samples and after the JMF document submittal has been accepted .
.Ac Quality Control .Aci General Reserved .Acii Asphalt Rubber Binder .AciiA General The asphalt rubber binder blending plant must be authorized under the Departments Material Plant Quality Program .
Take asphalt rubber binder samples from the feed line connecting the asphalt rubber binder tank to the HMA plant .
.AciiB Asphalt Modifier Test asphalt modifier under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Asphalt Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Frequency Viscosity ASTM D per shipment Flash point ASTM D Molecular analysis Asphaltenes Aromatics ASTM D per shipment .AciiC Crumb Rubber Modifier Sample and test scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber separately .
Test CRM under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Crumb Rubber Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Frequency Scrap tire crumb rubber gradation California Test per lb High natural crumb rubber gradation California Test per lb Wire in CRM California Test per lb Fabric in CRM California Test CRM particle length CRM specific gravity California Test Natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber ASTM D per lb SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .AciiD Asphalt Rubber Binder Test asphalt rubber binder under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Frequency Cone penetration ASTM D per lota Resilience ASTM D Softening point ASTM DDM Viscosity ASTM DDM minutes before use per lota aThe lot is defined in the Departments MPQP .
Retain the sample from each lot .
Test for cone penetration resilience and softening point for the first lots and if all lots pass the testing frequency may be reduced to once for every lots .
If QC test results indicate that the asphalt rubber binder does not comply with the specifications take corrective action and notify the Engineer .
.Aciii Aggregates Test the quality characteristics of aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Aggregate Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Gradation AASHTO T per tons and any remaining part Sand equivalenta b AASHTO T Moisture contentc AASHTO T Crushed particles AASHTO T per tons or per project whichever is greater Los Angeles Rattler AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles ASTM D Fine aggregate angularity AASHTO T Method A aReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
bUse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
cTest at continuous mixing plants only .
For lime treated aggregate test aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during RHMAG production .
.Aciv.Acviii Reserved .Acix Rubberized Hot Mix AsphaltGap Graded Production Test the quality characteristics of RHMAG under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE RHMAG Production Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Asphalt binder content AASHTO T Method A per tons and any remaining part HMA moisture content AASHTO T per tons but not less than per paving day Air voids content AASHTO T per tons or every paving days whichever is greater Voids in mineral aggregate SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics per tons or per project whichever is greater Dust proportion SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics Density of core California Test per paving day Nuclear gauge density California Test per tons or per paving day whichever is greater Hamburg wheel track AASHTO T Modified per tons or per project whichever is greater Moisture susceptibility AASHTO T .Ad Reserved .Ae Department Acceptance .Aei General The Department accepts RHMAG based on compliance with .
Aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Aggregate gradation AASHTO T JMF Tolerance Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing No .
sieve and retained on No .
sieve .
Onefractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Sand equivalent mina b AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight at ASTM D Report only Fine aggregate angularity min c AASHTO T Method A aReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
bUse of a sand reading Indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
cThe Engineer waives this specification if RHMAG contains percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate .
Manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel. . Inplace RHMAG quality requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE RHMAG Acceptance In Place Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Asphalt binder content AASHTO T Method A JMF . . HMA moisture content max AASHTO T . Air voids content Ndesign a b AASHTO T . . Voids in mineral aggregate on laboratory produced HMAd min Gradation inch and inch SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetricsc .. Voids in mineral aggregate on plantproduced HMA min a Gradation inch and inch SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetricsc .. Dust proportiona SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics Report only Density of core of max theoretical densitye f California Test .. Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at .inch rut depth Binder grade PG PG PG AASHTO T Modified Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at inflection point Binder grade PG PG PG AASHTO T Modified Moisture susceptibility min psi dry strength AASHTO T Moisture susceptibility min psi wet strength AASHTO T aPrepare briquettes .
Report the average of tests .
bThe Engineer determines the bulk specific gravity of each labcompacted briquette under AASHTO T Method A and theoretical maximum specific gravity under AASHTO T Method A. cDetermine bulk specific gravity under AASHTO T Method A. dThe Engineer determines the laboratoryprepared RHMAG value for only mix design verification .
eThe Engineer determines percent of theoretical maximum density under California Test except the Engineer uses .
AASHTO T Method A to determine inplace density of each density core instead of using the nuclear gauge .
AASHTO T Method A to determine theoretical maximum density instead of calculating test maximum density fThe Engineer determines theoretical maximum density under AASHTO T Method A at the frequency specified in California Test part section D. .Aeii Asphalt Rubber Binder .AeiiA General The Department does not use asphalt rubber binder design profile for production acceptance .
.AeiiB Asphalt Modifier The Department accepts asphalt modifier based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Asphalt Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Viscosity at C ms x ASTM D X a Flash point min C ASTM D Molecular analysis Asphaltenes max by mass Aromatics min by mass ASTM D . aThe symbol X is the asphalt modifier viscosity .
.AeiiC Crumb Rubber Modifier The Department accepts CRM scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table Crumb Rubber Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Scrap tire crumb rubber gradation passing No .
sieve California Test High natural crumb rubber gradation passing No .
sieve California Test Wire in CRM max California Test .
Fabric in CRM max California Test .
CRM particle length max in CRM specific gravity California Test .. Natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber ASTM D ..
Scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber are sampled and tested separately .
.AeiiD Asphalt Rubber Binder For Department acceptance testing take samples of asphalt rubber binder in the Engineers presence every lots or once a day whichever is greater .
Each sample must be in a qt can with open top and friction lid .
The Department accepts asphalt rubber binder based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Cone penetration at C . mm ASTM D Resilience at C min rebound ASTM D Softening point C ASTM DDM Viscosity at C centipoisesa ASTM DDM aPrepare sample for viscosity test under California Test .
.Aeiii.Aev Reserved .B Materials .B General Reserved SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .B Rubberized Hot Mix AsphaltGap Graded Mix Design For RHMAG the mix design must comply with the requirements shown in the following table RHMAG Mix Design Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Air voids content AASHTO T a Ndesign .
Gyration compaction no .
of gyrations AASHTO T Ndesign b Voids in mineral aggregate min SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetricsc .. Dust proportion SP Asphalt Mixture Volumetrics Report only Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at .inch rut depth Binder grade PG PG PG AASHTO T Modifiedd Hamburg wheel track min number of passes at the inflection point Binder grade PG PG PG AASHTO T Modifiedd Moisture susceptibility dry strength min psi AASHTO T d Moisture susceptibility wet strength min psi AASHTO T d e aCalculate the air voids content of each specimen using AASHTO T Method A to determine bulk specific gravity and AASHTO T Method A to determine theoretical maximum specific gravity .
Under AASHTO T use a digital manometer and pycnometer when performing AASHTO T . bSuperpave gyratory compactor ram pressure may be increased to a maximum of kPa and specimens may be held at a constant height for a maximum of minutes .
cMeasure bulk specific gravity using AASHTO T Method A. dTest plant produced RHMA .
eFreeze thaw required .
Determine the quantity of asphalt rubber binder to be mixed with the aggregate for RHMAG as follows .
Base the calculations on the average of briquettes produced at each asphalt rubber binder content . .
Plot asphalt rubber binder content versus average air voids content for each set of specimens and connect adjacent points with a bestfit curve . .
Calculate voids in mineral aggregate for each specimen average each set and plot the average versus asphalt rubber binder content . .
Calculate the dust proportion and plot versus asphalt rubber binder content. . From the curve plotted select the theoretical asphalt rubber binder content at percent air voids. . At the selected asphalt rubber binder content calculate dust proportion. . Record the asphalt rubber binder content in the Contractor Hot Mix Asphalt Design Data Form as the OBC .
The OBC must not fall below .
percent by total weight of the mix .
Laboratory mixing and compaction must comply with AASHTO R except the mixing temperature of the aggregate must be from to degrees F. The mixing temperature of the asphalt rubber binder must be from to degrees F. The compaction temperature of the combined mixture must be from to degrees F. SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .B Asphalt Rubber Binder .Ba General Asphalt rubber binder must be a combination of .
Asphalt binder .
Asphalt modifier .
CRM The combined asphalt binder and asphalt modifier must be . . percent by weight of the asphalt rubber binder .
.Bb Asphalt Modifier Asphalt modifier must be a resinous highflashpoint aromatic hydrocarbon and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Asphalt Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Viscosity at C ms x ASTM D X a Flash point min C ASTM D Molecular analysis Asphaltenes max by mass Aromatics min by mass ASTM D . aThe symbol X is the proposed asphalt modifier viscosity .
X must be between and .
A change in X requires a new asphalt rubber binder design .
Asphalt modifier must be from .
to .
percent by weight of the asphalt binder in the asphalt rubber binder .
.Bc Crumb Rubber Modifier CRM must be a ground or granulated combination of scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural scrap tire crumb rubber .
CRM must be . . percent scrap tire crumb rubber and . . percent high natural scrap tire crumb rubber by total weight of CRM .
Scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural scrap tire crumb rubber must be derived from waste tires described in Pub Res Code .
The CRM must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Crumb Rubber Modifier for Asphalt Rubber Binder Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Scrap tire crumb rubber gradation passing No .
sieve California Test High natural crumb rubber gradation passing No .
sieve California Test Wire in CRM max California Test .
Fabric in CRM max California Test .
CRM particle length max ina CRM specific gravity California Test .. Natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber ASTM D .. aTest at mix design and for certificate of compliance .
CRM must be ground or granulated at ambient temperature .
If steel and fiber are cryogenically separated separation must occur before grinding or granulating .
Cryogenically produced CRM particles must be ground or granulated and not pass through the grinder or granulator .
CRM must be dry freeflowing particles that do not stick together .
CRM must not cause foaming when combined with the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier .
You may add calcium carbonate or talc up to percent by weight of CRM .
.Bd Design and Profile Design the asphalt rubber binder from testing you perform for each quality characteristic and for the reaction temperatures expected during production .
The profile must include the same component sources SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE for the asphalt rubber binder used .
The hour minute interaction period determines the design profile .
At a minimum mix asphalt rubber binder components take samples and perform and record the tests shown in the following table Asphalt Rubber Binder Reaction Design Profile Quality characteristic Test method Minutes of reaction a Limit Cone penetration at C . mm ASTM D X b X X Resilience at C min rebound ASTM D X X X Field softening point C ASTM DDM X X X Viscosity centipoises ASTM DD M X X X X X X X aSix hours minutes after CRM addition reduce the oven temperature to F for hours .
After the hour minutes cool down after CRM addition reheat the binder to the reaction temperature expected during production for sampling and testing at hours minutes .
bX denotes required testing .
.Be Asphalt Rubber Binder Production .Bei General Deliver scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber in separate bags .
.Beii Mixing Proportion and mix asphalt binder asphalt modifier and CRM simultaneously or premix the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier before adding CRM .
If you premix asphalt binder and asphalt modifier mix them for at least minutes .
When you add CRM the temperature of the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier must be from to degrees F. After interacting for at least minutes the asphalt rubber binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Cone penetration at C . mm ASTM D Resilience at C min rebound ASTM D Softening point C ASTM DM Viscosity at C centipoisesa ASTM DDM aPrepare sample for viscosity test under California Test .
Do not use the asphalt rubber binder during the first minutes of the reaction period .
During this period the asphalt rubber binder mixture must be between degrees F and the lower of or degrees F below the asphalt binders flash point shown in the SDS .
If any asphalt rubber binder is not used within hours after the reaction period discontinue heating .
If the asphalt rubber binder drops below degrees F reheat before use .
If you add more scrap tire crumb rubber to the reheated asphalt rubber binder the binder must undergo a minute reaction period .
The added scrap tire crumb rubber must not exceed percent of the total asphalt rubber binder weight .
Reheated and reacted asphalt rubber binder must comply with the viscosity specifications .
Do not reheat asphalt rubber binder more than twice .
.B Aggregates .Ba General For RHMAG before the addition of asphalt binder and lime treatment the aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing No .
sieve and retained on No .
sieve .
Onefractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Sand equivalent mina AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight at ASTM D Report only Fine aggregate angularity min b AASHTO T Method A aReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
The use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
bThe Engineer waives this specification if the HMA contains percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate unless your JMF fails verification .
Manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel .
.Bb Aggregate Gradations The aggregate gradations for RHMAG must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements RHMAG pavement thickness shown Gradation .
to less than .
foot inch .
foot or greater inch For RHMAG the aggregate gradations must be within the TV limits for the specified sieve size shown in the following tables SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Aggregate Gradations for RHMAG Percentage Passing inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
.B Rubberized Hot Mix AsphaltGap Graded Production Asphalt rubber binder must be from to degrees F when mixed with aggregate .
If the dry and wet moisture susceptibility test result for treated plantproduced RHMAG is less than the RHMAG mix design requirement for dry and wet moisture susceptibility strength the minimum dry and wet strength requirement is waived but you must use one of the following treatments .
Aggregate lime treatment using the slurry method .
Aggregate lime treatment using the dry lime method .
Liquid antistrip treatment of RHMAG .C Construction Use a material transfer vehicle when placing RHMAG .
Do not use a pneumatic tired roller to compact RHMAG .
Spread and compact RHMAG at an ambient air temperature of at least degrees F and a surface temperature of at least degrees F. If the ambient air temperature is below degrees F cover loads in trucks with tarps .
The tarps must completely cover the exposed load until you transfer the mixture to the pavers hopper or to the pavement surface .
Tarps are not required if the time from discharge to truck until transfer to the pavers hopper or the pavement surface is less than minutes .
For RHMAG placed under method compaction .
Complete the st coverage of breakdown compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. .
Complete breakdown and intermediate compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. Use a static steeltired roller instead of the pneumatictired roller for intermediate compaction . .
Complete finish compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. Spread sand at a rate between and lbsq yd on new RHMAG pavement when finish rolling is complete .
Sand must be free of clay or organic matter .
Sand must comply with section .C .
Keep traffic off the pavement until spreading of the sand is complete .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .D Payment Not Used .
OPEN GRADED FRICTION COURSES .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for producing and placing open graded friction courses .
Open graded friction courses include HMAO RHMAO and RHMAOHB .
You may produce OGFC using a WMA technology .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a complete JMF except do not specify an asphalt binder content .
For RHMAO and RHMAOHB the JMF submittal must comply with section .Ac .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Quality Control .Abi General Reserved .Abii Asphalt Rubber Binder For RHMAO and RHMAOHB the asphalt rubber binder must comply with the specifications in .Abii .
.Abiii Aggregates Test the quality characteristics of aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Aggregate Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Gradation AASHTO T per tons and any remaining part Moisture contenta AASHTO T per tons and any remaining part Crushed particles AASHTO T per tons or per project whichever is greater Los Angeles Rattler AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles ASTM D aTest at continuous mixing plants only .
For lime treated aggregate test aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during OGFC production .
.Abiv Open Graded Friction Course Production Test the quality characteristics of OGFC under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table OGFC Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Asphalt binder content AASHTO T Method A per tons and any remaining part HMA moisture content AASHTO T per tons but not less than per paving day SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .Ac Department Acceptance .Aci General The Department accepts OGFC based on compliance with .
Aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Aggregate gradation AASHTO T JMF Tolerance Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing No .
sieve and retained on No .
sieve .
Onefractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight ASTM D Report only .
Inplace OGFC quality requirements shown in the following table OGFC Acceptance In Place Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Asphalt binder content AASHTO T Method A JMF . . HMA moisture content max AASHTO T . .Acii Asphalt Rubber Binder The Department accepts asphalt rubber binder in RHMAO and RHMAOHB under .Aeii .
.Aciii Pavement Smoothness Pavement smoothness of OGFC must comply with the requirements shown in the following table for a . mile section OGFC Pavement Smoothness Acceptance Criteria OGFC placement on Mean Roughness Index requirement New construction or HMA overlay inmi or less Existing pavement inmi or less Milled surface inmi or less .Aciv.Acv Reserved .B Materials .B General When mixed with asphalt binder aggregate must not be more than degrees F except aggregate for OGFC with unmodified asphalt binder must be not more than degrees F. .B Open Graded Friction Course Mix Design The Department determines the asphalt binder content under California Test within days of your complete JMF submittal and provides you a Caltrans Hot Mix Asphalt Verification form .
For OGFC the st paragraph of section .Ba does not apply .
.B Asphalt Binder Asphalt rubber binder in RHMAO and RHMAOHB must comply with section .B .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .B Aggregates .Ba General Aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing No .
sieve and retained on No .
sieve .
Onefractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight at ASTM D Report only .Bb Aggregate Gradations The aggregate gradations for HMAO must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements HMAO pavement thickness shown Gradation .
foot or greater to less than .
foot inch .
foot or greater inch The aggregate gradations for RHMAO and RHMAOHB must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Requirements RHMAO and RHMAOHB pavement thickness shown Gradation .
foot or greater inch For RHMAO and RHMAOHB the inch aggregate gradation is not allowed .
For OGFC the aggregate gradations must be within the TV limits for the specified sieve size shown in the following tables SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Aggregate Gradations for OGFC Percentage Passing inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
If lime treatment is required you may reduce the lime ratio for the combined aggregates from .
to .
percent for OGFC .
.B Sand Sand for spreading over RHMAO and RHMAOHB pavement must be free of clay or organic matter .
Sand must comply with section .C .
.C Construction Use a material transfer vehicle when placing OGFC .
If the ambient air temperature is below degrees F cover loads in trucks with tarps .
The tarps must completely cover the exposed load until you transfer the mixture to the pavers hopper or to the pavement surface .
Tarps are not required if the time from discharge to truck until transfer to the pavers hopper or the pavement surface is less than minutes .
Apply a tack coat before placing OGFC .
The tack coat application rate must comply with the requirements of the following table Tack Coat Application Rates for OGFC OGFC over Minimum residual rates galsq yd CSSCSSh SSSSh and QShCQSh asphaltic emulsion CRSCRS RSRS and QSCQS asphaltic emulsion Asphalt binder and PMRSPMCRS and PMRShPMCRSh asphaltic emulsion New HMA .
. .
Concrete pavement and existing asphalt concrete surfacing .
. . Planed pavement .
. .
Compact OGFC with steeltired axle tandem rollers .
If placing over tons of OGFC per hour use at least rollers for each paver .
If placing less than tons of OGFC per hour use at least rollers for each paver .
Each roller must weigh from to lb per linear inch of drum width .
Turn the vibrator off .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Compact OGFC with coverages .
The Engineer may order fewer coverages if the layer thickness of OGFC is less than .
foot .
For HMAO with unmodified asphalt binder .
Spread and compact only if the ambient air temperature is at least degrees F and the surface temperature is at least degrees F. .
Complete the st coverage using rollers before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. .
Complete all compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. For HMAO with modified asphalt binder except asphalt rubber binder .
Spread and compact only if the ambient air temperature is at least degrees F and the surface temperature is at least degrees F. .
Complete the st coverage using rollers before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. .
Complete all compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. For RHMAO and RHMAOHB .
Spread and compact only if the ambient air temperature is at least degrees F and surface temperature is at least degrees F. Complete the st coverage using rollers before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. .
Complete compaction before the surface temperature drops below degrees F. Spread sand at a rate between and lbsq yd on new RHMAO and RHMAOHB pavement after finish rolling activities are complete .
Keep traffic off the pavement until spreading of the sand is complete .
If you choose to correct OGFC for smoothness the Engineer determines if the corrective method causes raveling .
OGFC that is raveling must be removed and replaced .
.D Payment Not Used .
BONDED WEARING COURSES .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section .
includes specifications for producing and placing bonded wearing courses .
Placing a BWC consists of applying a polymermodified asphaltic emulsion and placing the specified HMA in a single pass with an integrated paving machine .
BWC using RHMAG RHMAO or HMAO must comply with the specifications for RHMAG RHMAO or HMAO .
.Ab Definitions Reserved .Ac Submittals With your JMF submittal include .
Asphaltic emulsion target residual rate .
Weight ratio of water to bituminous material in the original asphaltic emulsion Within business days following the st job site delivery submit test results for asphaltic emulsion properties performed on a sample taken from the asphaltic emulsion delivered .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Within business day of each job site delivery of asphaltic emulsion submit to METS a quart sample and a certificate of compliance .
Ship each sample so that it is received at METS within hours of sampling .
Each day BWC is placed submit the residual and application rate for the asphaltic emulsion .
During production submit certified volume or weight slips for the materials supplied .
.Ad Quality Assurance .Adi General For each job site delivery of asphaltic emulsion take a qt sample in the presence of the Engineer .
Take samples from the delivery truck at mid load from a sampling tap or thief .
If the sample is taken from the tap draw and discard qt before sampling .
If you unload asphalt binder or asphaltic emulsion into a bulk storage tank do not use material from the tank until you submit test results for a sample taken from the bulk storage tank .
Testing must be performed by an AASHTOaccredited laboratory .
.Adii Quality Control Take two gal samples of BWC in metal containers .
Test the asphaltic emulsion under ASTM D at least once per paving day at the job site .
.Adiii Department Acceptance The Department accepts asphaltic emulsion based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table Asphaltic Emulsion Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Saybolt Furol viscosity at C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Sieve test on original emulsion at time of delivery max AASHTO T . hour storage stability max AASHTO T Residue by evaporation min California Test Tests on residue from evaporation test Torsional recovery measure entire arc of recovery at C min California Test Penetration at C . mm AASHTO T The Department accepts the BWC based on the submitted asphaltic emulsion target residual rate .
galsq yd when tested under ASTM D. .A Materials .Aa General Reserved .Ab Asphaltic Emulsion The asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Asphaltic Emulsion Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Saybolt Furol viscosity at C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Sieve test on original emulsion at time of delivery max AASHTO T . hour storage stability max AASHTO T Residue by evaporation min California Test Tests on residue from evaporation test Torsional recovery measure entire arc of recovery at C min California Test Penetration at C . mm AASHTO T .Ac Reserved .A Construction .Aa General Do not dilute the asphaltic emulsion .
Do not place BWC if rain is forecast for the project area within hours by the National Weather Service .
.Ab Spreading and Compacting Equipment Use method compaction for placing the BWC .
Use a material transfer vehicle when placing BWC .
Use an integrated distributor paver capable of spraying the asphaltic emulsion spreading the HMA and leveling the mat surface in pass .
Apply asphaltic emulsion at a uniform rate for the full paving width .
The asphaltic emulsion must not be touched by any part of the paver including wheels or tracks .
If the spray bar is adjusted for changing pavement widths the paver must prevent excess spraying of asphaltic emulsion beyond inches of the HMA edge .
.Ac Applying Asphaltic Emulsion Before spreading HMA apply asphaltic emulsion on dry or damp pavement with no free water .
Apply emulsion at a temperature from to degrees F and in a single application at the residual rate specified for the condition of the underlying surface .
Asphaltic emulsion must have a target residual rate for the surfaces to receive the emulsion as shown in the following table Asphaltic Emulsion Target Residual Rate Surface to receive asphaltic emulsion Target residual rates Concrete pavement galsq yd ..
Dense compacted new HMA pavement galsq yd .. Open textured dry aged or oxidized existing asphalt concrete pavement galsq yd ..
If you request and your request is authorized you may change the asphaltic emulsion application rates .
.Ad Placing and Compacting Hot Mix Asphalt Construct a transverse joint if the HMA remains in the paver for more than minutes .
Do not reintroduce HMA spread over asphaltic emulsion into the paving process .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Do not overlap or hot lap HMA .
Pave through lanes after paving adjacent .
Shoulders .
Curve widenings .
Tapers .
Chain control lanes .
Transitions .
Turnouts .
Road connections .
Turn pockets .
Driveways .
Ramps For BWC placed on areas adjacent to through lanes that extend into the through lanes cut the BWC to a neat straight vertical line at the lane line .
If you spill asphaltic emulsion into the paver hopper stop paving and remove the contaminated material .
.A Payment Payment for asphaltic emulsion is not included in the payment for the type of HMA used in a bonded wearing course .
.B Bonded Wearing CoursesGap Graded .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for producing bonded wearing coursegap graded .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Include film thickness and calculations and AASHTO T results with your JMF submittal .
.Bd Quality Assurance .Bdi General Reserved .Bdii Quality Control .BdiiA General Reserved .BdiiB Aggregates Test the quality characteristics of the aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table Aggregate Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Gradation AASHTO T per tons and any remaining part Sand equivalenta AASHTO T Moisture contentb AASHTO T per tons and any remaining part Crushed particles AASHTO T per tons or per project whichever is greater Los Angeles Rattler AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles ASTM D Fine aggregate angularity AASHTO T Method A aReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
The use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
bTest at continuous mixing plants only .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE For lime treated aggregate test the aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during BWCG production .
.BdiiC Bonded Wearing CourseGap Graded Production Take two gal samples of BWCG in metal containers .
Test the quality characteristics of BWCG under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table BWCG Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Asphalt binder content AASHTO T Method A per tons and any remaining part HMA moisture content AASHTO T per tons but not less than per paving day .BdiiD.BdiiG Reserved .Bdiii Department Acceptance The Department accepts BWCG based on compliance with .
Asphalt binder content at JMF . . percent when tested under AASHTO T Method A. .
Aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Aggregate gradation AASHTO T JMF Tolerance Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing no .
sieve and retained on no .
sieve .
One fractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Sand equivalent mina AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight at ASTM D Fine aggregate angularity min AASHTO T Method A aReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
The use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
.B Materials .Ba General Reserved .Bb Bonded Wearing CourseGap Graded Mix Design For BWCG the st paragraph of section .Ba does not apply .
Determine the proposed OBC from a mix design that complies with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Hot Mix Asphalt Mix Design Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Film thickness min m Asphalt Institute MS Table .
a Drain down max AASHTO T b . aFilm thickness is calculated based on the effective asphalt content and determined as follows FT Pbe SA x Gb x where FT Film thickness in m Pbe Effective asphalt content by total weight of mix using SP Asphalt Mixture SA Estimated surface area of the aggregate blend in mkg from Table .
in the Asphalt Institute Manual Series No .
MS Gb Specific gravity of asphalt binder bCombine aggregate and asphalt at the asphalt binder suppliers instructed mixing temperature .
Coated aggregates that fall through the wire basket during loading must be returned to the basket before conditioning at F for hour .
The OBC must be greater than .
percent by total weight of mix .
.Bc Asphalt Binder Reserved .Bd Aggregates The aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Quality Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Percent of crushed particles Coarse aggregate min Onefractured face Twofractured faces Fine aggregate min Passing No .
sieve and retained on No .
sieve .
Onefractured face AASHTO T Los Angeles Rattler max Loss at Rev .
Loss at Rev .
AASHTO T Sand equivalent mina AASHTO T Flat and elongated particles max by weight ASTM D Fine aggregate angularity min AASHTO T Method A aReported value must be the average of tests from a single sample .
The use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in AASHTO T Figure .
Sections .
Manual Shaker .. Alternate Method No .
and .. Hand Method do not apply .
Prepare the stock solution as specified in section .. Stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
The aggregate gradations for BWCG must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE Aggregate Gradation Requirements BWCG pavement thickness shown Gradation less than .
foot No .
or inch .
foot or greater inch The proposed aggregate gradation must be within the TV limits for the specified sieve sizes shown in the following tables Aggregate Gradations for BWCG Percentage Passing inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
inch Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
No .
Sieve size Target value limit Allowable tolerance TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
TV No .
.. TV .
.B Construction Apply asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air and pavement temperatures are above degrees F. .B Payment Not Used SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
HOT MIX ASPHALT ON BRIDGE DECKS .A General Section .
includes specifications for producing and placing hot mix asphalt on bridge decks .
HMA used for bridge decks must comply with the specifications for Type A HMA in section .. .B Materials Do not use the inch or inch aggregate gradation for HMA on bridge decks .
The grade of asphalt binder for HMA must be PG or PG .
.C Construction Spread and compact HMA on bridge decks using method compaction .
If a concrete expansion dam is to be placed at a bridge deck expansion joint tape oilresistant construction paper to the deck over the area to be covered by the dam before placing the tack coat and HMA across the joint .
Apply a tack coat at the minimum residual rate specified in section .Cf .
For HMA placed on a deck seal use the minimum residual rate specified for concrete pavement .
For HMA placed on a deck seal .
Place the HMA within days after installing the deck seal . .
If a paper mask is placed on the deck under section .
place the HMA continuously across the paper mask. . Place HMA in at least approximately equal layers. . For placement of the st HMA layer ..
Comply with the HMA application temperature recommended by the deck seal manufacturer .
..
Deliver and place HMA using equipment with pneumatic tires or rubberfaced wheels .
Do not operate other vehicles or equipment on the bare deck seal .
.. Deposit HMA on the deck seal in such a way that the deck seal is not damaged .
Do not use a windrow .
.. Place HMA in a downhill direction on bridge decks with grades over percent .
.. Selfpropelled spreading equipment is not required .
.D Payment Not Used .
MINOR HOT MIX ASPHALT .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for producing and placing minor hot mix asphalt .
Minor HMA must comply with section .
except as specified in this section ..
The inertial profiler requirements in section do not apply .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals The QC plan and test results in sections .Ac and .Ad do not apply .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General The JMF renewal requirements in section .Ad do not apply .
Test pavement smoothness with a foot straightedge .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .Ab Quality Control Testing for compliance with the following quality characteristics is not required .
Flat and elongated particles .
Fine aggregate angularity .
Hamburg wheel track .
Moisture susceptibility .Ac Department Acceptance The Department accepts minor HMA under section .Ae except for compliance with requirements for the following quality characteristics .
Flat and elongated particles .
Fine aggregate angularity .
Hamburg wheel track .
Moisture susceptibility .B Materials .B General Reserved .B Minor Hot Mix Asphalt Mix Design The Hamburg wheel track and moisture susceptibility requirements do not apply to the mix design for minor HMA .
.B Asphalt Binder The grade of asphalt binder for minor HMA must be PG or PG .
.B Liquid Antistrip Treatment Treat minor HMA with liquid antistrip unless you submit AASHTO T and AASHTO T Modified test results showing compliance with section .B and dated within months of the submittal .
.C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED EXISTING ASPHALT CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A General Section .
includes general specifications for performing work on existing asphalt concrete facilities .
Work performed on existing asphalt concrete facilities must comply with section .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Before removing a portion of an asphalt concrete facility make a inch deep saw cut to a true line along the limits of the removal area .
.D Payment Not Used SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .
REPLACE ASPHALT CONCRETE SURFACING .A General Section .
includes specifications for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing .
.B Materials HMA to be used for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing must comply with Type A HMA as specified in section ..
The grade of asphalt binder must be PG or PG .
Tack coat must comply with section .B .
.C Construction Where replace asphalt concrete surfacing is shown remove the full depth of the existing asphalt concrete surfacing and replace with HMA .
The Engineer determines the exact limits of asphalt concrete surfacing to be replaced .
Replace asphalt concrete in a lane before the lane is specified to be opened to traffic .
Before removing asphalt concrete outline the replacement area and cut neat lines with a saw or grind to full depth of the existing asphalt concrete .
Do not damage asphalt concrete and base remaining in place .
If you excavate the base beyond the specified plane replace it with HMA .
Do not use a material transfer vehicle for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing .
Before placing HMA apply a tack coat as specified in section .Cf .
Place HMA using method compaction as specified in section .Cc .
.D Payment The payment quantity for replace asphalt concrete surfacing is the volume determined from the dimensions shown . .
REMOVE ASPHALT CONCRETE DIKES .A General Section .
applies to removing asphalt concrete dikes outside the limits of excavation .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Reserved .D Payment Not Used .
COLD PLANING ASPHALT CONCRETE PAVEMENT .A General Section .
includes specifications for cold planning asphalt concrete pavement .
Cold planning asphalt concrete pavement includes the removal of pavement markers traffic stripes and pavement markings within the area of cold planning .
.B Materials HMA for temporary tapers must be of the same quality that is used for the HMA overlay or comply with the specifications for minor HMA in section .. .C Construction .C General Do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE The cold planing machine must be .
Equipped with a cutter head width that matches the planing width unless a wider cutter head is authorized . .
Equipped with automatic controls for the longitudinal grade and transverse slope of the cutter head and ..
If a ski device is used it must be at least feet long rigid and a piece unit .
The entire length must be used in activating the sensor .
..
If referencing from existing pavement the cold planing machine must be controlled by a self contained grade reference system .
The system must be used at or near the centerline of the roadway .
On the adjacent pass with the cold planing machine a jointmatching shoe may be used . .
Equipped to effectively control dust generated by the planing operation .
Operated such that no fumes or smoke is produced .
Replace broken missing or worn machine teeth .
If you do not complete placing the HMA surfacing before opening the area to traffic you must .
Construct a temporary HMA taper to the level of the existing pavement. . Place HMA during the next work shift . .
Submit a corrective action plan that shows you will complete cold planing and placement of HMA in the same work shift .
Do not restart cold planing activities until the corrective action plan is authorized .
.C Grade Control and Surface Smoothness Install and maintain grade and transverse slope references .
The final cut must result in a neat and uniform surface .
The completed surface of the planed pavement must not vary more than .
foot when measured with a foot straightedge parallel with the centerline .
With the straightedge at right angles to the centerline the transverse slope of the planed surface must not vary more than .
foot .
Where lanes are open to traffic the dropoff of between adjacent lanes must not be more than .
foot .
.C Planed Material Remove cold planed material concurrently with planing activities such that the removal does not lag more than feet behind the planer .
.C Temporary HMA Tapers If a dropoff between the existing pavement and the planed area at transverse joints can not be avoided before opening to traffic construct a temporary HMA taper .
The HMA temporary taper must be .
Placed to the level of the existing pavement and tapered on a slope of horizontalvertical or flatter to the level of the planed area .
Compacted by any method that will produce a smooth riding surface Completely remove temporary tapers before placing permanent surfacing .
.D Payment Not Used .
REMOVE BASE AND SURFACING .A General Section .
includes specifications for removing base and asphalt concrete surfacing .
.B Materials Not Used SECTION ASPHALT CONCRETE .C Construction Where base and surfacing are described to be removed remove base and surfacing to a depth of at least inches below the grade of the existing surfacing .
Backfill resulting holes and depressions with embankment material under section .
.D Payment The payment quantity for remove base and surfacing is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
..
RESERVED CONCRETE PAVEMENT GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing concrete pavement .
.B Definitions action limit Test results at which corrective actions must be made while production continues .
fulldepth crack Crack other than a working crack that runs from one edge of a slab to the opposite or adjacent side of the slab .
raveling Progressive disintegration of the concrete pavement surface resulting in dislodged aggregate .
suspension limit Test results at which production must be suspended while corrections are made .
working crack Crack that extends through the full depth of a slab and is parallel to and within .
foot of a planned contraction joint .
.C Submittals .C General At least days before delivery to the job site submit the manufacturers instructions for storage and installation of .
Splice couplers for threaded tie bars .
Joint filler Submit calibration documentation and operational guidelines for frequency measuring devices for concrete vibrators as an informational submittal .
Submit updated QC charts each paving day as an informational submittal .
If repair or replacement of noncompliant concrete is required submit a repair or replacement plan .
.C Certificates of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance for .
Tie bars .
Splice couplers for threaded tie bars .
Dowel bars .
Tie bar baskets .
Dowel bar baskets .
Joint filler .
Epoxypowder coating .C Quality Control Plan Submit a concrete pavement QC plan .
Allow days for review .
.C Mix Design At least days before testing for mix proportions submit a copy of the AASHTO accreditation for the laboratory determining the mix proportions as an informational submittal .
At least days before starting field qualification submit the proposed concrete mix proportions the corresponding mix identifications and laboratory test reports including measurements of the modulus of rupture for each trial mixture at and days .
.C JustInTime Training Reserved SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .C Concrete Field Qualification Submit field qualification data and test reports including .
Mixing date .
Mixing equipment and procedures used .
Batch volume in cubic yards .
Type and source of ingredients used .
Penetration of the concrete .
Air content of the plastic concrete .
Age and strength at the time of concrete beam testing The minimum batch size for field qualification is cu yd .
Field qualification test reports must be certified with a signature by an official in responsible charge of the laboratory performing the tests .
.C Test Strips You may request to eliminate a test strip if you use paving equipment and personnel from a Department project for the same type of pavement and completed within the past months .
Submit supporting documents and the previous projects information with your request to eliminate a test strip .
.C Cores Submit the name of the laboratory that will test the cores for air content .
Submit each core in an individual plastic bag marked with a description of the location from which the core was taken .
.C Coefficient of Thermal Expansion Submit test specimens fabricated from a single sample of concrete for testing the coefficient of thermal expansion under AASHTO T for field qualification and during production .
Submit your coefficient of thermal expansion test data at httpcte .C.C Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General If the pavement quantity is at least cu yd provide a QC manager .
Core pavement as described for thickness bar placement and air content .
Provide material and labor to assist the Engineer in fabricating test beams for the Departments modulus of rupture testing .
Allow at least days for the Department to schedule testing for the coefficient of friction .
Notify the Engineer when a lane or lanes are scheduled to be opened to traffic and when the pavement is ready for testing which is the latter of .
days after paving .
When the pavement has attained a modulus of rupture of at least psi The Department tests for the coefficient of friction within days of receiving notification that the pavement is ready for testing .
.D JustInTime Training Reserved .D Quality Control Plan The QC plan must describe the organization and procedures used to SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Control the production process .
Determine whether a change to the production process is needed .
Implement a change The QC plan must include action and suspension limits and the details of the corrective action to be taken if any process is outside of those limits .
The suspension limits must not exceed the specified acceptance criteria .
The QC plan must address the elements affecting concrete pavement quality including .
Mix proportions .
Contraction and construction joints .
Aggregate gradation .
Bar reinforcement placement and alignment Materials quality .
Dowel bar placement alignment and anchorage .
Stockpile management .
Tie bar placement .
Line and grade control .
Modulus of rupture .
Proportioning .
Finishing and curing .
Mixing and transportation .
Protecting pavement .
Placing and consolidation .
Surface smoothness .D Qualifications Testing laboratories and their test equipment must be qualified under the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
Use a laboratory that complies with ASTM C to determine the mix proportions for concrete pavement .
The laboratory must have a current AASHTO accreditation for .
AASHTO T or ASTM C . ASTM CCM Use an ACIcertified concrete laboratory technician Grade I to perform field qualification tests and calculations .
.D Mix Designs Make trial mixtures no more than months before field qualification .
Using your trial mixtures determine the minimum cementitious materials content .
Use your value for minimum cementitious material content for MC in equation and equation of section .B .
To determine the minimum content of cementitious materials or the maximum ratio of water to cementitious materials use modulus of rupture values of at least psi for days age and at least psi for days age .
If you change an aggregate supply source or the mix proportions produce a trial batch and field qualify the new concrete .
The Department does not adjust time for sampling testing and qualifying new mix proportions or changing an aggregate supply source .
.D Test Strips Construct a test strip for each type of pavement if the quantity is at least cu yd .
Obtain authorization of test strips before additional paving .
Test strips must be .
From to feet long .
Same width as the planned paving .
Constructed using the same equipment to be used for constructing pavement The Engineer selects from to core locations for dowel bars and up to locations for tie bars for each test strip .
If you use mechanical dowel bar inserters the test strip must demonstrate they do not leave voids segregations or surface irregularities such as depressions dips or high areas .
Test strips must comply with the acceptance criteria for .
Smoothness except an inertial profile is not required SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Dowel bar and tie bar placement .
Pavement thickness .
Final finishing except for the coefficient of friction Allow business days for evaluation of a test strip .
If a test strip is not authorized submit a plan for changes to your materials methods or equipment .
Allow business days for authorization of the plan .
Construct another test strip under the authorized plan .
Remove test strips that are not authorized .
If a test strip is compliant except for smoothness and final finishing you may grind the surface .
After grinding retest the smoothness under section .
The Engineer retests the thickness after grinding .
Construct additional test strips if you change any of the following .
Paving equipment including .. Paver .. Dowel bar inserter ..
Tie bar inserter .. Tining machine .. Curing equipment .
Concrete mix proportions .D Quality Control .Da General During paving test the concrete pavement under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table Concrete Pavement Test Methods and Testing Frequencies Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Cleanness value California Test per day Sand equivalent California Test Aggregate gradation California Test Air content air entrainment specified California Test per hour Air content air entrainment not specified California Test per hours Density California Test Penetration California Test Aggregate moisture meter calibrationa California Test or per day a Check the calibration of the plant moisture meter by comparing moisture meter readings with California Test or California Test test results .
Maintain control charts to identify potential problems and assignable causes .
Post a copy of each control chart at a location determined by the Engineer .
Control charts for individual measurements of quality characteristics must use the target values in the mix proportions as indicators of central tendency .
Develop linear control charts for .
Cleanness value .
Sand equivalent .
Fine and coarse aggregate gradation .
Air content .
Penetration Control charts must include .
Contract number .
Mix proportions .
Test number SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Each test parameter .
Action and suspension limits .
Specification limits .
QC test results For control charts for fine and coarse aggregate gradation record the running average of the previous consecutive gradation tests for each sieve and superimpose the specification limits .
For control charts for air content the action limit is .
percent of the specified value .
If no value is specified the action limit is .
percent of the value used for your authorized mix design .
As a minimum a process requires corrective action if any of the following occurs .
consecutive running averages of tests for fine or coarse aggregate gradation are outside the specification limits .
point falls outside the suspension limit line for individual penetration or air content measurements .
points in a row fall outside the action limit line for individual penetration or air content measurements Stop production for processes requiring corrective action .
Before placing concrete pavement each day and at intervals not to exceed hours during production use a tachometer to test and record the vibration frequency of the concrete vibrators .
.Db Concrete Field Qualification Before paving your mix design must be field qualified .
For field qualification the modulus of rupture at an age of days or earlier must be at least .
psi for each single beam .
psi for the average of beams .Dc.Dh Reserved .D Department Acceptance .Da General The Department tests the concrete pavement under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table Department Acceptance Testing Frequency Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequencya CRCP JPCP Air contentb California Test days paving Modulus of rupture at days California Test cu yd Dowel bar placement Measurement sq yd Tie bar placement Measurement sq yd Coefficient of friction California Test days paving Thickness California Test sq yd aA single test represents no more than the frequency specified .
bTested only if air entrainment is specified .
.Db Verification Testing .Dbi General Reserved .Dbii Air Content If airentraining admixtures are specified the Engineer uses a ttest to compare your QC test results with the Departments test results .
The tvalue for test data is determined using the following equation SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT where nc number of your QC tests minimum of required nv number of Departments tests minimum of required X c mean of your QC tests X v mean of the Departments tests Sp pooled standard deviation Sc standard deviation of your QC tests Sv standard deviation of the Departments tests Your QC test results are compared with the Departments test results at a level of significance of  ..
The tvalue is compared to tcrit for the degrees of freedom shown in the following table Degrees of freedom ncnv tcrit for  . . . . . . . . . . .
If the calculated tvalue is less than or equal to tcrit your QC test results are verified .
If the calculated t value is greater than tcrit your QC test results are not verified .
If your QC test results are not verified core at least specimens from the concrete pavement under section .M .
The Engineer selects the core locations .
The authorized laboratory must test these specimens for air content under ASTM C. The Engineer compares these test results with your QC test results using the ttest method .
If your QC test results are verified based on this comparison the Engineer uses the QC test results for acceptance of concrete pavement for air content .
If your QC test results are not verified based on this comparison the Engineer uses the air content of core specimens determined by the authorized laboratory under ASTM C for acceptance .
.Dc Acceptance Testing .Dci General The Department accepts concrete pavement based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table t X c X v S p n c n v and S p S c n c S v n v n c n v SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Concrete Pavement Requirements for Acceptance Quality characteristic Test method Requirement CRCP JPCP Air content California Test .
of the specified valuea Modulus of rupture at days min psi California Test b Bar reinforcement depth tolerance at joints min Field measurement inch below the saw cut depth Dowel bar placement tolerancesc Horizontal offset inch Longitudinal translation inch Horizontal skew max inch Vertical skew max inch Vertical depth Field measurement The minimum distance measured from the concrete pavement surface to any point along the top of the dowel bar must be DB inch where DB of the pavement thickness or the saw cut depth in inches whichever is greater The maximum distance below the depth shown must be inch .
Tie bar placement tolerancesc Horizontal and vertical skew max inches Longitudinal translation inches Horizontal offset embedment inches Vertical depth Field measurement .
At least inch below the bottom of the saw cut .
At least inches from any point along the bar to the pavement surface or bottom Coefficient of friction min Concrete pavement Ramp termini California Test . . Pavement smoothness California Test AASHTO R and AASHTO R . No area of localized roughness with an International Roughness Index greater than inmi .
Mean Roughness Index of inmi or less within a . mile section Thickness toleranced max foot California Test .
foot deficient of the thickness shown aIf no value is specified the air content must be within .
of the value used for your authorized mix design .
bAverage of the individual test results of test beams .
cPlacement tolerance is measured relative to the completed joint .
dSee section .Dciv for additional thickness requirements .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .Dcii Dowel and Tie Bar Placement Core each days paving within business days .
The Engineer identifies the joint and dowel or tie bar to be tested .
Each dowel or tie bar test consists of cores on each end of the bar to expose both ends for measurement .
If the initial cores show that dowel or tie bars are within alignment tolerances and the Engineer orders more coring the additional cores are change order work .
If the coring indicates the dowel or tie bars are not placed within the specified tolerances or if unconsolidated concrete is around the dowel or tie bars perform additional coring as ordered to determine the limits of unacceptable work .
The Engineer determines the limits for removal and replacement .
.Dciii Pavement Smoothness The Department may accept pavement smoothness based on your inertial profiler testing in the absence of its own testing .
.Dciv Thickness Drill cores for the Departments acceptance testing for thickness under section .M .
Drill the cores in the primary area which is the area placed in day for each thickness .
Core at the locations determined by the Engineer and in the Engineers presence .
If grinding is required do not core until grinding has been completed .
The core specimen diameter must be inches .
To identify the limits of concrete pavement deficient in thickness by more than .
foot you may divide primary areas into secondary areas .
The Engineer measures cores under California Test to the nearest .
foot .
You may request additional thickness measurements to determine the average thickness variation .
The Engineer determines the locations with random sampling methods .
If each thickness measurement in a primary area is deficient by less than .
foot the Engineer calculates the average thickness deficiency in that primary area .
The Engineer uses .
foot for a thickness difference more than .
foot over the specified thickness .
The thickness of the concrete pavement must not be deficient by more than .
foot .
For each thickness measurement in a primary area deficient by more than .
foot the Engineer determines a secondary area where the thickness deficiency is more than .
foot .
The Engineer determines this secondary area by measuring the thickness of each concrete pavement slab adjacent to the measurement found to be more than .
foot deficient .
The Engineer continues to measure the thickness until an area that is bound by slabs with a thickness deficient by .
foot or less is determined .
Slabs without bar reinforcement are defined by the areas bound by longitudinal and transverse joints and concrete pavement edges .
Slabs with bar reinforcement are defined by the areas bound by longitudinal joints and concrete pavement edges and foot lengths .
The thickness measurements for a secondary area in a slab determine that entire slab thickness .
The Engineer measures the remaining primary area thickness after removing the secondary areas from consideration for determining the average thickness deficiency .
The minimum thickness is not reduced for specifications that may affect concrete pavement thickness such as allowable tolerances for subgrade construction .
The Engineer determines the areas of noncompliant pavement thickness deficiencies and limits where removal is required .
Pavement with an average thickness deficiency less than .
foot is acceptable .
If the thickness deficiency is .
foot or more and less than .
foot you may request authorization to leave the pavement in place and accept a payment adjustment .
If the deficiency is more than .
foot you must remove and replace the pavement .
The deduction for pavement thickness deficiency in each primary area is as shown in the following table SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Deduction for Thickness Deficiency Average thickness deficiencya Deduction .
foot .sq yd .
foot .sq yd .
foot .sq yd .
foot .sq yd .
foot .sq yd aValues greater than .
foot are rounded to the nearest .
foot .
.Dcv.Dcviii Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Tack coat must comply with section .
.B Concrete .B General Concrete placed for tapered edges after the pavement has been placed may be minor concrete .
.B Cementitious Material Concrete must contain from pounds to pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
The specifications for reducing cementitious material content in section .E do not apply .
.B Aggregate The specifications for a reduction in the operating range and contract compliance for cleanness value and sand equivalent specified in section .C and section .C for aggregate do not apply .
For coarse aggregate in high desert and high mountain climate regions the loss must not exceed percent when tested under California Test with revolutions .
For the combined aggregate gradation the difference between the percent passing the inch sieve and the percent passing the no .
sieve must not be less than percent of the total aggregate .
.B Air Entrainment The specifications for airentraining admixtures in the nd paragraph of section .Ia do not apply .
The air content must be within .
percent of the specified value .
If no value is specified the air content must be within .
percent of the value used for your authorized mix design .
For a project in the low or south mountain climate region add an airentraining admixture to the concrete at the rate required to produce an air content of percent in the freshly mixed concrete .
For a project in a high desert or high mountain climate region add an airentraining admixture to the concrete at the rate required to produce an air content of percent in the freshly mixed concrete .
.B.B Reserved .C Reinforcement Bars and Baskets .C General Reserved .C Bar Reinforcement Bar reinforcement must be deformed bars complying with section unless the project is shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region in which case it must be one of the following .
Epoxycoated bar reinforcement under section .B except bars must comply with either ASTM AAM ASTM AAM or ASTM AAM Grade or .
Bars must be handled under ASTM DDM and section .C. . Lowcarbon chromium steel bar complying with ASTM AAM .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .C Dowel Bars For a project not shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region dowel bars must be plain bars complying with section and must be one of the following .
Epoxycoated bars .
Bars must comply with ASTM AAM Grade or .
The epoxy coating must comply with either section .B or .B. . Stainlesssteel bars .
Bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under ASTM AAM UNS Designation S or S. . Low carbon chromiumsteel bars under ASTM AAM .
For a project shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region dowel bars must be plain bars complying with section and be one of the following .
Epoxycoated bars .
Bars must comply with ASTM AAM Grade or .
Epoxy coating must comply with section .B. . Stainlesssteel bars .
Bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under ASTM AAM UNS Designation S or S. Fabricate sample and handle epoxycoated dowel bars under ASTM DDM and section .C except each sample must be inches long .
.C Tie Bars Tie bars must be deformed bars .
For a project not shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region tie bars must be one of the following .
Epoxycoated bar reinforcement .
Bars must comply with section .B or .B except bars must comply with ASTM AAM ASTM AAM or ASTM AAM Grade or . . Stainlesssteel bars .
Bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under ASTM AAM UNS Designation S or S. . Low carbon chromiumsteel bars under ASTM AAM .
For a project shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region tie bars must be one of the following .
Epoxycoated bar reinforcement .
Bars must comply with section .B except bars must comply with either ASTM AAM ASTM AAM or ASTM AAM Grade or . . Stainlesssteel bars .
Bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under ASTM AAM UNS Designation S or S. Fabricate sample and handle epoxycoated tie bars under ASTM DDM section .
or section .. Do not bend tie bars .
.C Dowel and Tie Bar Baskets For dowel and tie bar baskets wire must comply with ASTM AAM and be welded under ASTM AAM section ..
Assemblies must be either Uframe or Aframe shaped assemblies .
Wire intersections must be resistance welded .
For a project not shown to be in the high desert or any mountain climate region baskets may be epoxy coated .
The epoxy coating must comply with section .B or .B .
For a project shown to be in the high desert or any mountain climate region the wire for dowel bar and tie bar baskets must be one of the following .
Epoxycoated wire complying with section .B .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Stainlesssteel wire .
Wire must be descaled solid stainlesssteel .
Wire must comply with the chemical requirements in ASTM AAM UNS Designation S or S and the tension requirements in ASTM AAM .
Handle epoxycoated tie bar and dowel bar baskets under ASTM DDM and either section .
or ..
Fasteners must be driven fasteners as specified in ASTM F. Fasteners on LCB or asphalt concrete must have a minimum shank diameter of inch and a minimum shank length of inches .
For ATPB or CTPB the shank diameter must be at least inch and the shank length must be at least inches .
Fasteners clips and washers must have a minimum .milthick zinc coating applied by either electroplating or galvanizing .
.D Dowel Bar Lubricant Dowel bar lubricant must be curing compound no .
or paraffin based .
Paraffinbased lubricant must be Bradley Coatings Group BCG or Valvoline Tectyl or an authorized equal and must be factory applied .
.E Joint Filler Joint filler for an isolation joint must be a preformed bituminoustype expansion joint filler for concrete complying with ASTM D. .F Nonshrink HydraulicCement Grout Nonshrink hydrauliccement grout must comply with ASTM CCM .
You may use clean uniform rounded aggregate filler to extend the grout .
Aggregate filler must not exceed percent of the grout mass or the maximum described in the manufacturers instructions whichever is less .
The moisture content of the aggregate filler must not exceed .
percent when tested under California Test or California Test .
When tested under California Test aggregate filler must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Filler Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing inch inch No .
No .
No .
.G.N Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Proportion aggregate and bulk cementitious material by weight using an authorized automatic proportioning device .
For widenings and lane reconstruction construct only the portion of the pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
If you do not complete the construction during the same closure construct temporary roadway pavement under section .E .
.B Joints .B General Do not bend tie bars or reinforcement in existing concrete pavement joints .
For contraction joints and isolation joints saw cut a groove with a powerdriven saw equipped with a diamond blade .
After cutting immediately wash slurry from the joint with water below psi gauge pressure .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Keep joints free from foreign material including soil gravel concrete and asphalt .
To keep foreign material out of the joint you may use filler material .
The filler material must not react adversely with the concrete or damage the pavement .
After sawing and washing install the material such that it keeps moisture in the adjacent concrete during the hours after paving .
If you install filler material the specifications for spraying the sawed joint with additional curing compound in section .I do not apply .
If you use absorptive filler material moisten the filler immediately before or after installation .
.B Construction Joints Construction joints must be vertical .
Before placing fresh concrete against hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures apply curing compound no .
or to the vertical surface and allow it to dry .
At joints between concrete pavement and asphalt concrete pavement apply a tack coat between the two pavements .
Use a metal or wooden bulkhead to form transverse construction joints .
If dowel bars are described the bulkhead must allow dowel bar installation .
.B Contraction Joints Saw contraction joints before cracking occurs and after the concrete is hard enough to saw without spalling raveling or tearing .
Except for longitudinal joints parallel to a curving centerline saw the contraction joints such that they are no more than .
foot from either side of a foot straight line .
Cut transverse contraction joints within .
foot of the spacing described .
Adjust spacing if needed such that slabs are at least feet long .
For widenings do not match transverse contraction joints with existing joint spacing or skew unless described .
Cut transverse contraction joints straight across the full width of the concrete pavement between isolation joints and edges of pavement .
In areas of converging and diverging pavements space transverse contraction joints such that the joint is continuous across the maximum pavement width .
Longitudinal contraction joints must be parallel with the concrete pavement centerline except where lanes converge or diverge .
.B Isolation Joints Before placing concrete at isolation joints saw cut the existing concrete face to make a clean flat vertical surface and secure the joint filler .
Make the saw cut the same depth as the depth of the new pavement .
.C Bar Reinforcement Place bar reinforcement under section .
Bar reinforcement must be more than inch below the saw cut depth at concrete pavement joints .
.D Dowel Bar Placement Dowel bar placement must comply with the tolerances shown in the following table SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Dowel Bar Placement Dimension Tolerance Horizontal offset inch Longitudinal translation inch Horizontal skew max inch Vertical skew max inch Vertical depth The minimum distance measured from the concrete pavement surface to any point along the top of the dowel bar must be DB inch where DB of the pavement thickness or the saw cut depth in inches whichever is greater The maximum distance below the depth shown must be inch .
NOTE Tolerances are measured relative to the completed joint .
If you are using curing compound as a lubricant apply the curing compound to the dowels .
In separate applications .
Apply the last application no more than hours before placing the dowels . .
Such that each dowel is completely lubricated before placement. . At a rate of gallon per square feet .
Install dowel bars using one of the following methods .
Drill and bond the bars under section . .
Mechanically insert the bars .
Eliminate evidence of the insertion by reworking the concrete over the dowels. . Use dowel bar baskets to hold the dowels at the specified depth and alignment before concrete placement .
Anchor the baskets with at least fastener per foot of basket section and at least feet in advance of the pavement placement activity .
You may request not to perform advance anchoring due to construction limitations or restricted access .
After anchoring the baskets and before placing the concrete cut and remove the temporary spacer wires and demonstrate the dowel bars do not move from their specified depth and alignment during concrete placement .
If installation of dowel bars is noncompliant stop paving demonstrate your correction and obtain verbal authorization .
.E Tie Bar Placement Tie bar placement must comply with the tolerances shown in the following table Tie Bar Placement Dimension Tolerance Horizontal and vertical skew max inch Longitudinal translation inch Horizontal offset embedment inch Vertical depth .
At least inch below the bottom of the saw cut .
At least inches from any point along the bar to the pavement surface or bottom NOTE Tolerances are measured relative to the completed joint .
Install tie bars at longitudinal joints using one of the following methods .
Drill and bond the bars under section . .
Mechanically insert the bars into plastic slip formed concrete before finishing .
Ensure there is full contact between the inserted bar and the concrete .
Eliminate evidence of the insertion by reworking the concrete over the tie bars .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Use threaded couplers to splice the tie bars .
The couplers must be fabricated from deformed bar reinforcement and free of external welding or machining. . Use tie bar baskets to hold the tie bars at the specified depth and alignment before concrete placement .
Use fasteners to anchor tie bar baskets .
Anchor the baskets at least feet in advance of the pavement placement activity .
You may request not to perform advanced anchoring due to construction limitations or restricted access .
After anchoring the baskets and before placing the concrete demonstrate the tie bars do not move from their specified depth and alignment during concrete placement .
If installation of tie bars is noncompliant stop paving demonstrate your correction and obtain verbal authorization .
.F Placing Concrete .F General Immediately before placing concrete the surface to receive the concrete must be .
Within the compaction and elevation tolerances .
Free of loose and extraneous material .
Uniformly moist but free of standing or flowing water Place concrete pavement with stationary side forms or slip form paving equipment .
Place consecutive concrete loads within minutes of each other .
Construct a transverse construction joint if the concrete placement is interrupted by more than minutes .
The transverse construction joint must be at the same longitudinal location as the contraction joint in the adjacent lane location or you must remove the concrete pavement to the preceding transverse joint .
Place the concrete pavement in fulllane widths separated by construction joints or monolithically with contraction joints .
Do not retemper concrete .
If the surface width is constructed as shown you may construct the pavement sides on a batter not flatter than verticalhorizontal .
.F Paving Adjacent to Existing Concrete Pavement Wherever pavement is placed adjacent to existing concrete pavement .
Grind the adjacent pavement before placing the new pavement. . Use paving equipment with padded crawler tracks or rubbertired wheels with enough offset to prevent damage . .
Match the pavement grade with the elevation of the existing concrete pavement after grinding .
.F Concrete Pavement Transition Panel For concrete pavement placed in a transition panel texture the surface with a drag strip of burlap broom or spring steel tine device that produces scoring in the finished surface .
Scoring must be either parallel or transverse to the centerline .
Texture at the time that produces the coarsest texture .
.F Stationary SideForm Construction Stationary side forms must be straight and without defects including warps bends and indentations .
Side forms must be metal except at end closures and transverse construction joints where other materials may be used .
You may build up side forms by attaching a section to the top or bottom .
If they are attached to the top of metal forms the attached section must be metal .
The side form base width must be at least percent of the shown concrete pavement thickness .
Side forms including interlocking connections with adjoining forms must be rigid enough to prevent springing from subgrading and paving equipment and concrete pressure .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Construct the subgrade to the final grade before placing the side forms .
The forms must bear fully on the foundation throughout their length and base width .
Place the forms to the grade and alignment of the finished concrete pavement edge .
Support the forms during concrete placement compaction and finishing .
After completing the subgrade and immediately before placing the concrete true up the side forms and set to the line and grade for a distance that avoids delays due to form adjustment .
Clean and oil the forms before each use .
Side forms must remain in place for at least day after placing the concrete and until the pavement edge no longer requires protection from the forms .
Spread screed shape and consolidate concrete with or more machines .
The machines must uniformly distribute and consolidate the concrete .
The machines must operate to place the concrete to the shown cross section with minimal hand work .
Consolidate the concrete without segregation .
If you use concrete vibrators .
Vibration rate must be at least cycles per minute for surface vibrators and cycles per minute for internal vibrators .
Use a calibrated device to measure the frequency of vibration. . Amplitude of vibration must cause perceptible concrete surface movement at least foot from the vibrating element. . Vibrators must not rest on side forms or new concrete pavement. . Power to vibrators must automatically cease if forward or backward motion of the paving machine is stopped. . Highfrequency internal vibrators must be used within minutes of depositing concrete on the subgrade to uniformly consolidate the concrete across the paving width including the area adjacent to the forms. . Mass of concrete must not be shifted with the vibrators .
.F Slip form Construction If you use slip form construction spread screed shape and consolidate the concrete to the shown cross section with slip form machines and minimal hand work .
Slip form paving machines must be equipped with traveling side forms and must not segregate the concrete .
Do not deviate from the pavement alignment by more than .
foot .
Slip form paving machines must use highfrequency internal vibrators to consolidate concrete .
You may mount the vibrators with their axes parallel or normal to the pavement alignment .
If vibrators are mounted with their axes parallel to the pavement alignment space the vibrators no more than .
feet centerto center .
If vibrators are mounted with their axes normal to the pavement alignment space vibrators with a maximum .foot lateral clearance between individual vibrators .
Each vibrator must have a vibration rate from to cycles per minute .
The amplitude of vibration must cause perceptible concrete surface movement at least foot from the vibrating element .
Use a calibrated tachometer to measure the frequency of vibration .
.G Edge Treatment If required regrade the area for the preparation of tapered edge treatment .
Sections .H and .H do not apply to tapered edges .
For tapered edges placed after the concrete pavement is complete install connecting bar reinforcement under section .
You may construct the tapered edges by saw cutting or grinding .
The angle of the tapered edge slope must not deviate by more than degrees from the angle shown measured from the plane of the adjacent finished pavement surface .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .H Finishing .H General Reserved .H Preliminary Finishing .Ha General Preliminary finishing must produce a smooth and truetograde finish .
After preliminary finishing mark each days paving with a stamp approximately by feet .
The stamp must be authorized before paving starts .
The stamp must form a uniform mark from to inch deep .
Locate the mark feet from the transverse construction joint formed at the start of paving each day and .
foot from the outside edge of the pavement .
The mark must show the month day and year of placement and the station of the transverse construction joint .
Orient the mark such that it can be read from the outside edge of the pavement .
Do not apply water to the pavement surface before float finishing .
.Hb Stationary Side Form Finishing If you use stationary sideform construction apply a preliminary finish to the pavement by machinefloat or hand method .
For the machinefloat method .
Use selfpropelled machine floats . .
Determine the number of machine floats required to perform the work at a rate equal to the pavement placement .
If the time from paving to machinefloat finishing exceeds minutes stop pavement placement .
When machine floats are in proper position you may resume pavement placement. . Run machine floats on side forms or adjacent pavement lanes .
If running on adjacent pavement protect the adjacent pavement surface under section .J .
Floats must be hardwood steel or steelshod wood and equipped with devices that adjust the underside to a true flat surface .
For the hand method finish the pavement smooth and true to grade with manually operated floats or powered finishing machines .
.Hc Slip form Finishing For slip form construction the slip form paver must give the pavement a preliminary finish .
You may supplement the slip form paver with machine floats .
Before the pavement hardens correct the slump of the pavement edge in excess of .
foot except for the edge rounding .
.H Final Finishing After completing preliminary finishing round the edges of the initial paving widths to a .foot radius .
Round the transverse and longitudinal construction joints to a .foot radius .
Texture the pavement before curing it .
Perform the initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device that produces striations parallel to the centerline .
Perform the final texturing with a springsteel tined device that produces grooves parallel with the centerline .
Construct longitudinal grooves with a selfpropelled machine designed specifically for grooving and texturing pavement .
The machine must have tracks to maintain constant speed provide traction and maintain accurate tracking along the pavement surface .
The machine must have a single row of rectangular spring steel tines .
The tines must be from to inch wide spaced on inch centers and have enough length thickness and resilience to form grooves approximately inch deep .
The machine must have horizontal and vertical controls .
The machine must apply a constant downward pressure on the surface of the pavement during texturing .
The operation must not cause raveling .
Construct grooves over the entire pavement width in a single pass except do not construct grooves inches from the pavement edges and longitudinal joints .
The final texture must be uniform and smooth .
Use a guide to properly align the grooves .
The grooves must be parallel and aligned to the pavement edge across its width .
The grooves must be from to inch deep after the pavement has hardened .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT For irregular areas and areas inaccessible to the grooving machine you may construct grooves using the hand method .
Handconstructed grooves must comply with the specifications for machineconstructed grooves .
Initial and final texturing must produce a coefficient of friction of at least .. Do not open a lane or lanes to traffic unless the coefficient of friction is at least .. For ramp termini use heavy brooming normal to the ramp centerline to produce a coefficient of friction of at least .. .I Curing Cure the concrete pavement exposed area using the waterproof membrane method or curing compound method with curing compound no .
or .
If you remove the side forms within hours of the start of curing also cure the pavement edges .
Apply curing compound with mechanical sprayers .
Reapply curing compound to saw cuts and disturbed areas .
.J Protecting Concrete Pavement Maintain the concrete pavement surface temperature at not less than degrees F for the initial hours .
Protect the surface from activities that cause damage and reduce the texture or coefficient of friction .
Prevent soil gravel petroleum products concrete or asphalt mixes from being deposited on the pavement surface .
Construct crossings for traffic convenience .
You may use RSC for crossings if authorized .
Do not open crossings until the Department determines that the pavement modulus of rupture is at least psi under California Test or California Test .
Do not allow traffic on concrete pavement or use equipment on it for days after paving and before the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of psi based on the Departments testing unless .
Equipment is for sawing contraction joints .
One side of the paving equipment tracks may be on the concrete pavement after a modulus of rupture of psi has been attained if .. Unit pressure exerted on the pavement by the paver does not exceed psi .. You change the paving equipment tracks to prevent damage or the paving equipment tracks travel on protective material such as planks .. No part of the track is closer than foot to the concrete pavement edge ..
Authorized If visible cracking or other damage occurs to the concrete pavement stop operating the paving equipment on the pavement and repair the damage .
.K Early Use of Concrete Pavement To request early use of concrete pavement .
Furnish molds and machines for the modulus of rupture testing .
Sample the concrete .
Fabricate beam specimens .
Test the beams for the modulus of rupture under California Test The pavement must have a modulus of rupture of at least psi .
Protect the pavement under section .J .
.L Reserved .M Drilling Cores Drill concrete pavement cores under ASTM CCM .
Use diamondimpregnated drill bits .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT Clean dry and fill core holes with nonshrink hydrauliccement grout or concrete .
Coat hole walls with epoxy adhesive for bonding new concrete to old concrete .
Finish the fill to match the adjacent surface elevation and texture .
.N Correcting Noncompliant Pavement Work .N General Correct noncompliant pavement as follows .
Replace the pavement .
Repair spalls ravels and working cracks .
Correct the smoothness and coefficient of friction .
Treat partialdepth cracks .
Replace damaged joint seals under section In addition to removing pavement for other noncompliance remove and replace JPCP slabs that have either of the following .
or more fulldepth cracks .
Combined raveled areas more than percent of the total slab area or a single raveled area more than sq ft Replace JPCP for feet on both sides of a joint with a rejected dowel bar .
.N Spall and Ravel Repair Repair spalled or raveled areas that are .
Deeper than .
foot .
Wider than .
foot .
Longer than .
foot Repair spalls or ravels under section and complete the repairs before opening a lane or lanes to traffic .
.N Crack Repair Treat partialdepth cracks in JPCP under section .
If the joints are sealed repair working cracks by routing and sealing .
Use a router mounted on wheels with a vertical shaft and a routing spindle that casters as it moves along the crack .
Form a reservoir inch deep by inch wide in the crack .
The equipment must not cause raveling or spalling .
Treat the contraction joint adjacent to the working crack by either of the following methods .
Applying epoxy resin under ASTM CCM Type IV Grade .
Pressure injecting epoxy resin under ASTM CCM Type IV Grade .O Smoothness and Friction Correction Correct pavement that is noncompliant for .
Smoothness by grinding under section .
Coefficient of friction by grooving or grinding under section Do not start corrective work until .
Pavement has cured days .
Pavement has at least a psi modulus of rupture .
Corrective method is authorized Correct the entire lane width .
Start and end grinding at lines perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
The corrected area must have a uniform texture and appearance .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT If corrections are made within areas where testing with an inertial profiler is required retest the entire lane length with an inertial profiler .
If corrections are made within areas where testing with a foot straightedge is required retest the corrected area with a straightedge .
Allow days for the Departments coefficient of friction retesting .
.P.U Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for any type of concrete pavement is the volume determined by the dimensions shown .
The Department does not pay for additional coring that you request to check dowel or tie bar alignment .
If the Engineer authorizes a test strip that remains in place as part of the pavement the payment quantity for any type of concrete pavement includes the volume of the test strip .
The Department does not pay for additional tie bars required due to the curvature of the pavement slab .
Payment for grinding existing pavement is not included in the payment for concrete pavement .
CONTINUOUSLY REINFORCED CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
Constructing continuously reinforced concrete pavement includes terminal joints expansion joints wide flange beam terminals and pavement anchors .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals For field qualification submit the test data for the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete .
If you request to use plastic chairs to support the transverse bars submit a sample of the plastic chair including .
Manufacturers instructions for the applicable use and load capacity .
Chair spacing .
Your calculation for the load on a chair for the area of bar reinforcement it supports During production submit the test data for the coefficient of thermal expansion as an informational submittal .
.D Quality Assurance For field qualification test the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete under AASHTO T . The coefficient of thermal expansion must not exceed .
microstraindegree F. During the evaluation of the test strip the Engineer visually checks the reinforcement and dowel and tie bar placement .
During production test the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete at a frequency of test for each cu yd of paving but not less than test for a project with less than cu yd of concrete. . MATERIALS .A General Class permeable material filter fabric and slotted plasticpipe cross drain for pavement anchors must comply with section .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .B Transverse Bar Assembly Transverse bar assemblies may be used to support longitudinal bars instead of transverse bars and other support devices .
.C Wide Flange Beam Wide flange beams and studs must be either rolled structural steel shapes complying with ASTM AAM or structural steel complying with ASTM AAM .
Polyethylene foam board for wide flange beams must be commercial quality .
.D Joints Joint seals for wide flange beam terminals and for transverse expansion joints must comply with section ..
Expanded polystyrene for transverse expansion joints and wide flange beam terminal must comply with section .B. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Bar Reinforcement Place bar reinforcement under section .D except you may request to use plastic chairs .
Plastic chairs will be considered only for support directly under the transverse bars .
You must demonstrate the vertical and lateral stability of the bar reinforcement and plastic chairs during the construction of the test strip .
For a transverse bar in a curve with a radius under feet place the reinforcement in a single continuous straight line across the lanes and aligned with the radius point as shown .
.C Construction Joints Transverse construction joints must be perpendicular to the lane line .
Construct the joints to allow for lap splices of the longitudinal bar .
Clean joint surfaces before placing concrete against the surfaces .
Remove laitance curing compound and other foreign materials .
.D WideFlange Beams Completely fuse studs to a wideflange beam with an electric arc welder .
Replace studs dislodged in shipping or that can be dislodged with a hammer .
.E Correcting Noncompliant Pavement Work .E General The specifications for repairing cracks in section .N do not apply to CRCP .
Do not apply high molecularweight methacrylate to cracks in CRCP .
CRCP that develops raveling areas of by inches or greater requires partial depth repair .
CRCP that develops one or more fulldepth transverse cracks with faulting greater than .
inch or one or more full depth longitudinal cracks with faulting greater than .
inch requires fulldepth repair .
.E Partial Depth Repair Partial depth repair must comply with section except .
Determine a rectangular boundary which extends inches beyond the damaged area .
The depth of the saw cut must be between inches from the surface to inch above the longitudinal bars . .
Provide additional reinforcement if each length of the repair boundaries is equal to or greater than feet .
SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .E FullDepth Repair .Ea General Remove the fulldepth of CRCP except for the portion of reinforcement to remain in place .
Provide continuity of the reinforcement .
Splicing must comply with section .
Do not damage the base concrete and reinforcement to remain in place .
Place concrete in the area where you removed CRCP .
.Eb Transverse Cracks Make initial fulldepth transverse saw cuts normal to the lane line a distance of feet on each side of the transverse crack .
.Ec Longitudinal Cracks Remove the cracked area normal to the lane line for the full width of the lane a distance of foot beyond each end of the crack .
You may propose alternate limits with your repair plan .
.F Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED JOINTED PLAIN CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing jointed plain concrete pavement .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals At least hours before each paving shift submit the following information as an informational submittals .
Early age stress and strength predictions .
Schedule of sawing and curing activities .
Contingency plan if cracking occurs Submit the test data for the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete as an informational submittal .
.D Quality Assurance The QC plan must include a procedure for identifying the locations of transverse contraction joints relative to the dowel bars longitudinal centers and a procedure for consolidating concrete around the dowel bars .
Develop and implement a system for predicting stresses and strength during the initial hours after paving .
The system must include .
Subscription to a weather service to obtain forecasts for wind speed ambient temperatures humidity and cloud cover .
Portable weather station with an anemometer temperature and humidity sensors to be located at the paving site .
Earlyage concrete pavement stress and strength prediction plan .
Methods for analyzing monitoring updating and reporting predictions Test for coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete under AASHTO T . Test at field qualification and at a frequency of test for each cu yd of paving but not less than test for a project with less than cu yd of concrete. . MATERIALS Not Used SECTION CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Transverse contraction joints on a curve must be on a single straight line through the radius point of the curve .
If transverse joints do not align in a curve drill a fulldepth inchdiameter hole under ASTM CCM where the joint meets the adjacent slab .
Fill the hole with joint filler .
If joints are not sealed do not allow joint filler to penetrate the joint .
.B Correcting Noncompliant Pavement Work To replace the JPCP saw cut and remove it full depth .
Saw cut full slabs at the longitudinal and transverse joints .
Saw cut partial slabs at the joints and at locations determined by the Engineer .
The saw cut must be vertical .
After lifting the slab paint the cut ends of dowels and tie bars .
Construct transverse and longitudinal construction joints between the new slab and the existing concrete .
If slabs are constrained at both longitudinal edges by the existing pavement use dowel bars instead of tie bars .
For longitudinal joints offset dowel bar holes from original tie bars by inches .
For transverse joints offset dowel bar holes from the original dowel bar by inches .
Drill and bond bars to the existing concrete under section .
Clean loose material and contaminants from the faces of joints and the underlying base .
Coat the faces with a double application of pigmented curing compound under section .F .
For partial slab replacements place preformed spongerubber expansion joint filler at new transverse joints under ASTM D. Place concrete in the area where you removed JPCP .
.C.G Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT GENERAL .
GENERAL .A General Section includes general specifications for performing work on existing concrete pavement .
Section does not apply .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals At least days before delivering fastsetting concrete polyester resin binder or bonding agent to the job site submit the manufacturers instructions SDS and certificates of compliance .
Notify the Engineer if polyester resin binder will be stored in containers over gallons .
.D Quality Assurance Before using polyester concrete .
Allow days for sampling and testing of the polyester resin binder .
Arrange for a representative from the manufacturer to provide training for ..
Cleaning and preparing the area .. Mixing and applying the bonding agent .. Mixing placing and curing polyester concrete Do not use polyester concrete until your personnel and the Departments personnel have been trained. . MATERIALS .A General Water for washing aggregates mixing concrete curing and coring must comply with section .D .
.B FastSetting Concrete Fastsetting concrete must be one of the following .
Magnesium phosphate concrete that is either ..
Single component water activated .. Dual component with a prepackaged liquid activator .
Modified highalumina based concrete .
Portland cement based concrete Store fastsetting concrete in a cool and dry environment .
If retarders are used add them under the manufacturers instructions .
You may use any accelerating chemical admixtures complying with ASTM CCM Type C and section .E .
Fastsetting concrete must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT FastSetting Concrete Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Compressive strengtha min psi at hours at hours California Test California Test Flexural strengtha min psi at hours California Test Bond strengtha min psi at hours Saturated surface dry concrete Dry concrete California Test California Test Water absorption max California Test Abrasion resistancea max g at hours California Test Drying shrinkage max at days ASTM C . Water soluble chloridesb max by weight California Test .
Water soluble sulfatesb max by weight California Test .
Thermal stability min California Test aPerform testing with aggregate filler if used .
bPerform testing on a cube specimen fabricated under California Test cured at least days and then pulverized to passing the no .
sieve .
Aggregate filler may be used to extend prepackaged concrete .
Aggregate filler must .
Be clean and uniformly rounded. . Have a moisture content of .percent by weight or less when tested under California Test . .
Comply with sections .C and .C. . Not exceed percent of the concrete volume or the maximum percent in the manufacturers instructions for the fastsetting concrete whichever is less .
Aggregate filler must comply with the gradation shown in the following table Aggregate Filler Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing inch No .
No .
.C Polyester Concrete Polyester concrete consists of polyester resin binder and dry aggregate .
The polyester resin binder must be an unsaturated isophthalic polyesterstyrene copolymer .
Polyester resin binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT Polyester Resin Binder Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Viscositya Pas RVT No .
spindle RPM at C ASTM D ..
Specific gravitya C ASTM D .. Elongation min Type I specimen .. mm . . inch thick Speed of testing .
mmmin .
inchminute Condition T ASTM D ASTM D Tensile strength min MPa Type I specimen .. mm . . inch thick Speed of testing .
mmmin .
inchminute Condition T ASTM D ASTM D . psi Styrene contenta by weight ASTM D Silane coupler min by weight of polyester resin binder .
PCC saturated surfacedry bond strength at hours and F min psi California Test Static volatile emissionsa max gsq m South Coast Air Quality Management District Method aPerform the test before adding initiator .
Silane coupler must be an organosilane ester gammamethacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane .
Promoter must be compatible with suitable methyl ethyl ketone peroxide and cumene hydroperoxide initiators .
Aggregate for polyester concrete must comply with sections .C .C and .C .
The combined aggregate gradation must comply with one of the gradations shown in the following table Combined Aggregate Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing A B C No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
Aggregate retained on the no .
sieve must have a maximum of percent crushed particles under California Test .
Fine aggregate must be natural sand .
The weighted average absorption must not exceed percent when tested under California Tests and .
You may submit an alternative gradation or request to use manufactured sand as fine aggregate but percent of the combined gradation must pass the inch sieve .
Allow days for review .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT Polyester concrete must have a minimum compressive strength of psi at hours and minutes under California Test or ASTM C. .D Bonding Agent Bonding agent must comply with the concrete manufacturers instructions .
.E Temporary Pavement Structure Temporary pavement structure consists of RSC or HMA over AB .
RSC not complying with section may be used as temporary pavement structure if .
Modulus of rupture is at least psi before opening to traffic .
RSC thickness is greater than or equal to the existing concrete pavement surface layer .
RSC is replaced during the next paving shift AB used for temporary pavement structure must comply with the inch maximum gradation specified in section .B .
HMA must comply with the specifications for minor HMA in section .
.F Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Construct only the portion of pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
If removal is required remove only the portion of pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
Concrete pavement work is complete when cured material attains the specified minimum properties required before opening to traffic .
If you fail to complete the concrete pavement work during the same closure construct temporary pavement structure before opening the lane to traffic .
Except for saw cutting the equipment materials and personnel for constructing temporary pavement structure must be at the job site or an approved location before starting concrete pavement work .
If HMA can be delivered to the job site within hour you may request delivery as an alternative to having HMA at the job site .
Maintain the temporary pavement structure and replace it before you resume concrete pavement work .
After removing temporary pavement structure you may stockpile that AB at the job site and reuse it for another temporary pavement structure .
.B Mixing and Applying Bonding Agent Mix and apply the bonding agent at the job site under the manufacturers instructions and in small quantities .
Apply bonding agent after cleaning the surface and before placing concrete .
Apply a thin even coat of bonding agent with a stiff bristle brush until the entire work surface is scrubbed and coated with bonding agent .
.C Mixing Concrete .C General Mix concrete under the manufacturers instructions .
For repairing spalls mix in a small mobile drum or paddle mixer .
The quantity of aggregate filler water and liquid activator must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Mix the entire contents of prepackaged dualcomponent magnesium phosphate concrete as supplied by the manufacturer .
Use the full amount of each component and do not add water to dualcomponent magnesium phosphate concrete .
Do not mix magnesium phosphate concrete in containers containing zinc cadmium aluminum or copper or work it with tools containing these materials .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT For concrete other than dualcomponent magnesium phosphate concrete use the minimum amount of water to produce workable concrete and comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Do not mix modified highalumina based concrete in containers containing aluminum or work it with tools containing aluminum .
.C Polyester Concrete When mixing with resin the moisture content of the combined aggregate must not exceed of the average aggregate absorption when tested under California Test .
Proportion the polyester resin and aggregate to produce a mixture with suitable workability for the intended work .
Only a minimal amount of resin may rise to the surface after finishing .
.D Placing Concrete The pavement surface temperature must be at least degrees F before placing concrete .
You may propose methods to heat the surfaces .
Place polyester concrete on surfaces treated with a HMWM bonding agent .
Place magnesium phosphate concrete on a dry surface .
Place portland cement and modified highalumina concrete on surfaces treated with a bonding agent recommended by the concrete manufacturer .
If no bonding agent is recommended by the manufacturer place concrete on damp surfaces that are not saturated .
Do not retemper concrete .
Use dry finishing tools cleaned with water before working the concrete .
.E Curing Concrete Cure concrete under the manufacturers instructions .
When curing compound is used comply with section .B for curing compound no .
or .
.F Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used SUBSEALING AND JACKING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for subsealing and jacking using grout to fill voids under existing concrete pavement .
Subsealing and jacking includes .
Drilling holes through existing concrete pavement .
Injecting grout .
Cleaning .
Filling the drilled holes with mortar or concrete Jacking includes raising pavement to grade using injected grout .
Section .D does not apply .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit shipping invoices with packaged or bulk fly ash and cement .
Before grouting activities begin submit a proposal for the materials to be used .
Include authorized laboratory test data for the grout indicating .
Time of initial setting under ASTM C SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Compressive strength results at and days for and second grout efflux times To request a substitution of grout materials submit a proposal that includes test data .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Test grout compressive strength under California Test Part at days with seconds efflux time .
Follow the procedures for moist cure .
The day compressive strength must be at least psi .
.D Department Acceptance For Department acceptance the final pavement elevation must be within .
foot of the required grade. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Grout Grout must consist of Type II portland cement fly ash and water .
Use from .
to .
parts fly ash to part portland cement by weight .
Use enough water to produce the following grout efflux times determined under California Test Part D . From to seconds for subsealing .
From to seconds for jacking Cement for grout must comply with the specifications for Type II portland cement in section .B .
Fly ash must comply with AASHTO M Class C or Class F. Fly ash sources must be on the Authorized Material List for cementitious materials for use in concrete .
You may use chemical admixtures and calcium chloride .
Chemical admixtures must comply with section .E .
Calcium chloride must comply with ASTM D. .C Mortar Mortar must be a prepackaged fastsetting mortar that complies with ASTM C. .D Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Drill holes in the pavement inject grout plug the holes and finish the holes with mortar .
Drill holes through the pavement and underlying base to a depth from to inches below the pavement surface .
The hole diameter must match the fitting for the grout injecting equipment .
.B Injecting Grout .B General Inject grout within days of drilling holes .
Immediately before injecting grout clean the drilled holes with water at a minimum pressure of psi .
The cleaning device must have at least jets that direct water horizontally at the slabbase interface .
Do not inject grout whenever the atmospheric or subgrade temperature is below degrees F or during inclement weather .
If water is present in the holes obtain authorization before injecting grout .
Do not inject grout until at least consecutive slabs requiring subsealing are drilled ahead of the grouting activities .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT The grout plant must have a positive displacement cement injection pump and a highspeed colloidal mixer capable of operating from to rpm .
The injection pump must sustain psi if pumping grout with a second efflux time .
A pressure gauge must be located immediately adjacent to the grout hose supply valve and positioned for easy monitoring .
If using bulk dry cement and fly ash weigh each item before mixing them .
If the materials are packaged each container must weigh the same .
Introduce water to the mixer through a meter or scale .
Inject grout under pressure until the voids under the pavement slab are filled .
The injection nozzle must not leak .
Do not inject grout if the nozzle is below the bottom of the slab .
Inject grout hole at a time .
Stop injecting grout in a hole if either of the following occurs .
Grout does not flow under a sustained pump gauge pressure of psi after seconds and there is no indication the slab is moving .
Injected grout rises to the surface at a joint or crack or flows into an adjacent hole Dispose of unused grout within hour of mixing .
.B Subsealing If a slab raises more than inch due to grout injection during subsealing work stop injecting grout in that hole .
.B Jacking The positive displacement pump used for grout injection for jacking work must be able to provide a sustained gauge pressure of psi .
Gauge pressures may be from to psi for brief periods to start slab movement .
You may add additional water to initiate pressure injection of grout .
Do not reduce the grout efflux time below seconds .
Raise the slabs uniformly .
Use string lines to monitor the pavement movement .
Do not move adjacent slabs not shown to be jacked .
If you move adjacent slabs correct the grade within the tolerances for final pavement elevation .
.C Finishing Immediately after removing the injection nozzle plug the hole with a round tapered wooden plug .
Do not remove plugs until adjacent holes are injected with grout and no grout surfaces through the previously injected holes .
After grouting remove grout from drilled holes to at least inches below the pavement surface .
Clean the holes and fill with mortar .
Finish filled holes flush with the pavement surface .
.D Tolerances The final pavement elevation must be within .
foot of the required grade .
If the final pavement elevation is from .
to .
foot higher than the required grade grind the noncompliant pavement surface under section to within .
foot of the required grade .
If the final pavement elevation is higher than .
foot from the required grade remove and replace the noncompliant pavement under section . . PAYMENT The payment quantity for subsealing is the sum of the dry weights of cement and fly ash used in placed grout .
The payment quantity for jacking is the sum of the dry weights of cement and fly ash in the placed grout .
The Department does not pay for wasted grout .
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the subsealing or jacking quantity .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT CRACK TREATMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying highmolecularweight methacrylate to partialdepth concrete pavement surface cracks .
Section .D does not apply .
.B Definitions Partialdepth crack Crack that does not extend the full concrete slab depth from one edge of the slab to the opposite or adjacent side of the slab .
.C Submittals .C General Submit HMWM samples days before use .
Submit the proposed removal method at least days before sealant removal .
.C Public Safety and Application Plans Before starting crack treatment submit a public safety plan and an application plan for applying HMWM as shop drawings .
The public safety and application plans must identify the materials equipment and methods to be used .
In the public safety plan include the SDS for each component of HMWM and details for .
Shipping .
Storage .
Handling .
Disposal of residual HMWM and containers If the project is in an urban area adjacent to a school or residence the public safety plan must also include an airborne emissions monitoring plan prepared by a CIH certified in comprehensive practice by the American Board of Industrial Hygiene .
Submit a copy of the CIHs certification .
The CIH must monitor the emissions at a minimum of points including the mixing point the application point and the point of nearest public contact .
At work completion submit a report by the CIH with results of the airborne emissions monitoring plan .
The application plan must include .
Crack treatment and coefficient of friction testing schedules .
Methods and materials including ..
Description of equipment for applying HMWM ..
Description of equipment for applying sand .. Gel time range and final cure time for resin Revise and resubmit rejected plans .
With each plan rejection the Engineer gives revision directions including detailed comments .
.C Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Use test tiles to evaluate the HMWM cure time .
Coat at least one by inch smooth glazed tile for each batch of HMWM .
Place the coated tile adjacent to the area being treated .
Do not apply sand to the test tiles .
Use the same type of crack treatment equipment for testing and production .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .D Test Area Before starting crack treatment treat a test area of at least square feet within the project limits at a location authorized by the Engineer .
Use test areas outside the traveled way if available .
Treat the test area under weather and pavement conditions similar to those expected during crack treatment production .
The Engineer evaluates the test area based on the Departments acceptance criteria .
Do not begin crack treatment until the Engineer authorizes the test area .
.D Department Acceptance The Engineer accepts a treated area if .
Corresponding test tiles are dry to the touch .
Treated surface is tackfree and not oily .
Sand cover adheres enough to resist hand brushing .
Excess sand is removed .
Coefficient of friction is at least .
when tested under California Test .
MATERIALS HMWM consists of compatible resin promoter and initiator .
HWMW resin may be prepromoted by mixing promoter and resin together before filling containers .
Identify prepromoted resin on the container label .
Adjust the gel time to compensate for temperature changes throughout the application .
The quality characteristics of HMWM resin must comply with the requirements shown in the following table HighMolecularWeight Methacrylate Quality Characteristics Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Viscosity a max cP Brookfield RVT with UL adapter RPM at C ASTM D Specific gravitya min at C ASTM D . Flash point a min C ASTM D . Vapor pressurea max mm Hg at C ASTM D . Tackfree time max minutes at F Specimen prepared under California Test Volatile contenta max ASTM D PCC saturated surfacedry bond strength min psi at hours and F California Test aPerform the test before adding initiator .
Sand must be commercial quality dry blast sand .
At least percent of the sand must pass the no .
sieve and at least percent must be retained on the no .
sieve when tested under California Test . . CONSTRUCTION Before applying HMWM clean the pavement surface by abrasive blasting and blow loose material from visible cracks with highpressure air .
Remove concrete curing seals from the pavement to be treated .
The pavement must be dry when blast cleaning is performed .
If the pavement surface becomes contaminated before applying the HMWM clean the pavement surface by abrasive blasting .
Protect existing facilities from HMWM .
During pavement treatment protect pavement joints working cracks and surfaces not being treated .
Repair or replace existing facilities contaminated with HMWM at your expense .
The equipment applying HMWM must combine the components by either static inline mixers or by external intersecting spray fans .
The pump pressure at the spray bars must not cause atomization .
Do not use compressed air to produce the spray .
Use a shroud to enclose the spray bar apparatus .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT You may apply HMWM manually to prevent overspray onto adjacent traffic .
If applying resin manually limit the batch quantity of HMWM to gallons .
Apply HMWM at a rate of sq ftgal .
The prepared area must be dry and the surface temperature must be from to degrees F while applying HMWM .
Do not apply HMWM if the ambient relative humidity is more than percent .
Flood the treatment area with HMWM to penetrate the pavement and cracks .
Apply HMWM within minutes after complete mixing .
Mixed HMWM viscosity must not increase .
Redistribute excess material with squeegees or brooms within minutes of application .
Remove excess material from tined grooves .
Wait at least minutes after applying HMWM before applying sand .
Apply sand at a rate of approximately pounds per square yard or until refusal .
Remove excess sand by vacuuming or sweeping .
Do not allow traffic on the treated surface until .
Treated surface is tackfree and not oily .
Sand cover adheres enough to resist hand brushing .
Excess sand is removed .
Coefficient of friction is at least .
determined under California Test .
PAYMENT Not Used SPALL REPAIR .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for repairing spalls in concrete pavement .
Section .D does not apply .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance The Engineer accepts spall repairs based on authorized saw cut dimensions and visual inspection. . MATERIALS Bonding agent must comply with the requirements for HMWM in section .
except the tackfree time requirements do not apply and the HMWM must not contain wax .
Caulk must be at least percent silicone designated as a concrete sealant and comply with ASTM C. Form board must be singlewall doubleface corrugated cardboard or paperboard covered with a bond breaker on each face .
For existing joints or cracks less than mils wide use paperboard. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Prepare spall repair areas by removing concrete and cleaning the underlying surface .
Repair spalls using polyester concrete with a HMWM bonding agent .
After completing spall repairs do not allow traffic on the repairs for at least hours after the time of final setting under ASTM CM .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .B Remove Pavement The Engineer determines the rectangular limits of unsound concrete pavement .
Before removing pavement mark the saw cut lines and spall repair area on the pavement surface .
Do not remove pavement until the Engineer verbally authorizes the saw cut area .
Use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
Remove pavement as shown and .
From the center of the repair area towards the saw cut .
To the full saw cut depth .
At least inches beyond the saw cut edge to produce a rough angled surface Produce a rough surface by chipping or other removal methods that do not damage the pavement remaining inplace .
Completely remove any saw overcuts .
Pneumatic hammers used for concrete removal must weigh pounds or less .
If you damage concrete pavement outside the removal area enlarge the area to remove the damaged pavement .
If dowel bars are exposed during removal remove concrete from the exposed surface and cover with duct tape .
.C Cleaning Clean the exposed faces of the concrete by .
Sand or water blasting .
Water blasting equipment must be capable of producing a blast pressure from to psi . .
Blowing the exposed concrete area with compressed air free of moisture and oil to remove debris .
Air compressors must deliver air at a minimum of cfm and develop psi of nozzle pressure .
.D Compression Relief at Joints and Cracks .D General Provide compression relief at joints and cracks by using a form board or saw cutting .
.D Form Board Installation Before placing concrete place the form board to match the existing joint or crack alignment and width .
Extend the form board at least inches beyond each end of the repair and at least inch deeper than the repair .
After placing concrete remove the form board before sealing joints or cracks .
.D Saw Cut Method After cleaning seal exposed joints or cracks with caulk at the bottom and sides of the repair area .
Any surface receiving caulk must be clean and dry .
Place caulk a minimum of inch beyond the edges of the repair area into the existing joint or crack .
Saw cut the polyester concrete to the full depth along the existing joint or crack alignment within hours from time of final setting .
Use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
.E.H Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for spall repair is the authorized saw cut area .
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the spall repair quantity .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT JOINT SEALS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for sealing concrete pavement joints or replacing concrete pavement joint seals .
Pavement joints include isolation joints .
Section .D does not apply .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals At least days before delivery to the job site submit a certificate of compliance SDS manufacturers recommendations and instructions for storage and installation of .
Liquid joint sealant . .
Backer rods .
Include the manufacturer data sheet verifying compatibility with the liquid joint sealant. . Preformed compression joint seal .
Include the manufacturer data sheet used to verify the seal for the joint dimensions shown. . Lubricant adhesive .
Upon delivery of asphalt rubber joint sealant to the job site submit a certified test report for each lot based on testing performed within year .
Submit a work plan for removing pavement and joint materials .
Allow days for review .
Include descriptions of the equipment and methods for removal of existing pavement and joint material .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Before sealing joints arrange for a representative from the manufacturer to provide training on cleaning and preparing the joint and installing the liquid joint sealant or preformed compression joint seal .
Do not seal joints until your personnel and the Departments personnel have been trained .
.D Department Acceptance The Engineer accepts joint seals based on constructed dimensions and visual inspection of completed seals for voids. . MATERIALS .A General Joint seal materials must be either silicone joint sealant asphalt rubber joint sealant or preformed compression joint seal .
Silicone or asphalt rubber joint sealant must not bond or react with the backer rod .
.B Silicone Joint Sealant Silicone joint sealant must be on the Authorized Material List for silicone joint sealant .
.C Asphalt Rubber Joint Sealant Asphalt rubber joint sealant must .
Be asphalt binder mixed with not less than percent ground rubber by weight .
Ground rubber must be vulcanized or a combination of vulcanized and devulcanized materials that pass a no .
sieve . .
Comply with ASTM D for Type II. . Be capable of melting at a temperature below degrees F and applied to cracks and joints. . Be delivered in containers complying with ASTM D. .D Backer Rods Backer rods must .
Comply with ASTM D SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT ..
Type for asphalt rubber joint sealant ..
Type or Type for silicone joint sealant .
Be expanded closedcell polyethylene foam .
Have a diameter at least percent greater than the saw cut joint width .E Preformed Compression Joint Seals Preformed compression joint seals must .
Comply with ASTM D . Have or cells except seals inch wide or less may have cells Lubricant adhesive used to install seals must comply with ASTM D. .F.K Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General If joint seals are shown for new concrete pavement seal new concrete pavement joints at least days after the concrete pavement is placed .
Before sealing joints complete pavement repairs and grinding and grooving .
Remove existing pavement and joint material by sawing rectangular plowing cutting or manual labor .
Saw cut the reservoir as shown before cleaning the joint .
Use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
.B Joint Cleaning .B General Clean the joint after removing existing pavement and before installing joint seal material .
Cleaning must be completed no more than hours before installing backer rods liquid joint seal or preformed compression seals using the following sequence .
Removing debris .
Drying .
Sandblasting .
Air blasting .
Vacuuming Clean in direction to minimize contamination of surrounding areas .
.B Removing Debris Remove debris including dust dirt and visible traces of old sealant from the joint after sawing plowing cutting or manual removal .
Do not use chemical solvents to wash the joint .
.B Drying After removing debris allow the reservoir surfaces to dry or remove moisture and dampness at the joint with compressed air that may be moderately hot .
.B Sandblasting After the joint is dry sandblast the reservoir to remove remaining residue using a inch diameter nozzle and psi minimum pressure .
Do not sandblast straight into the reservoir .
Angle the sandblasting nozzle between to inches from the concrete and make at least pass to clean each reservoir face .
.B Air Blasting After sandblasting air blast the reservoir to remove sand dirt and dust hour before sealing the joint .
Use compressed air free of oil and moisture delivered at a minimum rate of cfm and psi nozzle pressure .
.B Vacuuming After air blasting use a vacuum sweeper to remove debris and contaminants from the pavement surfaces surrounding the joint .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .B Reserved .C Installing Liquid Joint Sealant Before installing liquid joint sealant the pavement and reservoir surfaces must be dry and the ambient air temperature must be at least degrees F and above the dew point .
Before installing asphalt rubber joint sealant the pavement surface temperature must be at least degrees F. Where backer rods are shown place the rods before installing liquid joint sealant .
Place backer rods under the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified .
The reservoir surface must be free of residue or film .
Do not puncture the backer rod .
Immediately after placing the backer rod install liquid joint sealant under the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified .
Before installing demonstrate that fresh liquid sealant is ejected from the nozzle free of cooled or cured material .
Pump liquid joint sealant through a nozzle sized for the width of the reservoir so that liquid joint sealant is placed directly onto the backer rod .
The installer must draw the nozzle toward his body and extrude liquid joint sealant evenly .
Liquid joint sealant must maintain continuous contact with the reservoir walls during extrusion .
Within minutes of placing liquid joint sealant recess it to the depth shown before a skin begins to form .
After each joint is sealed remove excess liquid joint sealant on the pavement surface .
Do not allow traffic over the sealed joints until the liquid joint sealant is set tack free and firm enough to prevent embedment of roadway debris .
.D Installing Preformed Compression Joint Seals Install preformed compression joint seals as shown and under the manufacturers instructions .
Use lubricant adhesive .
Install longitudinal seals before transverse seals .
Longitudinal seals must be continuous except splicing is allowed at intersections with transverse seals .
Transverse seals must be continuous for the entire transverse length of concrete pavement except splices are allowed for widening and staged construction .
With a sharp instrument cut across the longitudinal seal at the intersection with transverse construction joints .
If the longitudinal seal does not relax enough to properly install the transverse seal trim the longitudinal seal to form a tight seal between the joints .
Any authorized splicing must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Use a machine specifically designed for preformed compression joint seal installation .
The machine must install the seal .
To the specified depth .
To make continuous contact with the joint walls .
Without cutting nicking or twisting the seal .
Without stretching the seal more than percent Cut preformed compression joint seal material to the exact length of the pavement joint to be sealed .
The Engineer measures this length .
After you install the preformed compression joint seal the Engineer measures the excess length of material at the joint end .
The Engineer divides the excess length by the measured cut length to determine the stretch percentage .
Seals must be compressed from to percent of the joint width when complete in place .
.E Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED TRANSITION TAPERS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing transition tapers in existing concrete pavement .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT Section .D does not apply. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Construct transition tapers by either grinding or removing and replacing the existing concrete .
Do not allow flying debris during the construction of tapers .
Grinding must comply with section .
If you replace the existing concrete comply with section except taper the surface to the level shown and finish it with a coarse broom .
If the transition taper will be overlaid with HMA that is not placed before opening to traffic and there is a grade difference of more than .
foot construct a temporary taper by placing HMA that complies with section ..
Remove the temporary HMA taper before constructing the transition taper. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for pavement transition taper is determined from the dimensions shown .
The Department does not pay for temporary HMA tapers .
DOWEL BAR RETROFIT Reserved INDIVIDUAL SLAB REPLACEMENT WITH RAPID STRENGTH CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing individual slab replacement with rapid strength concrete .
.B Definitions concrete raveling Disintegration of the concrete surface layer from aggregate loss .
early age Any age less than times the time of final setting for concrete determined under ASTM CCM .
fulldepth crack Crack that runs from one edge of the concrete slab to the opposite or adjacent side of the slab .
opening age Age when the minimum modulus of rupture specified for opening to traffic and equipment is attained .
time of final setting Elapsed time required to develop a concrete penetration resistance that is at least psi under ASTM CCM .
.C Submittals .C General At least days before delivery to the job site submit the SDS and manufacturers instructions for storage and installation of joint filler material .
You may request to use surface finish additives .
Submit the surface finish additive manufacturers instructions with your request .
Allow days for review .
At least days before starting individual slab replacement work submit a sample of cement from each proposed lot and samples of proposed admixtures in the quantities ordered .
During individual slab replacement operations submit uniformity reports for hydraulic cement at least once every days to the Engineer and METS Attention Cement Laboratory .
Uniformity reports must comply with ASTM C except testing age and water content may be modified to suit the particular material .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT Except for modulus of rupture tests submit QC test result forms within hours of the paving shift .
Submit modulus of rupture results within .
minutes of completing the opening age test completion .
hours of completing day test completion .C Quality Control Plan If the quantity of RSC is at least cu yd submit a QC plan at least days before placing trial slabs .
If the quantity of RSC is less than cu yd submit proposed forms for inspection sampling and testing .
The QC plan must describe the organization and procedures used to .
Control the production process .
Determine whether a change to the production process is needed .
Implement a change The QC plan must include .
Names qualifications and certifications of QC personnel including .. QC manager .. Assistant QC managers .. Samplers and testers .
Outline of procedure for the production transportation placement and finishing of RSC .
Outline of procedure and forms for RSC QC sampling and testing to be performed during and after RSC placement including the testing frequencies for modulus of rupture of RSC .
Contingency plan for identifying and correcting problems in production transportation placement or finishing RSC including .. Action limits ..
Suspension limits that do not exceed specified material requirements ..
Detailed corrective action if limits are exceeded ..
Temporary pavement structure provisions including Quantity and location of standby material Determination of need .
Location of your QC testing laboratory and testing equipment during and after paving operations .
List of testing equipment to be used including the date of last calibration .
Production target values for material properties that impact concrete quality or strength including cleanness value and sand equivalent .
Outline of procedure for placing and testing trial slabs including ..
Locations and times .. Production procedures ..
Placing and finishing methods .. Sampling methods sample curing and sample transportation ..
Testing and test result reporting .
Name of source plant with an approved material plant quality program .
Procedures or methods for controlling pavement quality including .. Materials quality .. Constructing contraction and construction joints ..
Protecting pavement before opening to traffic .C Mix Design At least days before constructing a trial slab submit a mix design .
The maximum ambient temperature range for a mix design is degrees F. Submit more than mix design based on ambient temperature variations anticipated during RSC placement .
Each mix design must include .
Mix design identification number .
Aggregate source .
Opening age .
Aggregate gradation .
Types of cement and chemical admixtures .
Mix proportions SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Maximum time allowed between batching and placing .
Range of effective ambient temperatures .
Time of final setting .
Data for the modulus of rupture development from laboratoryprepared samples including test results at .. hour before opening age ..
Opening age .. hour after opening age .. day .. days .. days .. days .
Shrinkage test data .
Any special instructions or conditions such as water temperature requirements .C Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Provide a QC manager and assistant QC managers to administer the QC plan .
Each QC manager must hold current ACI certification as a Concrete Field Testing TechnicianGrade I and a Concrete Laboratory Testing TechnicianGrade II except the assistant QC managers may hold a certification as a Concrete Laboratory Testing TechnicianGrade I instead of Grade II .
The QC manager responsible for the production period involved must review and sign the sampling inspection and test reports before submitting them .
The QC manager must be present for .
Each stage of mix design .
Trial slab construction .
RSC production and placement .
Meetings with the Engineer relating to production placement or testing The QC manager must not be a member of this projects production or paving crews an inspector or a tester .
The QC manager must have no duties during the production and placement of RSC except those specified .
Testing laboratories and equipment must comply with the Departments Independent Assurance Program .
At the time of the QC plan submittal the Department evaluates the QC samplers and testers .
.D JustInTime Training Reserved .D Preconstruction Meeting The following additional personnel must attend the preconstruction meeting .
Concrete plant inspectors .
Personnel performing saw cutting and joint sealing Discuss the pavement structure removal as an additional topic during the preconstruction meeting .
.D Trial Slabs Before starting individual slab replacement work complete trial slab for each mix design .
Place trial slabs near the job site at a mutuallyagreed location that is neither on the roadway nor within the project limits .
Trial slabs must be by feet and at least inches thick .
During trial slab construction sample and split the aggregate for gradation cleanness value and sand equivalent testing .
Fabricate and test beams under California Test to determine the modulus of rupture values .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT Cure beams fabricated for early age testing such that the monitored temperatures in the beams and the slab are always within degrees F of each other .
Monitor and record the internal temperatures of trial slabs and early age beams at intervals of at least minutes .
Install thermocouples or thermistors connected to stripchart recorders or digital data loggers to monitor the temperatures .
Temperature recording devices must be accurate to within degrees F. Measure the internal temperatures at inch from the top inch from the bottom and no closer than inches from any edge until early age testing is completed .
Cure beams fabricated for day testing under California Test except place them into sand at a time that is from to times the time of final setting measured under ASTM CM or at hours whichever is earlier .
Trial slabs must have an opening age modulus of rupture of not less than psi and a day modulus of rupture of not less than psi .
After authorization remove and dispose of trial slabs and testing materials .
.D Quality Control .Da General Provide continuous process control and QC sampling and testing throughout RSC production and placement .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before any sampling and testing .
Establish a testing facility at the job site or at an authorized location .
Sample RSC under California Test .
.Db Rapid Strength Concrete Test RSC under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table RSC Testing Frequencies Quality characteristics Test method Minimum testing frequencya Cleanness value California Test cu yd or per shift Sand equivalent California Test cu yd or per shift Aggregate gradation California Test cu yd or per shift Air content California Test cu yd or per shift Yield California Test per shift Slump or penetration ASTM C or California Test per hours of paving Unit weight California Test cu yd or per shift Aggregate moisture meter calibrationb California Test or California Test per shift Modulus of rupture California Test Comply with section .Dc aTest at the most frequent interval .
bCheck plant moisture meter calibration by comparing moisture meter readings with California Test or California Test test results Maintain control charts to identify potential problems and causes .
Post a copy of each control chart at a location determined by the Engineer .
Use the mix proportion target values as indicators of central tendency in the control charts .
Develop linear control charts for .
Cleanness value .
Sand equivalent .
Fine and coarse aggregate gradation .
Air content .
Penetration Control charts must include SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
Contract number .
Mix proportions .
Test number .
Each test parameter .
Action and suspension limits .. For air content the action limit is .
percent and the suspension limit is .
percent of the specified values .
If no value is specified apply the air content value used in the approved mix design. . Specification limits .. For fine and coarse aggregate gradation record the running average of the previous consecutive gradation tests for each sieve and superimpose the specification limits. . QC test results A process requires corrective action if any of the following occurs .
For fine and coarse aggregate gradation consecutive running averages of tests are outside the specification limits .
For individual penetration or air content measurements if either .. point falls outside the suspension limit line .. points in a row fall outside the action limit line Stop production and take corrective action for out of control processes or the Engineer rejects subsequent RSC .
Use a tachometer to test and record the vibration frequency of the concrete vibrators before placing RSC each day and at least every hours during production .
.Dc Modulus of Rupture During RSC placement sample and fabricate beams for testing the modulus of rupture testing within the first cu yd at least once every cu yd and within the final truckload .
Submit split samples and fabricate test beams for the Departments testing unless ordered otherwise .
Determine the modulus of rupture at opening age under California Test except beam specimens may be fabricated using an internal vibrator under ASTM C. Cure the beams under the same conditions as the pavement until hour before testing .
Test beam specimens in the presence of the Engineer and average the results .
A single test represents no more than that days production or cu yd whichever is less .
Determine the modulus of rupture at other ages using beams cured and tested under California Test except place them in sand at a time from to times the time of final setting under ASTM CCM or at hours whichever is earlier .
.D Department Acceptance .Da General The final surface texture of the individual slab replacement must pass visual inspection and have a coefficient of friction of at least .
determined under California Test .
Allow at least days for the Department to schedule for coefficient of friction testing .
Notify the Engineer when the pavement is scheduled to be opened to traffic .
.Db Modulus of Rupture The Department accepts RSC based on your test results for modulus of rupture at opening age and the Departments test results for modulus of rupture at days .
RSC must have a modulus of rupture at opening age that is at least psi and a modulus of rupture at days that is at least psi .
Modulus of rupture is calculated based on the test result average from testing beams for each sample .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT For RSC with a modulus of rupture at opening age that is at least psi and a modulus of rupture at days that is greater than or equal to psi but less than psi the Department deducts percent of the payment for individual slab replacementRSC .
For RSC with a modulus of rupture at opening age that is at least psi and a modulus of rupture at days that is greater than or equal to psi but less than psi the Department deducts percent of the payment for individual slab replacementRSC .
.Dc Concrete Pavement Smoothness The Department tests for concrete pavement smoothness using a foot straightedge .
Straightedge smoothness specifications do not apply to the pavement surface placed within inches of existing concrete pavement except parallel to the centerline at the midpoint of a transverse construction joint .
The concrete pavement surface must not vary from the lower edge of a foot straightedge by more than . . feet when parallel to the centerline . . feet when perpendicular to the centerline extending from edge to edge of a traffic lane .Dd Cracking and Raveling The Department rejects an RSC slab within year of contract acceptance if there is either of the following .
Partial or fulldepth cracking .
Concrete raveling consisting of either ..
Combined raveled areas more than percent of each RSC slab area .. Any single raveled area of more than sq ft .De Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Rapid Strength Concrete Use either the inch maximum or the inch maximum combined gradation specified in section .Cd .
Air content must comply with the minimum requirements in section .B .
.C Dowel Bars Dowel bars must comply with section .
.D.E Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Complete individual slab replacement adjacent to new pavement or existing pavement shown for construction before constructing the other pavement work .
Replace individual slabs damaged during construction before placing final pavement delineation .
.B Removing Existing Pavement Remove pavement under section .
The Engineer determines the exact individual slab replacement limits after overlying layers are removed .
After removing pavement to the depth shown grade the subgrade to a uniform plane .
Water as needed and compact the material remaining in place to a firm and stable base .
The finished surface of the remaining material must not extend above the grade established by the Engineer .
.C Placing Dowel Bars Drill existing concrete and bond dowel bars under section for Type individual slab replacement .
Do not install dowel bars in contraction joints .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .D Placing Rapid Strength Concrete Do not place RSC whenever the ambient air temperature is forecast by the National Weather Service to be less than degrees F within hours of final finishing .
Before placing RSC against existing concrete place inch thick commercial quality polyethylene flexible foam expansion joint filler across the original transverse and longitudinal joints .
Place the top of the joint filler flush with the top of the pavement and extend to the top of the base layer .
Secure joint filler to the joint face of the existing pavement to prevent the joint filler from moving during the placement of RSC .
Use metal or wood side forms .
Wood side forms must not be less than inches thick .
Side forms and connections must be of sufficient rigidity that movement will not occur under forces from equipment or RSC .
Clean and oil side forms before each use .
Side forms must remain in place until the pavement edge no longer requires the protection of forms .
After you place RSC consolidate it using highfrequency internal vibrators adjacent to forms and across the full paving width .
Place RSC as nearly as possible to its final position .
Do not use vibrators for extensive shifting of concrete pavement .
Spread and shape RSC with powered finishing machines supplemented by hand finishing .
After you mix and place RSC do not add water to the surface to facilitate finishing .
You may request authorization to use surface finishing additives .
Place consecutive concrete loads without interruption .
Do not allow cold joints where a visible lineation forms after concrete is placed sets and hardens before additional concrete is placed .
.E Joints .E General Joints must be vertical .
.E Construction Joints Before placing fresh concrete against hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures apply curing compound no .
or to the vertical surface of the hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures and allow it to dry .
At joints between concrete pavement and HMA apply tack coat between the concrete pavement and HMA .
.E Contraction Joints Saw contraction joints before cracking occurs and after the RSC is hard enough to saw without spalling raveling or tearing .
Cut contraction joints to a minimum of the slab depth .
Use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
Match transverse contraction joints with existing joint spacing and skew unless otherwise described .
Where the existing transverse joint spacing in an adjacent lane exceeds feet construct an additional transverse contraction joint midway between the existing joints .
Cut transverse contraction joints across the full slab replacement width .
After cutting immediately wash slurry from the joint with water at less than psi pressure .
Longitudinal contraction joints must be parallel with the concrete pavement centerline except when lanes converge or diverge .
Transverse and longitudinal contraction joints must not deviate by more than .
foot from either side of a foot straight line .
For longitudinal joints parallel to a curved centerline radius less than feet compensate for curvature .
Keep joints free from foreign material including soil gravel concrete and asphalt .
.F Final Finishing After preliminary finishing round the edges of the initial paving width to a .foot radius .
Round transverse and longitudinal construction joints to a .foot radius .
Mark each individual slab replacement area with a stamp .
The stamp must show the month day and year of placement and SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT contract number .
Level the location of the stamp with a steel trowel below the pavement texture .
Orient the stamp mark so it can be read from the outside edge of the individual slab replacement area .
Before curing texture the pavement .
Perform initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device that produces striations parallel to the centerline .
Perform final texturing with a steeltined device that produces grooves parallel with the centerline .
Tines must be from to inch wide on inch centers and have enough length thickness and resilience to form grooves from to inch deep after the concrete has hardened .
Grooves must extend over the entire pavement width except do not construct grooves inches from longitudinal pavement edges or joints .
Final texture must be uniform and smooth .
Grooves must be parallel and aligned to the pavement edge across the pavement width .
The groove alignment must not vary more than .
foot for every feet of length .
.G Temporary Pavement Structure Temporary pavement structure must be RSC or inchthick HMA over AB .
.H Noncompliant Individual Slab Replacement Replace an individual slab replacement slab that has any of the following defects .
One or more fulldepth cracks . .
Concrete raveling. . Noncompliant smoothness except you may request authorization for grinding under section and retesting .
Grinding that causes a depression will not be authorized .
Smoothness must be corrected within hours of placing RSC. . Noncompliant modulus of rupture .
If the modulus of rupture at opening age is at least psi and the modulus of rupture at days is at least psi but less than psi you may request authorization to leave the RSC in place and accept the specified deduction .
If pavement is noncompliant for coefficient of friction groove or grind the pavement under section .
Comply with section .N and groove or grind before the installation of any required joint seal or edge drains adjacent to the areas to the noncompliant area .
Treat an individualslabreplacement slab with partialdepth cracking using HMWM under section .
.I Replace Pavement Delineation Replace traffic stripes pavement markings and markers that are removed obliterated or damaged by individual slab replacement under sections and .
.J Reserved .
PAYMENT Payment for replacing base is not included in the payment for individual slab replacementrapid strength concrete .
Payment for placing dowel bars is not included in the payment for individual slab replacementrapid strength concrete .
DRILL AND BOND BARS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for drilling installing and bonding tie bars and dowel bars in concrete pavement .
Section .D does not apply .
.B Definitions Reserved SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for .
Tie bars .
Dowel bars .
Dowel bar lubricant .
Chemical adhesive .
Epoxy powder coating At least days before delivery to the job site submit the manufacturers instructions for storage handling and use of chemical adhesive .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Reserved .D Department Acceptance The Department accepts drill and bond bars based on the Engineers inspection before placing concrete .
.D Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Dowel bar lubricant must comply with section .D .
Chemical adhesive for drilling and bonding bars must be on the Authorized Material List for chemical adhesives that indicates the appropriate chemical adhesive system for concrete temperature and installation conditions .
Each chemical adhesive system container must clearly and permanently show the .
Manufacturers name .
Model number of the system .
Manufacture date .
Batch number .
Expiration date .
Current International Conference of Building Officials Evaluation Report number .
Directions for use .
Storage requirement .
Warnings or precautions required by State and federal laws and regulations .B Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Drill holes for bars .
Clean drilled holes under the chemical adhesive manufacturers instructions .
Holes must be dry at the time of placing the chemical adhesive and bars .
Use a grout retention ring when drilling and bonding dowel bars .
Immediately after inserting the bar into the chemical adhesive support the bar to prevent movement until chemical adhesive has cured the minimum time recommended by the manufacturer .
Apply dowel bar lubricant to the entire exposed portion of the dowel bar .
If the Engineer rejects a bar installation stop paving drilling and bonding activities .
Adjust your procedures and obtain the verbal authorization before resuming paving drilling and bonding .
Cut the rejected bar flush with the pavement joint surface and coat the exposed end of the bar with chemical adhesive .
Offset the new hole inches horizontally from the rejected holes center .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .B Tie Bar Tolerance Place tie bars within the tolerances shown in the following table Tie Bar Tolerances Dimension Tolerance Horizontal skew horizontal skew bar length Vertical skew vertical skew bar length Longitudinal translation inch Horizontal offset embedment inch Height relative to the adjacent bar Vertical depth clearance from the pavement surface or bottom inches min .C Dowel Bar Tolerance Place dowel bars within the tolerances specified in section .D .
.D Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used REMOVING CONCRETE PAVEMENT AND BASE .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for removing concrete pavement and base .
Remove concrete pavement or concrete pavement and base to the depth shown .
Before placing subsequent layers of subbase base pavement or other material the subgrade must comply with section .C .
Section .D does not apply. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Remove Concrete Pavement If there is overlying material on the concrete pavement remove it with the pavement .
Saw cut using a diamond blade and make cuts perpendicular to the pavement surface .
Saw cutting is not required where concrete pavement is adjacent to asphalt concrete pavement .
Saw cut no more than days before removing pavement such that traffic will not dislodge any pavement piece or segment .
Saw cut perpendicular to the traveled way except you may cut parallel or diagonal to the traveled way when saw cutting and removing the pavement during the same closure .
You may make additional saw cuts within the sawed outline .
Saw cuts must be the full pavement depth unless otherwise shown .
Saw cut at longitudinal and transverse joints to remove entire slabs .
For partialslab areas the Engineer determines the exact sawcut locations .
Do not impact the surface within inches of pavement remaining in place .
Slablifting equipment must attach to the pavement .
SECTION EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT .C Remove Base Before removing any type of asphalt treated cement treated or concrete base sawcut the outline of the base removal area using a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
Cut asphalt treated base at least inches deep on a neat line perpendicular to the base surface .
Cut cement treated or concrete base full depth .
Remove unbonded granular base material by means that will not disturb base to remain in place. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED GROOVE AND GRIND CONCRETE GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for grooving and grinding concrete roadway surfaces .
Section .D does not apply. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used GROOVING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for grooving concrete roadway surfaces .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Department Acceptance The Department accepts grooved areas if at least percent of any by foot longitudinal pavement area is grooved except where prevented by irregularities in the pavement surface. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION At the start of each work shift grooving machines must be equipped with a full complement of functioning grooving blades .
Grooving blades must be . . inch wide and spaced on inch centers .
Set blades and cut to depth at the locations shown in the following table Location Groove depth inches Pavement to Bridge decks to Inductive loop detectors to Begin and end grooving at lines perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
Center grooving within the lane width .
For new pavement or bridge decks groove the full lane width .
If a single blade on a grooving machine fails to cut an acceptable groove you may continue to groove for the remainder of the work shift .
Do not regroove because of a single failed blade .
If more than a single blade fails perform either of the following .
Discontinue work within feet of the failure .
Cutting omitted grooves is not required .
SECTION GROOVE AND GRIND CONCRETE .
Continue grooving until the end of the work shift .
You must cut omitted grooves by other means. . PAYMENT Not Used GRINDING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for grinding concrete roadway surfaces .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Test for pavement smoothness under sections and except .
At the midpoint of a joint or crack test smoothness with a straightedge. . Straightedge and inertial profiler requirements do not apply to areas abnormally depressed from subsidence or other localized causes .
End smoothness testing feet before and resume feet after these areas .
After grinding the existing pavement must comply with specifications for smoothness and coefficient of friction in section except .
At the midpoint of a joint or crack both sides must have uniform texture. . Crossslope must be uniform and have positive drainage across the traveled way and shoulder .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts pavement for smoothness and coefficient of friction under section .D .
For Department acceptance the following ground areas must comply with the specifications for smoothness and concrete cover over reinforcing steel in section .Dbii .
Bridge decks .
Approach slabs .
Adjacent feet of approach pavement After grinding bridge decks approach slabs and the adjacent feet of approach pavement the coefficient of friction must comply with section .Dbiii. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Grind surfaces in the longitudinal direction of the traveled way and grind the full lane width .
Begin and end grinding at lines perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
Grinding must result in a parallel corduroy texture with grooves from .
to .
inch wide and from to grooves per foot of width .
Grooves must be from .
to .
inch from the top of the ridge to the bottom of the groove .
SECTION GROOVE AND GRIND CONCRETE Grinding equipment must have diamond cutting blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for grinding and texturing concrete pavements .
At joints or cracks both sides must have a uniform texture .
.B Pavement Grind existing concrete pavement that is adjacent to an individual slab replacement .
Grind the replaced individual slab and all the existing slabs immediately surrounding it .
Grind after the individual slab is replaced .
Grind existing concrete pavement that is adjacent to new lanes of concrete pavement before paving .
As an alternative to grinding existing concrete pavement you may replace the existing pavement .
The new concrete pavement must be the same thickness as the removed pavement .
Replace existing pavement between longitudinal joints or pavement edges and transverse joints .
Do not remove portions of slabs .
Replacement of existing concrete pavement must comply with specifications for individual slab replacement in section .
.C Bridge Decks Approach Slabs and Approach Pavement Grind bridge decks approach slabs and approach pavement if described. . PAYMENT Grinding an existing approach slab and the adjacent feet of approach pavement is paid for as grind existing bridge deck .
RESERVED RESERVED DIVISION VI STRUCTURES GENERAL GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing structures. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing ground anchors and soil nails .
.B Definitions Not Used .C Submittals .C General Submit a certified calibration chart for each jack and its gauge as an informational submittal .
.C Shop Drawings .Ca General Submit copies of shop drawings to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of the submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
Allow days for the Departments review .
After review submit from to copies as requested for authorization and use during construction .
Shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Shop drawings for ground anchors and soil nails must include .
Your name address and telephone and fax numbers. . Construction schedule and sequence of installing and grouting. . Encapsulation details. . Repair procedure for damaged sheathing. . Drilling methods and equipment including .. Drilled hole diameter .
.. Equipment space requirements. . Grout mix design and testing procedures. . Grout placement equipment and procedures including minimum required cure time . .
Details for providing the bonded and unbonded length .
If packers or other similar devices are to be used include the type . .
Testing equipment including .. Jacking frame and appurtenant bracing .
..
Method and equipment for measuring movement during testing .
.Cb Ground Anchor Shop Drawings Ground anchor shop drawings must include the following additional information .
Details and specifications for the anchorage system and ground anchors . .
Details for the transition between the corrugated plastic sheathing and the anchorage assembly . .
If shims are used during lockoff shim thickness and supporting calculations . .
Calculations for determining the bonded length .
Do not rely on any capacity from the grouttoground bond within the unbonded length .
.Cc Soil Nail Shop Drawings Soil nail shop drawings must include the following additional information .
Details and specifications for .. Anchorage system .. Production soil nails .. Test soil nails .
Drilling methods and equipment including ..
Supporting calculations ..
Assumed bond strength SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .
Details for isolating installed proof test soil nails during shotcrete application .
Procedure for extracting grouted soil nails .C Test Data Submit the following data for each ground anchor or soil nail test .
Key personnel .
Test loading equipment .
Anchor or nail location .
Time and date of .. Drilling ..
Installation .. Grouting ..
Testing .
Hole diameter and depth .
Drilling method .
Soil or rock classification and description .
Bonded and unbonded length .
Quantity of groundwater encountered within the bonded length .
Grout quantity and pressure used within the bonded length .
Anchor end or nail head movement at each load increment or at each time increment during the load hold period Submit the test data when ground anchor or soil nail testing is complete or when requested .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Not Used .D Quality Control .Da General Stability testing and wall zones must comply with section .
.Db Load Testing .Dbi General The jacking equipment and the movement measuring system must be stable during all phases of loading .
Do not unload or reposition the test equipment during load testing .
.Dbii Jacking Equipment and Calibration Apply the test loads using a hydraulic jack supported by a reaction frame that can support the test equipment without excessive deformation .
Use a calibrated pressure gauge or a load cell to determine the magnitude of applied test loads .
The pressure gauge must have an accurately reading clearly visible dial or display .
Dial gauges must be graduated in psi increments or less .
Each jack and its gauge must be calibrated as a unit under the specifications for jacks used to tension prestressing steel permanently anchored at percent or more of its specified minimum ultimate tensile strength in section .Db .
The load cell must be calibrated and have an indicator capable of measuring the maximum test load .
The load cell range must be such that the lower percent of the manufacturers rated capacity is not used in determining the jacking force .
.Dbiii Measuring Movements The equipment for measuring the movement at the anchor end or nail head must be accurate to .
inch and have enough capacity to complete the test without being reset .
SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .Dbiv Procedure At each load increment including the ending alignment load measure the movement at the anchor end or nail head relative to an independent fixed reference point .
Record the movements to the nearest .
inch .
Maintain each test load within percent of the specified load throughout each hold period .
.D Department Acceptance The Department may verify the test loads using the Departments load cells .
If requested install and support the Departments testing equipment during testing and remove the equipment after testing is complete. . MATERIALS .A General Not Used .B Sheathing PVC sheathing must comply with ASTM D Class B. HDPE sheathing must have a density of from to kgm when measured under ASTM D. Smooth and corrugated sheathing including joints must be .
Strong enough to prevent damage during construction .
Watertight .
Chemically stable without embrittlement or softening .
Nonreactive with ..
Concrete .. Steel .. Corrosioninhibiting grease if used The corrugation width the distance between corrugations and the corrugation height of corrugated plastic sheathing must be approximately equal .
.C Grout Grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
Cement must comply with section .B .
Water must comply with section .D .
Do not exceed gallons of water per lb of cement .
Admixtures must comply with section except they must not contain chloride ions in excess of .
percent by weight. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Water or grout from ground anchor or soil nail construction must not .
Fall on traffic .
Flow across shoulders or lanes occupied by traffic .
Flow into landscaping gutters or other drainage facilities Do not use an excessive quantity of water when drilling and installing ground anchors .
.B Drilling Drilled holes must not extend beyond the rightofway or easement limits .
Drilling equipment must produce straight clean holes .
Use the rotary or rotary percussion drilling method to drill ground anchor or soil nail holes in the foundation material .
SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS At locations where caving is anticipated keep enough casing and auger lengths on the job site to maintain uninterrupted anchor or nail installation .
At locations where hard drilling conditions such as rock cobbles boulders or obstructions are anticipated keep a downhole pneumatic hammer drill rig and drill bit available on the job site for drilling holes .
Clean the holes to remove material from drilling activities .
Do not use water to clean soil nail holes unless authorized .
Dispose of drill cuttings under section .B .
.C Installation Before you insert each ground anchor or soil nail into a drilled hole clean the anchor or nail of oil grease dirt and other extraneous substances and repair or replace any damaged sheathing .
There must be no evidence of distress in the plastic sheathing or crushing of the grout within the pregrouted sheathing .
Do not insert an anchor or nail into a hole until the hole has been inspected by the Engineer .
Install the anchor or nail in the drilled hole promptly so that caving or deterioration of the hole does not occur .
If you can not insert an anchor or nail into a drilled hole to the required depth without difficulty remove the anchor or nail and clean or redrill the hole .
Do not force or drive a partially inserted anchor or nail into a drilled hole .
Partially inserted anchors or nails are rejected .
For openhole drilling methods keep holecleaning tools on the job site .
The tools must be suitable for cleaning drilled holes along their full length just before inserting the anchor or nail .
.D Grouting Mix the grout as follows .
Add water to the mixer followed by cement and any admixtures or fine aggregate . .
Mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout. . Agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped. . Do not add water after the initial mixing .
Grouting equipment must be .
Capable of grouting at a pressure of at least psi .
Equipped with a pressure gauge having a fullscale reading of not more than psi .E Research Investigation Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used GROUND ANCHORS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing ground anchors .
A ground anchor consists of a steel bar or strand tendon with an anchorage assembly that is placed in a cored formed or drilled hole and then grouted and stressed .
.B Definitions lockoff load Load maintained on the jacks while the anchor head or anchor nuts on the ground anchor are permanently set .
SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .C Submittals Submittals for strand tendons bar tendons bar couplers and anchorage assemblies must comply with section .C .
At least days before using the corrosioninhibiting grease submit a test sample from the lot to be used and test data showing compliance with the specifications for strand coating and encapsulation .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Not Used .D Quality Control .Da General Strand tendons bar tendons bar couplers and anchorage assemblies must comply with section .D .
.Db Load Testing .Dbi General Performance test ground anchors as described .
Proof test all ground anchors that are not performance tested .
Perform load testing against the completed structural element shown .
Do not test directly against the soil .
Do not stress against the concrete until it has attained a compressive strength of at least psi or has cured for at least days .
Bearing pads must be a minimum of foot away from the edges of the drilled hole .
If a ground anchor fails to comply with the acceptance criteria redesign or replace the ground anchor .
Do not retest a ground anchor unless you postgrout the anchor bonded length after the unacceptable test .
.Dbii Test Procedure Conduct the performance and proof tests as follows .
Incrementally load and unload the anchor as shown in the following table SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS Loading Schedules Performance test Proof test Load increment Hold time minutes Load increment Hold time minutes AL Until stable AL Until stable .FTL .FTL AL Until stable .FTL .FTL .FTL .FTL .FTL AL Until stable .FTLa or .FTL AL Until stable .FTL .FTL AL Until stable .FTL .FTL .FTL .FTL AL Until stable .FTL .FTL .FTL .FTL .FTLa or AL Until stable NOTE FTL factored test load shown AL alignment load .FTL aMaximum test load .
Apply each load increment in less than minute and hold it for the length of time shown in the table titled Loading Schedules. . Measure and record the applied test load and the anchor end movement at each load increment . .
When applying the maximum test load ..
Hold the load constant for minutes .
.. Start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the last load increment .
.. Measure and record the anchor end movement at and minutes . .
If the movement measured from to minutes is greater than .
inch ..
Hold the load constant for an additional minutes .
.. Measure and record the anchor end movement at and minutes .
..
Plot a creep curve as a function of the logarithm of time showing the anchor end movement from to minutes. . Reduce the load to the ending alignment load and record the residual movement .
.D Department Acceptance .Da General The Department tests the efflux time of the grout under California Test .
.Db Load Testing .Dbi General Not Used .Dbii Acceptance Criteria Ground anchors that are performance or prooftested must comply with the following SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .
Total measured movement at the maximum test load minus the measured residual movement at the ending alignment load exceeds percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the sum of the unbonded length and the jacking length . .
Creep movement complies with one of the following .. For a minute load hold the creep movement measured from to minutes is less than .
inch .
.. For a minute load hold the creep movement measured from to minutes is less than .
inch and the creep rate is linear or decreasing in time logarithmic scale from the to the minute reading. . MATERIALS .A General If a bond breaker is shown near the bearing plate use a inch premolded joint filler that complies with section .B .
.B Steel Strand tendons bar tendons and bar couplers must comply with section .B .
The anchorage enclosure and the steel tube and bearing plate of the anchorage assembly must be galvanized steel complying with section .
Section does not apply to the anchorage enclosure welds or to the weld between the steel tube and the bearing plate .
The permanent bearing plate must effectively distribute the factored test load uniformly to the concrete such that .
Concrete bearing stress does not exceed psi .
Bending stress of the plate does not exceed .. . of the yield strength for steel .. . of the yield strength for cast steel or cast iron .C Sheathing .C General Polypropylene sheathing must have a density of from to kgm when measured under ASTM D. .C Smooth Plastic Sheathing Smooth sheathing for bar tendons must be PVC or HDPE .
Smooth sheathing for encapsulating individual strands of strand tendons must be HDPE or polypropylene and must have a minimum wall thickness of mils .
.C Corrugated Plastic Sheathing Corrugated plastic sheathing must be PVC or HDPE .
PVC corrugated sheathing must have a nominal wall thickness of mils .
HDPE corrugated sheathing with an outside diameter of inches or greater must have a nominal wall thickness of mils .
HDPE corrugated sheathing with an outside diameter of less than inches must have a nominal wall thickness of mils .
.D Strand Coating and Encapsulation Within the unbonded length of strand tendons fully coat each individual strand with corrosioninhibiting grease and encapsulate it with a smooth HDPE or polypropylene sheath .
Hot melt extrude or shop apply the sheath onto the strand using a method that ensures all spaces between the sheath strand and strand wires are filled with corrosioninhibiting grease .
The corrosioninhibiting grease must .
Fill all space between the strand wires SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .
Encapsulate the strand giving an encasement diameter at least mils greater than the diameter of the bare strand .
Provide a continuous nonbrittle film of corrosion protection to the prestressing steel .
Provide lubrication between the strand and the sheathing .
Resist flow from the sheathing .
Be chemically stable and nonreactive with the prestressing steel sheathing material and concrete .
Be organic .
Have appropriate polar moisturedisplacing and corrosioninhibiting additives .
Have the physical properties shown in Table of Specification for Unbonded Single Strand Tendons published by the PostTensioning Institute .E Grout The efflux time of the grout immediately after mixing must be at least seconds .
For drilled holes inches or larger in diameter you may add fine aggregate to the grout used outside of the corrugated sheathing .
The fine aggregate must comply with section .C .
Grout with fine aggregate must contain at least pounds of cement per cubic yard. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Ground anchor installation must comply with the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified .
Determine the bonded length necessary to comply with the specified acceptance criteria .
Sheathe the tendons in the unbonded length with smooth plastic sheathing that extends into the steel tube of the permanent anchorage assembly .
Sheathe the tendons full length with corrugated plastic sheathing .
The transition between the corrugated plastic sheathing and the anchorage assembly must allow stressing to the maximum test load without evidence of distress in the corrugated plastic sheathing .
Select a ground anchor installation method that achieves the loadings specified .
Do not drill for ground anchors in a wall zone until any required stability testing is complete and the test results are authorized .
Drill the holes for ground anchors in the foundation material deep enough to provide the necessary bonded length beyond the minimum unbonded length shown .
If coring through concrete structures core the holes using methods that do not shatter or damage the concrete adjacent to the hole .
The diameter of the drilled hole must be large enough to provide a minimum grout cover of inch over the corrugated sheathing for the full length of the tendon .
Before installing a ground anchor repair or replace any damaged portions of the sheathing .
Place centralizers at foot maximum intervals for the full length of the tendon with the uppermost centralizer located feet from the end of the steel tube and the deepest centralizer located feet from the end of the anchor .
Pregrout each tendon at least hours before you place the tendon in the drilled hole .
At each grouting stage inject the grout at the low end of the void to be filled .
Place the grout using grout tubes .
Do not place grout in the unbonded length under pressure .
Record the quantity of grout and the grout pressures .
If hot weather conditions will contribute to quick stiffening of the grout cool the grout by authorized methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping activities .
After initial grouting the anchor must remain undisturbed until the grout is strong enough to provide anchorage during load testing .
SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS Protect the anchorage assembly against rust corrosion and physical damage until the enclosure is grouted or the assembly is encased in concrete .
For ground anchors installed inside driven structural elements such as pipe casing shells and pipe piles construct the drilled hole in the foundation material as follows .
Use construction methods that do not reduce the compression or tension capacity of the driven element. . After the driven element is installed advance the anchor hole with a drill casing using rotary methods to at least feet beyond the tip of the driven element .
Do not use percussion drilling until the casing is in place. . Do not extract the casing until the tendon is installed and the portion of the initial grout outside the corrugated sheathing and within the bonded length has been placed .
.B Bar Tendons For bar tendons provide a seal between the smooth sheathing and the corrugated sheathing at the top and bottom of the length of smooth sheathing .
Center the bar in the corrugated sheathing and pregrout the annular space between the bar and the sheathing before placing the tendon in the drilled hole .
You may place the initial grout in the drilled hole before or after inserting the bar tendon .
Stress the bars for multiplebar tendons simultaneously .
.C Strand Tendons Separate the individual strands of strand tendons within the bonded length using spacers such that the entire surface of each strand is bonded in the grout .
The spacers must be .
Spaced at feet maximum .
Made of plastic .
Strong enough to support the individual strands during construction activities Pregrout the corrugated sheathing a minimum length of feet before inserting the strand tendon in the hole .
After inserting the strand tendon and before placing the initial grout in the hole inject grout into the corrugated sheathing to the limits shown .
.D Lockoff After a successful ground anchor test tension the anchor and lock it off at the lockoff load shown .
Secure the ends of strand tendons with a permanenttype anchorage system that .
Holds the prestressing steel at a force producing a stress of at least percent of the specified ultimate tensile strength of the steel .
Permanently secures the ends of the prestressing steel Lock off strand tendons as follows .
Stress the tendon to the maximum test load . .
Fully set the permanent wedges in the anchor head . .
Remove the shims or use other appropriate means to achieve the lockoff load shown .
Immediately after lockoff perform a liftoff test to verify that the lockoff load has been attained .
If necessary adjust the shim thickness to achieve the lockoff load .
After lockoff place grout to the secondary grout level shown .
At least hours after the secondary grout has set fill the remaining void in the steel tube and bearing plate with grout .
Maintain a minimum grout head of feet until the grout has set .
If a grouted anchorage enclosure is shown install the enclosure as follows SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .
Grout the steel tube. . Clean the bearing plate surface. . Place the sealant. . Bolt the anchorage enclosure in place . .
Fill the void in the anchorage enclosure with grout. . Clean and seal any holes in the top of the anchorage enclosure used for grout placement .
Use a nonsag polysulfide or polyurethane sealing compound that complies with ASTM C. . PAYMENT Not Used SOIL NAILS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing soil nails .
A soil nail consists of steel bar reinforcement with an anchorage assembly that is placed in a drilled hole and then grouted .
.B Definitions pullout failure Occurrence in which attempts to increase the test load result in nail head movement relative to a fixed reference point without an increase in load .
.C Submittals .C General If a pullout failure occurs submit the pullout failure load as part of the test data .
If production soil nails are rejected under section .Dbii submit revised shop drawings .
If additional verification soil nails are required under section .Dbii submit revised shop drawings .
.C Test Boring Report If additional verification soil nails are required under section .Dbii submit a test boring report for the additional verification soil nails .
The test boring report must include .
Summary of drilling methods drilling equipment drill platforms and drilling difficulties encountered .
Location map of the surveyed position of the new test borings relative to existing and proposed facilities in the California Coordinate System and bridge stationing .
Bore hole surveying notes .
Depth increments of borings .
Soil and rock classifications and descriptions .
Photographs of cuttings .
Copies of original daily drilling notes including dates and weather conditions Classify soil and rock under the Soil and Rock Logging Classification and Presentation Manual .
For the manual go to the Geotechnical Services Web site .
The test boring report must be sealed and signed by a geologist or engineer registered as a geologist or civil engineer in the State .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Not Used .D Quality Control .Da General Not Used SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .Db Load Testing .Dbi General Perform load testing of verification and proof test soil nails to verify the installation methods and pullout resistance .
Load testing must include incrementally loading the soil nail until the maximum test load is held for the specified duration or a pullout failure occurs .
If a pullout failure occurs record the pullout failure load .
.Dbii Test Procedure .Dbii General Determine the test load using the following equation T Lb x Qd where T test load pounds Lb soil nail bonded length feet feet minimum Qd design pullout resistance shown poundsfoot .Dbii Verification Test Perform verification testing in the Engineers presence .
Install and test verification test soil nails for each wall zone .
You may install and test the nails during stability testing .
Conduct the verification test as follows .
Incrementally load the test soil nail as shown in the following table Verification Test Loading Schedule Load increment Hold time minutes AL Until stable .T .T .T .T .Ta .T .Tb AL Until stable NOTE T test load AL alignment load .T aCreep test bMaximum test load .
Apply each load increment in less than minute and hold it for the length of time shown in the table titled Verification Test Loading Schedule. . Measure and record the applied test load and the nail head movement at each load increment. . During the creep test ..
Hold the load constant for minutes .
.. Start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the load increment from .T to .T .
.. Measure and record the nail head movement at and minutes .
..
Plot a creep curve as a function of the logarithm of time showing the nail head movement from to minutes . .
If the movement measured from to minutes is less than .
inch .. Increase the load incrementally to .T .
SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS ..
Hold the load constant for minutes .
.. Start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the load increment from .T to .T .
.. Measure and record the nail head movement at and minutes .
.. Reduce the load to the ending alignment load and record the residual movement . .
If the movement measured from to minutes is .
inch or greater reduce the load to the ending alignment load .
Verification test soil nails that fail to comply with the acceptance criteria are rejected .
Submit revised shop drawings for additional verification test soil nails .
The Engineer determines the cause of failure for each rejected verification test soil nail .
If the Engineer determines that the installation methods are the cause of failure the installation methods are rejected .
Show alternative installation methods on the revised shop drawings .
If the Engineer revises soil nail lengths or design pullout resistance values any additional verification test soil nails are change order work .
Install and test additional verification test soil nails until they comply with the acceptance criteria .
Log horizontal borings for additional verification test soil nails and submit a test boring report under section .C .
The logging of horizontal test borings and the submittal of the test boring report is change order work .
.Dbii Proof Test Production soil nails must be represented by proof test soil nails within a given wall zone .
Perform proof testing in the Engineers presence at the locations shown .
Test against a temporary yoke that bears directly on the shotcrete facing .
Test loads transmitted through the temporary yoke must not fracture the shotcrete or cause displacement or sloughing of the soil surrounding the drilled hole .
Conduct the proof test as follows .
Incrementally load the test soil nail as shown in the following table Proof Test Loading Schedule Load increment Hold time minutes AL Until stable .T .T .T .T .Tab or .Tc .Tc AL Until stable NOTE T test load AL alignment load .T aCreep test bMaximum test load for proof test cLoads for supplemental testing only .
Apply each load increment in less than minute and hold it for the length of time shown in the table titled Proof Test Loading Schedule. . Measure and record the applied test load and the nail head movement at each load increment. . During the creep test ..
Hold the load constant for minutes .
SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .. Start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the load increment from .T to .T .
.. Measure and record the nail head movement at and minutes . .
If the movement measured from to minutes is greater than .
inch ..
Hold the load constant for an additional minutes .
.. Measure and record the nail head movement at and minutes .
..
Plot a creep curve as a function of the logarithm of time showing the nail head movement from to minutes. . Reduce the load to the ending alignment load and record the residual movement .
Production soil nails represented by proof test soil nails that fail to comply with the acceptance criteria except those represented by proof test soil nails selected for supplemental testing are rejected .
Submit revised shop drawings for replacement soil nails that show alternative installation methods revised production soil nails or a modified soil nail plan .
.Dbii Supplemental Test The Engineer selects up to of proof test soil nails for supplemental testing .
Only proof test soil nails with a creep movement less than .
inch measured from to minutes are considered for supplemental testing .
Perform supplemental testing immediately following creep testing .
Incrementally load the soil nails as shown in the table titled Proof Test Loading Schedule .
Record the test load and nail head movement as part of the test data .
For proof test soil nails that fail supplemental testing the Department deducts .
per linear foot of proof test soil nail .
.Dc Grout Before using grout with fine aggregate produce a test batch to verify the consistency .
Produce and deliver the test batch under conditions and in time periods similar to those expected during the grouting of soil nails .
Place the test batch grout in an excavated hole or a container of suitable size to allow testing under California Test .
The test batch must comply with the specified nominal penetration .
Dispose of the grout after testing .
.D Department Acceptance .Da General The Department tests grout with fine aggregate under California Test before use .
.Db Load Testing .Dbi General Not Used .Dbii Acceptance Criteria Soil nails that are verification or prooftested must comply with the following .
For verification tests ..
Creep movement measured from to minutes is less than .
inch .
..
Creep rate is linear or decreasing in time logarithmic scale from the to the minute reading. . For proof tests the creep movement complies with one of the following ..
Creep movement measured from to minutes is no more than .
inch .
..
Creep movement measured from to minutes is less than .
inch and the creep rate is linear or decreasing in time logarithmic scale from the to the minute reading. . Total measured movement at the maximum test load minus the measured residual movement at the ending alignment load exceeds percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the unbonded length . .
Pullout failure does not occur .
SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS .
MATERIALS .A General Each production soil nail must be either a reinforcing bar encapsulated full length in a grouted corrugated plastic sheathing or an epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcing bar partially encapsulated in a grouted corrugated plastic sheathing .
The epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcing bar must comply with section .
except the epoxy thickness must be from to mils .
Bar reinforcement for test soil nails is not required to be epoxy coated or encapsulated in grouted plastic sheathing .
.B Steel Soil nail anchorage assemblies must comply with section except galvanizing is not required for nuts washers wedges and bearing plates if they are fully encased in concrete grout or shotcrete .
Concrete anchors on bearing plates must comply with the specifications for studs in clause of AWS D .. .C Bar Reinforcement Bar reinforcement must comply with section .
For bar reinforcement for production soil nails .
Grade bar reinforcement must comply with ASTM AAM or AAM. . Grade bar reinforcement must comply with ASTM AAM. . Reinforcement must have at least a inch length of thread on the anchorage end .
Threading must be either continuous spiral deformed ribbing provided by the bar deformations or cut into the bar .
For bars with cut threads use the next larger bar size from that shown and use coarse threads. . Epoxy coating at the anchorage end of epoxycoated bars may be omitted for no more than inches. . Metal surfaces of assembled splices of epoxycoated bars must be epoxy coated .
Choose the bar reinforcement size and grade for test soil nails .
Test soil nail bars must not be smaller than the production soil nails they represent .
.D Sheathing Corrugated plastic sheathing must be PVC or HDPE and must have a minimum thickness of mils .
.E Grout For drilled holes inches or larger in diameter you may add fine aggregate to the grout .
Grout with fine aggregate must .
Contain at least pounds of cement per cubic yard of grout .
Use fine aggregate that complies with section .C .
Have a nominal penetration of at least inches when measured under California Test .
Have an air content of no more than percent when measured under California Test .
Not contain airentraining admixtures .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Determine the drilled hole diameter and installation method required to achieve the soil nail pullout resistance values shown .
Do not drill for proof test or production soil nails in a wall zone until stability testing if required and verification soil nail testing are complete in the wall zone and the test results are authorized .
If you are ordered to lengthen verification or proof test soil nails the lengthening of test soil nails is change order work .
If you are ordered to lengthen production soil nails or install additional production soil nails the SECTION GROUND ANCHORS AND SOIL NAILS lengthening or addition of production soil nails is change order work .
.B Test Soil Nails Construct verification and proof test soil nails using the same equipment methods nail inclination and drilled hole diameter as to be used for production soil nails .
Drill install and grout verification test soil nails in the Engineers presence .
You may install verification test soil nails by any of the following means .
Through the existing slope face . .
Through the drill platform work bench . .
Through the stabilization berm . .
Through the stability test exposed face . .
Into slot cuts made for the lift in which verification test soil nails are located .
A slot cut must be no larger than is needed to accommodate the drill and test setup equipment .
Install the verification test soil nails within the limits of each wall zone or within the limits of the excavated stability test face .
Space the verification test soil nails at least feet apart .
Grout only the bonded length of verification and proof test soil nails .
Do not splice a test soil nail within the bonded length .
Remove each verification and proof test soil nail to inches behind the front face of the shotcrete after testing is complete .
Fill the void with grout .
If requested extract the verification and proof test soil nails and fill the voids with grout .
.C Installation Install and grout the soil nails in the same work shift that the holes are drilled .
Use centralizers to support the soil nail in the center of the drilled hole .
Space the centralizers at .
feet maximum along the bar length and .
feet from the bar ends .
You may use plastic centralizers .
Splice the bar reinforcement only where shown on the authorized shop drawings or at the end of a soil nail that is ordered to be lengthened .
Verify and record the drilled hole length before grouting .
Grout the drilled hole after installing the soil nail .
Inject the grout at the low end of the drilled hole .
Fill the drilled hole with a dense grout free of voids and foreign material .
Grout the hole in continuous operation .
Do not use cold joints in the grout placement .
Fill any void remaining at the open end of the drilled hole of a production soil nail with shotcrete .
Secure the soil nail at the face of the shotcrete .
The bearing plate must have full bearing on the shotcrete surface .
Hand tighten the nut on the end of the production soil nail bar before the initial set of the shotcrete .
Make the nut wrench tight after the shotcrete has set for hours unless a shorter time is authorized .
After placing the grout the soil nails must remain undisturbed for the minimum cure time shown on the authorized shop drawings. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for soil nails is the length measured along the bar centerline from the back face of shotcrete to the tip end shown or ordered .
Verification and proof test soil nails are paid for as soil nails .
RESERVED EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing earth retaining systems. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EMBANKMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing mechanically stabilized embankments .
Concrete panels must comply with section .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
Geosynthetic reinforcement must comply with section .
Earthwork must comply with section .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit results from the proposed buttonhead wire coupler test .
Submit results from each production buttonhead wire coupler test .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Coupler test samples must comply with the minimum tensile specifications for plain wire in ASTM AAM .
Total wire slip must be at most inch when tested as specified for tension testing of round wire test samples under ASTM A .
If any test samples fail revise the connection and retest .
Do not start face panel installation until tension and slip test results are accepted .
Perform tension and slip tests on the proposed buttonhead wire soil reinforcement and coupler connection .
Test connection test samples .
Test samples must consist of two inches long button head wires connected by a swaged coupler .
Testing must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
.D Quality Control Perform tension and slip testing on production buttonhead wire and coupler connections during wall construction .
Test connection test samples for each lot of mat wire connections installed .
If or more test samples fail the entire represented lot is rejected .
If test sample fails to comply with specified criteria test an additional test samples .
If any of these additional samples fail the entire represented lot is rejected. . MATERIAL .A General Concrete leveling pads must be constructed with minor concrete .
SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS Soil reinforcement connecting elements and other steel components in contact with the earth must be galvanized under section .B .
Threaded ends of inspection wires for metallic soil reinforcement may be formed before or after galvanizing .
Coat the final inches of the wire with applications of organic zincrich primer .
Encase the threaded end with a waterproof vinyl enclosure secured with a nylon tie .
If the threaded end is galvanized after threading clean the threads before painting .
Corrugated steel pipe must comply with section .
Perforated pipe underdrains and underdrain outlets and risers must comply with section .
Perforated pipe must be steel unless perforated plastic pipe is shown .
Rock for rock slope protection at drain pipe outlets must be no .
backing and must comply with section .
Filter fabric must be Class A. Adhesive for bonding filter fabric to concrete panels must be commercial grade .
Resin bonded cork for horizontal joints must comply with ASTM D Type II with a compressive load of at least psi .
Pipe pins must comply with ASTM AAM except the zinc coating of actual surface must average at least .
ozsq ft and no individual specimen may be less than .
ozsq ft. .B Face Panels In freezethaw areas concrete panels must comply with section .I and must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
If architectural treatment is not required finish exposed surfaces of concrete members as specified for Class surface finish under section .F .
.C Structure Backfill Structure backfill for mechanically stabilized embankment must .
Be free of organic material and substantially free of shale and other soft material of poor durability .
Not contain slag aggregate or recycled materials such as .. Glass .. Shredded tires .. Portland cement concrete rubble including asphaltic dust sand rock grindings slabs and boulders .. Asphaltic concrete rubble including asphaltic dust sand rock grindings slabs and boulders .. Other unsuitable material as determined by the Engineer For an embankment with metallic soil reinforcement structure backfill must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS Gradation Requirements Sieve size Test method Requirement percent passing inch California Test inch California Test No .
California Test No .
California Test Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Sand equivalenta min California Test Plasticity indexa max California Test Minimum resistivity ohmcm California Test Chlorides ppm California Test Sulfates ppm California Test pH California Test .. aDoes not apply if percent or less passes the no .
sieve and percent or less passes the no .
sieve .
For an embankment with geosynthetic soil reinforcement structure backfill must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables Gradation Requirements Sieve size Test method Requirement percent passing inch California Test No .
California Test No .
California Test No .
California Test Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Sand equivalent min California Test Plasticity indexa max California Test Durability Index min California Test pH California Test .. .D Permeable Material Permeable material must be Class Type B complying with section .F .
Permeable material for an embenkment with metallic soil reinforcement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Minimum resistivity ohmcm California Test Chlorides max ppm California Test Sulfates max ppm California Test pH California Test .. Permeable material for an embankment with geosynthetic soil reinforcement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement pH California Test .. .E Soil Reinforcement Steel wire must comply with the specifications for plain wire reinforcement in ASTM AAM .
Welded wire reinforcement must comply with the specifications for plain wire welded wire reinforcement in ASTM AM .
For buttonheaded wires .
Buttons must be cold formed symmetrically about the axes of the wires .
Buttons must develop the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the wire .
Do not use a coldforming process that causes indentations in the wire .
Button heads must not contain wide open splits more than splits per head or splits nonparallel to the axis of the wire Steel wire reinforcement hooks and bends must comply with the Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete published by ACI .
Couplers at wire reinforcement connections must be seamless steel sleeves applied over the buttonhead wires .
Couplers must develop the wire minimum tensile strength with a total slip of at most inch .
Splice welded wire reinforcement along its length with mechanical couplers that develop the minimum tensile strength of the wire .
Identification storage and handling of geosynthetic reinforcement must comply with ASTM D and any alternative system details .
Protect the geosynthetic reinforcement from chemicals flames welding sparks and temperatures less than degrees F or greater than degrees F. Do not allow foreign materials to come into contact with or become affixed to the geosynthetic reinforcement. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Water for earthwork or for dust control within feet of structures with metallic soil reinforcement must comply with the specifications for water in reinforced concrete in section .D .
Protect the unthreaded portion of the galvanized inspection wire from damage .
.B Earthwork .B General Grade the foundation level for a width equal to the length of soil reinforcement elements plus foot or as shown .
Compact foundation material to a relative compaction of at least percent .
Start wall construction activities after the Engineer accepts the compacted foundation area .
SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS If ordered remove unsuitable material .
This work is change order work .
Place structure backfill simultaneously with erection of facing panels .
Place and compact material without distorting soil reinforcement or displacing facing panels .
Place structure backfill at the front of the wall before backfilling more than feet above the bottom of the lowermost face element .
If a mechanically stabilized embankment with soil reinforcement is to be constructed on an embankment compact embankment material to a relative compaction of at least percent within the limits established by inclined planes sloping .
horizontalvertical from lines foot outside the bottom limits of the mechanically stabilized embankment including any permeable material .
Start placing and compacting structure backfill foot from the back face of wall panels and progress toward the free end of the soil reinforcement .
Operate compaction equipment parallel to the wall facing .
Place and compact the remaining width of backfill behind wall panels after covering the soil reinforcement to a depth of inches .
Do not use sheepsfoot or gridtype rollers within the limits of soil reinforcement .
Use handheld or hand guided compacting equipment within feet of facing panels .
Place structure backfill at each level of soil reinforcement to a plane inches above the elevation of the soil reinforcement connection starting feet from the back of the face panel and extending for at least the remaining length of soil reinforcement .
Complete this grading before placing the next layer of soil reinforcement .
Place permeable material and filter fabric when placing structure backfill .
Place permeable material in layers less than feet thick .
Compaction of permeable material for the drainage system outside the limits of soil reinforcement is not required .
Do not operate equipment directly on the permeable material or filter fabric .
If a sloped layer of permeable material is placed to facilitate the work or to satisfy safety considerations the vertical limits of the permeable material must remain unchanged and the thickness of the layer of permeable material is measured normal to the slope .
Grade backfill to drain away from the wall face at the end of each work shift .
Use berms or ditches to direct runoff away from the wall site .
Do not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the wall site .
.B Soil Reinforcement Tension soil reinforcement in the direction perpendicular to the wall face .
Remove slack in the connection and the soil reinforcement .
Secure soil reinforcement in place before and during compaction .
Swage wire reinforcement couplers with a hydraulic press .
Cover soil reinforcement with structure backfill during the same work shift that it is placed .
Do not operate construction equipment directly on soil reinforcement .
Maintain a layer of structure backfill at least inches thick between soil reinforcement and any construction equipment .
Place geosynthetic soil reinforcement in fulllength sections .
Place structure backfill over geosynthetic soil reinforcement in lifts of at most inches if using hand operated compaction equipment and inches if using heavy compaction equipment .
.B Face Panels Vertical and horizontal panel alignment offset must not exceed inch when measured along a foot straightedge .
The offset in any panel joint must not exceed inch .
After placing backfill feet above inspection elements dry pack voids in face panels with mortar under section .E .
Mortar must comply with section .F except the proportion of cementitious material to sand must be such that the mortar achieves a day compressive strength of to psi .
.C Filter Fabric Immediately before placing filter fabric the subgrade to receive filter fabric must be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the filter fabric .
SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS Concrete panel surfaces to receive filter fabric must be dry and thoroughly cleaned .
Handle and place filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
Stretch align and place fabric without wrinkling .
Adjacent borders of filter fabric must be stitched or overlapped .
Overlap rolls to inches .
Place the preceding roll over the following roll in the direction the material is being spread .
Stitch fabric using yarn of a contrasting color .
Yarn size and composition must comply with the filter fabric manufacturers instructions .
Use to stitches per inch of seam .
Repair damaged filter fabric by placing a piece of filter fabric large enough to cover the damaged area and provide at least a inch overlap .
Do not operate equipment including vehicles directly on filter fabric .
Maintain at least inches of permeable material between filter fabric and equipment during spreading of permeable material .
Where structure backfill is to be placed on filter fabric maintain at least inches of structure backfill material between filter fabric and equipment during placement .
.D Leveling Pads Place concrete for leveling pads at least hours before erecting face panels. . PAYMENT The vertical height of each section is the difference in elevation on the outer face from the bottom of the lowermost face element to the top of wall profile .
REINFORCED CONCRETE CRIB WALLS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing reinforced concrete crib walls .
Reinforced concrete crib walls must comply with section .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
Concrete crib walls consist of a series of rectangular cells composed of interlocking precast reinforced concrete headers stretchers and blocks. . MATERIALS .A General Pads shown to be placed between bearing surfaces must either be neoprene complying with the specifications for strip waterstops in section .
or commercial quality no .
asphalt felt .
The protective board is not required for neoprene pads .
.B Crib Members .B General All members must be manufactured to no more than an inch greater in thickness than the dimensions shown .
The thickness of the lowest step must not be less than the dimension shown .
Stretchers must be manufactured to no less than a inch in length than the dimensions shown .
If an opening is shown in the face of the wall special length stretchers and additional headers may be necessary .
For nontangent wall alignments special length stretchers may be required .
For nontangent wall alignments and at locations where filler blocks are required special length front face closure members may be required .
.B Reinforcement Reinforcing wire must comply with the specifications for deformed wire reinforcement in ASTM AAM .
SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS For hoops or stirrups use either reinforcing wire or deformed steel welded wire reinforcement .
The cross sectional area must be equivalent to that of the reinforcing steel shown .
Deformed steel welded wire reinforcement must comply with the specifications for deformed wire welded wire reinforcement in ASTM AAM .
.B Concrete External vibration resulting in adequate consolidation may be used .
Cure crib members under section ..
When removed from forms the members must present a true surface of even texture free from honeycombs and voids larger than inch in diameter and inch in depth .
Clean and fill other pockets with mortar under sections .F and .E .
If the Engineer determines that rock pockets are of the extent or character as to affect the strength of the member or to endanger the life of the steel reinforcement replace the member .
Concrete test cylinders must comply with section .D except if the penetration of fresh concrete is less than inch the concrete in the test mold must be consolidated by vibrating the mold equivalent to that of the consolidating effort being used to consolidate the concrete in the member .
Finish concretetoconcrete bearing surfaces to a smooth plane .
Section .F does not apply to concrete crib members. . CONSTRUCTION Construct reinforced concrete crib walls to the lines and grades established by the Engineer .
The foundation must be accepted by the Engineer before any crib members are placed .
The gap between bearing surfaces must not exceed inch .
Where a gap of inch to inch exists or where shown place a inch pad of asphalt felt or sheet neoprene between the bearing surfaces. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for reinforced concrete crib wall is the area measured on the batter at the outer face .
The height is measured from the bottom of the bottom stretcher to the top of the top stretcher .
The length is measured from end to end of each section of wall .
RESERVED TYPE RETAINING WALLS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing Type retaining walls .
Reinforced concrete footings and stems must comply with section .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
CMU stems must comply with section . . MATERIALS Hollow CMUs must comply with the specifications for normal weight CMUs in ASTM C and must be of uniform color and size .
Caulking for sealing expansion joints must be a nonsag polysulfide or polyurethane type complying with ASTM C. Grout must comply with section .D and contain at least lbcu yd of cementitious material. . CONSTRUCTION You may construct wall stems of reinforced concrete or reinforced CMUs .
Use only stem type for each wall .
CMU construction must be true and plumb .
SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS Provide recesses in the units for horizontal reinforcement .
Provide cleanout openings at the bottom of cells where the wall height is over feet .
Seal cleanouts after inspection and before filling cells with grout .
Lay units with full mortar coverage of the face in both vertical and horizontal joints except at weep holes .
Shove vertical joints tight .
Exposed joints must be concave and tooled smooth .
Fill cells in hollow unit masonry with grout .
Consolidate grout while pouring by puddling or vibrating .
Place the top lift of grout approximately inch below the top of units .
Place a mortar cap above the top lift .
Do not place backfill against the back of Type retaining walls until grout compressive strength has reached psi or until the grout has cured for days. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for retaining wall stem Type is the area determined from the dimensions shown .
The height is the difference in elevation from the top of the footing to the top of the wall .
ALTERNATIVE EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing alternative earth retaining systems .
You may use an alternative earth retaining system when specified in the special provisions .
Use only one type of system at any one location .
The alternative earth retaining system must comply with the specifications for the type of wall being constructed .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General For asbuilt drawings common to more than one structure submit the asbuilt drawings for each structure .
.C Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings for the alternative system to OSD Documents Unit .
Submit copies for initial review .
Submit from to copies as requested of final shop drawings for final authorization .
Include the following .
All information required for construction of the system at each location .
Existing ground line at the wall face .
Design parameters material notes and wall construction procedures Verify existing ground elevations before submitting drawings .
Shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Allow days for the Departments review .
.C Certificates Submit certificates of compliance for the alternative system stating the supplied materials comply with the authorization criteria for the system on the Authorized Material List for alternative earth retaining systems .
.D Quality Assurance A qualified representative of the alternative system manufacturer must be present during erection and backfill of the first vertical feet of the entire length of the wall .
The representative must be available during the remaining installation .
The representative must not be your employee .
SECTION EARTH RETAINING SYSTEMS .
MATERIALS The alternative systems specified are taken from the Authorized Material List .
Only systems having characteristics suitable for this project are specified .
Some systems may be proprietary .
Alternative systems are selected based on data previously furnished by suppliers or manufacturers of each system. . CONSTRUCTION The structure must comply with the system details authorized on the Authorized Material List .
Check vertical and horizontal alignment at each course during erection .
Include a drainage system where shown .
Where shown construct the alternative system to accommodate wallmounted lighting and drainpipes and panels for future drainage inlets .
The top of wall profile must conform to the profile shown .
The bottom of wall elevations must be at or below the elevations shown .
Use a minimum height and length of wall adequate for the loading and site conditions described .
The length of soil reinforcement for any system must not be less than that shown .
The coping lip or barrier slab lip must cover the top of face panels at least inches .
Place the top level of soil reinforcement .
Parallel to the top of the concrete panel .
At least inches below the bottom of either the barrier slab lip or the concrete gutter behind the coping .
At least inches below the top edge of the concrete panel .
PAYMENT Not Used TEMPORARY STRUCTURES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing temporary structures. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Full compensation for work specified in section is included in the payment for the bid items involved unless .
Bid item for the work is shown on the Bid Item List .
Work is specified as change order work FALSEWORK .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing falsework .
You must design construct and maintain falsework that .
Is safe and adequate .
Provides the necessary rigidity .
Supports the imposed loads .
Produces a completed structure that conforms to the lines and grades shown .B Definitions previously welded splice Splice made in a falsework member in compliance with AWS D. or other recognized welding standard before contract award .
independent support system Support system that is in addition to the falsework removal system employing methods of holding falsework from above by winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel HS rods or cranes .
.C Submittals .C General Submit a certificate of compliance for each delivery of structural composite lumber used in falsework .
Submit a letter of certification that certifies all components of manufactured assemblies are used in compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
If requested submit manufacturers data for manufactured assemblies to verify manufacturers instructions or perform tests demonstrating adequacy of the proposed assemblies .
Submit field acceptance criteria for falsework piles with a calculated nominal resistance greater than tons .
Base acceptance criteria on a wave equation analysis performed on dynamic monitoring of falsework pile driving .
Analyses must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Submit acceptance criteria before falsework erection is complete .
Submit a letter of certification for all falsework members with welded splices .
The letter must certify that all welding and NDT including visual inspection comply with the Contract and the welding standard shown on the shop drawings .
The letter must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Submit the letter before placing any concrete on the falsework being certified .
Submit a welding certification for falsework members with previously welded splices .
The certification must SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .
Itemize the testing inspection methods and acceptance criteria used .
Include tracking and identifying documents for previously welded members .
Be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Be submitted before erecting the members Submit a falsework lighting plan before starting construction on falsework containing openings for vehicular traffic pedestrians or railroad .
You may propose a lighting plan that fulfills the light intensity specified using alternative methods .
Supply data to allow evaluation of the alternative methods .
.C Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings with supporting calculations for falsework .
Shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State if any of the following conditions apply .
Height of any portion of the falsework measured from the ground line to the soffit of the superstructure is more than feet .
Any individual falsework clear span is more than feet .
Provisions for vehicular pedestrian or railroad traffic through the falsework are made Shop drawings and calculations for falsework piles with a calculated loading capacity greater than tons must be designed by an engineer who is registered as a civil or geotechnical engineer in the State .
Submit copies of falsework shop drawings and copies of design calculations .
Include with the submittal .
Details of erection and removal activities. . Methods and sequences of erection and removal including equipment . .
Details for the stability of falsework during all stages of erection and removal activities. . Superstructure placing diagram showing concrete placing sequence and construction joint locations .
If a schedule for placing concrete is shown no deviation is allowed . .
Assumed soil bearing values for falsework footings . .
Maximum horizontal distance falsework piles may be pulled for placement under caps . .
Maximum deviation of falsework piles from vertical . .
Anticipated total falsework and form settlements including footing settlement and joint takeup. . Grade Evalue species and type of any structural composite lumber .
Include manufacturers tabulated working stress values for the lumber. . Design calculations including stresses and deflections in load carrying members . .
Provisions for complying with temporary bracing requirements. . Welding standard used for welded members .
Submit separate drawings and calculations for each single bridge or portion of bridge .
You may revise authorized falsework shop drawings if you submit it before the start of the affected work to allow review and corrections without work delays .
The additional time will not be more than that originally allowed .
For falsework over railways comply with any additional requirements of the railway company involved .
The licensed engineer signing the falsework drawings must certify that the falsework is constructed as shown in the authorized shop drawings before concrete is placed .
The certification must include any necessary testing to verify the ability of the falsework members to sustain the stresses required by the falsework design .
The licensed engineer may assign a representative to perform this certification as follows .
Where falsework contains openings for railroads vehicular traffic or pedestrians the assigned representative must have at least years of combined experience in falsework design or supervising falsework construction and be registered as a civil engineer in the State. . For other falsework the assigned representative must have at least years of combined experience in falsework design or supervising falsework construction .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .
The Engineer may request you certify the experience of the assigned representative and submit supporting documentation demonstrating the required experience .
For shop drawings and calculations for falsework removal systems employing methods of holding falsework from above by winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel HS rods or cranes include the following information .
Design code used for the analysis of the structural members of the independent support system .
Provisions for complying with current CalOSHA requirements .
Load tests and ratings within year of intended use of hydraulic jacks and winches .
Location of the winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel HS rods or cranes .
Analysis showing that the bridge deck and overhang are capable of supporting all loads at all time .
Analysis showing that winches will not overturn or slide during all stages of loading .
Location of deck and soffit openings if needed .
Details of repair for the deck and soffit openings after falsework removal .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Welding and Nondestructive Testing Welding must comply with AWS D. or other recognized welding standard except for fillet welds if the load demands are lb or less per inch for each inch of fillet weld .
Perform NDT on welded splices using UT or RT .
Each weld and any repair made to a previously welded splice must be tested .
You must select locations for testing .
The length of a splice weld where NDT is to be performed must be a cumulative weld length equal to percent of the original splice weld length .
The cover pass must be ground smooth at test locations .
Acceptance criteria must comply with the specifications for cyclically loaded nontubular connections subject to tensile stress in clause of AWS D ..
If repairs are required in a portion of the weld perform additional NDT on the repaired sections .
The NDT method chosen must be used for an entire splice evaluation including any repairs .
For previously welded splices perform and document all necessary testing and inspection required to certify the ability of the falsework members to sustain the design stresses. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Design Criteria .B General Design falsework to resist the sum of the dead and live vertical loads and an assumed horizontal load .
Anticipated falsework settlement must not exceed inch .
Design footings to carry the imposed loads without exceeding estimated soil bearing values or anticipated settlements .
Falsework spans for Tbeam girders must not exceed feet plus .
times the Tbeam girder depth .
Design falsework supporting deck slabs and overhangs on girder bridges such that there is no differential settlement between the girders and the deck forms during deck concrete placement .
For individual steel towers with maximum leg loads exceeding kips design foundations to provide uniform settlement under all legs of each tower .
Design support systems for form panels supporting concrete deck slabs and overhangs on girder bridges as falsework .
Temporary bracing must be designed to withstand all imposed loads during erection construction and removal of any falsework .
Wind loads must be included in the design of the bracing .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES Falsework removal systems employing methods of holding falsework from above and members of the independent support system must support the sum of the actual vertical and horizontal loads due to falsework materials equipment construction sequence or other causes and wind loading .
Identifiable mechanical devices used in the falsework removal plan must comply with applicable industry standards and manufacturer instructions for safe load carrying capacity .
Unidentifiable winches must be capable of carrying twice the design load .
The load used for the analysis of overturning moment and sliding of the winch system must be percent of the design load .
.B Loads The design load for falsework must consist of dead and live vertical loads and an assumed horizontal load .
The minimum total design load for any falsework is psf including members that support walkways for the combined live and dead load .
Dead loads must include the weight of concrete reinforcing steel forms and falsework .
Loads due to concrete reinforcing steel and forms must be assumed to be at least .
pcf for normal concrete .
pcf for lightweight concrete Live loads must include .
Actual weight of any equipment to be supported by the falsework applied as concentrated loads at the points of contact .
Uniform load of at least psf applied over the area supported by the falsework .
Load of lbft applied at the outside edge of deck overhangs The assumed horizontal load the falsework bracing system must resist must be the sum of the actual horizontal loads due to equipment construction sequence or other causes and a wind loading .
The horizontal load in any direction must be at least percent of the total dead load .
If the concrete is to be prestressed design the falsework to support any increased or readjusted loads caused by the prestressing forces .
Design the falsework with sufficient rigidity to resist the assumed horizontal load without considering the concrete load .
For heavyduty steel shoring or steel pipe column falsework with a vertical load capacity greater than kips per leg or column the minimum horizontal wind loading must be the sum of the products of the wind impact area shape factor and wind pressure value for each height zone .
The wind impact area is the total projected area of all elements in the tower face or falsework bent normal to the direction of the applied wind .
Use a shape factor of .
for heavyduty steel shoring and .
for pipe column falsework .
Use the wind pressure values shown in the following table Height zone feet above ground Wind pressure value Shores or columns adjacent to traffic psf At other locations psf Over For all other falsework the minimum horizontal wind loading must be the sum of the products of the wind impact area and the wind pressure value for each height zone .
The wind impact area is the gross projected area of the falsework and any unrestrained portion of the permanent structure except for the areas between falsework bents or towers where diagonal bracing is not used .
Use the wind pressure values shown in the following table SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES Height zone feet above ground Wind pressure value For members over and bents adjacent to traffic opening psf At other locations psf .
Q . Q . Q . Q . Q . Q Over .
Q . Q NOTE Q .W but not more than where W width of the falsework system in feet measured in the direction of the wind force Design falsework to support placement of the entire superstructure crosssection except railing at one time .
You may consider girder stems and connected bottom slabs selfsupporting between falsework posts if .
Girder stems and connected bottom slabs are placed more than days before the top slab .
Distance between falsework posts is at most times the depth of the portion of the girder stem placed in the st pour Falsework for box girder structures with internal falsework bracing systems that use flexible members capable of withstanding only tensile forces must be designed to include the vertical effects caused by elongation of the flexible member and the design horizontal load combined with the dead and live loads imposed by concrete placement for girder stems and connected bottom slabs .
This requirement does not apply to falsework composed of individual steel towers that use flexible members capable of withstanding only tensile forces to resist overturning .
.B Stresses Loadings and Deflections .Ba General Maximum allowable stresses and loadings specified in section .B are based on the use of undamaged highquality materials .
Reduce stresses and loadings for materials of lesser quality .
.Bb Timber Design timber connections under the Departments Falsework Manual .
The maximum allowable stresses loadings and deflections for timber are as shown in the following table Quality characteristic Requirement Compression perpendicular to the grain psi Compression parallel to the grain psi Ld maximum Flexural stress psi psi maximum for members with a nominal depth of inches or less .
Horizontal shear psi Axial tension psi Deflection due to concrete loading only of span lengtha Modulus of elasticity E psi .
x Timber piles tons NOTES L unsupported length inches d least dimension of a square or rectangular column or the width of a square of equivalent cross sectional area for round columns inches aIrrespective of deflection compensated for in camber strips SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .Bc Steel Except for flexural compressive stresses design stresses for identified grades of steel must not exceed stresses specified in the AISC Steel Manual .
Except for flexural compressive stresses the design stresses for unidentified steel must not exceed those specified for steel complying with ASTM AAM in the AISC Steel Manual or as shown in the following table Quality characteristic Requirement Tension axial and flexural psi Compression axial psi .Lra Shear on gross section of web of rolled shapes psi Web yielding for rolled shapes psi Modulus of elasticity E psi x NOTES L unsupported length inches r radius of gyration of the member inches aLr must not exceed Design stresses and deflections for all grades of steel must not exceed the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Requirement Compression flexural psi L x db x ta Deflection due to concrete loading only of the spanb Modulus of elasticity E psi x NOTES L unsupported length inches d least dimension of rectangular columns or the width of a square of equivalent crosssectional area for round columns or the depth of beams inches b width of the compression flange inches t thickness of the compression flange inches Fy specified minimum yield stress in psi aNot to exceed psi for unidentified steel psi for steel complying with ASTM AAM or .Fy for other identified steel bIrrespective of deflection compensated for in camber strips .Bd Manufactured Assemblies Do not exceed the manufacturers instructions for loadings and deflections on jacks brackets columns joists and other manufactured devices except the dead load deflection of joists at locations other than under deck slabs between girders must not exceed of their spans .
.B Special Locations Design and construct falsework over or adjacent to roadways or railroads that are open to traffic such that the falsework is stable if subjected to impact by vehicles .
Falsework posts at the following locations are considered adjacent to roadways or railroads .
Posts supporting members that cross over a roadway or railroad .
Posts located in the row of falsework posts nearest to the roadway or railroad and where the horizontal distance from the traffic side of the falsework to the edge of pavement or to a point feet from the centerline of track is less than the total height of the falsework and forms The falsework design at the above locations must comply with section .B and the following requirements .
The vertical load used for the design of falsework posts and towers that support the portion of the falsework over openings must be the greater of SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .
percent of the design load calculated under section .B not including any increased or readjusted loads caused by prestressing forces .
Increased or readjusted loads caused by prestressing forces .
Falsework posts must be steel with a minimum section modulus about each axis of .
cubic inches or sound timbers with a minimum section modulus about each axis of cubic inches. . Each falsework post must be mechanically connected to the support footing at its base or laterally restrained to withstand a force of at least lb applied at the base of the post in any direction except toward the roadway or railroad track .
Posts must be mechanically connected to the falsework cap or stringer .
The mechanical connection must resist a load in any horizontal direction of at least lb . .
Mechanically connect exterior falsework stringers stringers adjacent to the ends of discontinuous caps stringers over points of minimum vertical clearance and every th remaining stringer to the falsework cap or framing .
For falsework over railroads mechanically connect all stringers to caps .
Mechanical connections must resist at least a lb load in any direction including uplift on the stringer .
Install connections before traffic passes under the span. . Connect timber bracing to falsework using at least inchdiameter bolts or coil rod with a root diameter equal to that of the shank of a inchdiameter bolt. . Falsework member clearances must be at least those shown in the following table Falsework member Clearance To railing members barriers and anchored temporary railings To unanchored temporary railings Footings Piles Other members .
Falsework bents within feet of the centerline of a railroad track must be sheathed solid from to feet above the track on the side facing the track .
Sheathing must be plywood at least inch thick or lumber at least inch thick .
Brace these bents to resist the required assumed horizontal load or lb whichever is larger . .
Provide clear openings through falsework as described. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Install temporary bracing as necessary to withstand all imposed loads during erection construction and removal of any falsework .
The materials used in the falsework construction must be of the quality necessary to sustain the stresses required by the falsework design .
Where falsework for multiple level bridges is supported on the deck of a structure .
Falsework must bear either directly on girder stems or bent caps of the supporting structure or on falsework sills that transmit the load to the stems or cap without stress to the deck slab. . Additional falsework must be in place beneath the supporting structure when construction loads are imposed on the supporting structure .
Design and construct additional falsework to support all construction loads imposed on the supporting structure from the upper structure .
.B Foundations Construct falsework on solid footings capable of supporting falsework loads .
Protect footings from softening and undermining .
The Engineer determines if you must verify that the design soil bearing values do not exceed the soil capacity using load testing .
You may place falsework foundation pads and piles before shop drawings are authorized .
Falsework piles must be driven and the actual nominal pile resistance assessed under section .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .C Erection Construct falsework to support the loads imposed without settlement or takeup beyond that shown on the falsework drawings .
Install the final bracing system before placing falsework members above stringers .
If falsework is over or adjacent to roadways or railroads all details of the falsework system that contribute to horizontal stability and resistance to impact except for bolts in bracing must be installed when each element of the falsework is erected and remain in place until the falsework is removed .
If ordered use camber strips to compensate for falsework deflection vertical alignment and anticipated structure deflection .
The Engineer furnishes the amount of camber to be used in constructing falsework .
Install telltales that are attached to the soffit forms and can be read from the ground .
Provide sufficient telltales to allow the total settlement where concrete is being placed to be determined .
Construct deck slab forms between girders with no allowance for settlement relative to the girders .
Do not apply dead loads other than forms and reinforcing steel to falsework until authorized .
If events occur that the Engineer determines will result in a structure that does not comply with the structure as described or settlements occur that are more than inch greater than those shown on the falsework drawings stop concrete placement and apply corrective measures .
If the measures are not provided before initial concrete set occurs stop concrete placement at the location ordered .
.D Removal Remove falsework such that portions of falsework not yet removed remain stable at all times .
Falsework removal includes lowering the falsework blowing sand from sand jacks turning screws on screw jacks and removing wedges .
Except for concrete above the deck do not release falsework supporting any span of a .
Simple span bridge before days after the last concrete has been placed .
Continuous or rigid frame bridge before days after the last concrete has been placed ..
In that span ..
In adjacent portions of each adjoining span for a length equal to onehalf of the span where falsework is to be released .
Simple span continuous or rigid frame bridge until the supported concrete has attained a compressive strength of psi or percent of the specified strength whichever is greater Do not release falsework for prestressed portions of structures until prestressing steel has been tensioned .
Do not remove falsework supporting any span of a continuous or rigid frame bridge until all required prestressing is complete in that span and in adjacent portions of each adjoining span for a length equal to at least one half of the span where falsework is to be released .
Release falsework supporting spans of CIP girders slab bridges or culverts before constructing or installing railings or barriers on the spans unless authorized .
Remove falsework for arch bridges uniformly and gradually .
Start at the crown and work toward the springing .
Remove falsework for adjacent arch spans concurrently .
Do not release falsework that supports overhangs deck slabs between girders or girder stems that slope degrees or more from vertical before days after deck concrete has been placed .
You may release falsework supporting the sides of girder stems that slope less than degrees from vertical before placing deck concrete if you install lateral supports .
Lateral supports must be .
Designed to resist rotational forces on the girder stem including forces due to concrete deck placement .
Installed immediately after each form panel is removed .
Installed before releasing supports for the adjacent form panel SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES Do not release falsework for bent caps supporting steel or PC concrete girders before days after placing bent cap concrete .
Do not erect girders onto bent caps until bent cap concrete has attained a compressive strength of psi or percent of the specified strength whichever is greater .
Remove falsework for structural members subject to bending as specified for simple span bridges .
Do not release falsework for box culverts and other structures with decks lower than the roadway pavement and span lengths of feet or less until the last placed concrete has attained a compressive strength of psi .
Curing of the concrete must not be interrupted .
Falsework removal for other box culverts must comply with the specifications for the release of bridge falsework .
Do not release falsework for arch culverts sooner than hours after concrete has been placed .
Remove falsework piling to at least feet below the original ground or streambed .
Remove falsework piling driven within ditch or channel excavation limits to at least feet below the bottom and side slopes of the excavated areas .
Dispose of falsework materials and work debris .
Falsework removal system employing methods of holding falsework by winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel HS rods or cranes must also be supported by an independent support system when the falsework removal system is not actively lowering the falsework at vehicular pedestrian or railroad traffic openings .
Bridge deck openings used to facilitate falsework removal activities must be formed and located away from the wheel path .
The formed openings must be wedge shaped with a inch maximum diameter at the top and a inch maximum diameter at the bottom .
Anchor inchsquare aluminum or galvanized steel wire inchmesh hardware cloth with a . inch minimum wire diameter firmly to the inside of the soffit openings .
Construct a inch drip groove to the outside of soffit openings .
Clean and roughen openings made in the bridge deck .
Fill the deck openings with rapid setting concrete complying with section .B .
.E Falsework Lighting .E General Falsework lighting includes lighting to illuminate the pavement portals and pedestrian walkways at or under openings in the falsework required for traffic .
Falsework lighting components must comply with section .
Lighting for pedestrian walkway illumination must be installed at all pedestrian openings through or under the falsework .
Design falsework lighting so that required maintenance can be performed with a minimum of inconvenience to traffic .
Closing of traffic lanes for routine maintenance is not allowed on roadways with posted speed limits greater than mph .
Illuminate the following only during hours of darkness as provided in division section of the California Vehicle Code Falsework portals and pavement under falsework with portals less than feet apart .
Photoelectric switches must be used to control falsework lighting systems .
Pavement under falsework with portals feet or more apart and all pedestrian openings through falsework must be illuminated hours per day .
Lighting fixtures must be aimed to avoid glare to oncoming motorists .
Type NMC cable with no .
minimum conductors with ground wire must be used .
Fasten cable to the supporting structure at sufficient intervals to adequately support the cable and within inches from every box or fitting .
Conductors within feet of ground must be enclosed in a inch or larger Type conduit .
Each illumination system must be on a minimum of separate branch circuit at each bridge location .
Each branch circuit must be fused not to exceed A .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES For falsework lighting arrange with the service utility to complete service connections .
You pay for energy line extension service and service hookup costs .
.E Pavement Illumination Illumination of pavement at vehicular openings through falsework must comply with the following requirements .
Fixture must include RFL commercialtype flood lamp holder with protective covers. . Fixture must be fully adjustable with brackets and locking screws and allow mounting directly to a standard metal junction box. . Lamp must be mediumbase Vac W minimum PAR quartzhalogen flood lamp. . A continuous row of fixture types required must be installed at locations and spacing specified .
Fixtures must be installed beneath falsework structure with the end fixtures not further than feet inside portal faces .
Fixtures must be installed and energized immediately after the members supporting them have been erected. . Fixtures along the sides of the opening must be placed not more than feet behind or feet in front of the roadway face of the temporary railing .
Mounting heights of fixtures must be between and feet above the roadway surface and must present an unobstructed light pattern on the pavement .
.E Portal Illumination Illumination of falsework portals must comply with the following requirements .
On each side of each entrance portal plywood sheet clearance guides must .. Be feet wide by feet high .
.. Be fastened vertically facing traffic with the bottom of the panel to feet above the roadway .
.. Have the center of the panel located approximately feet horizontally behind the roadway face of the railing .
.. Have freshly painted panels for each installation with not less than applications of flat white paint .
Paint testing will not be required . .
If ordered repaint the designated areas to improve the general appearance of the painted surfaces .
Repainting is change order work. . Falsework portals must be illuminated on the side facing traffic with W minimum PAR floodlamps mounted on the structure directly over each vertical support adjacent to the traveled way as needed to uniformly illuminate the exterior falsework beam the clearance guides and the overhead clearance sign .
Each lamp must be supported approximately feet above the pavement and approximately feet in front of the portal face. . Portal lighting and clearance guides must be installed on the day the vertical members are erected .
.E Pedestrian Walkway Illumination Illumination of pedestrian openings through or under the falsework must comply with the following requirements .
Fixtures must be flush mounted in the overhead protection shield and equipped with a damage resistant clear polycarbonate diffuser lens .
Lamps must be standard incandescent W Vac. . Fixtures must be centered over the passageway at intervals of not more than feet with the end fixtures not more than feet inside the end of the pedestrian openings. . Pedestrian passageway light systems must be installed immediately after the overhead protection shield is erected. . PAYMENT Not Used TEMPORARY SUPPORTS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for providing temporary supports for existing structures during retrofit reconstruction and removal activities .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES Temporary supports include jacking assemblies and accessories required to jack and support structures .
.B Definitions frame Portion of a bridge between expansion joints .
.C Submittals .C General Submit copies of the initial location survey of the existing structure signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Submit a copy of the displacement monitoring record after completing reconstruction of each bent .
.C Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings with design calculations for the temporary support system .
Submit copies of shop drawings and copies of design calculations .
Include with the submittal .
Descriptions and values of all loads including construction equipment loads. . Descriptions of equipment to be used . .
Details and calculations for jacking and supporting the existing structure . .
Stress sheets anchor bolt layouts shop details and erection and removal plans for the temporary supports . .
Assumed soil bearing values and design stresses for temporary support footings including anticipated foundation settlement . .
Maximum distance temporary support piles may be pulled for placement under footing caps . .
Maximum deviation of temporary support piles from a vertical line through the point of fixity . .
Details for use of permanent piles .
Include any additional loads imposed on the piles . .
Details for additional bracing required during erection and removal of temporary supports . .
Details of the displacement monitoring system including equipment location of control points and methods and schedule for taking measurements . .
Details for jacking the structure if settlement occurs in the temporary supports .
Calculations must show a summary of computed stresses in temporary supports connections between temporary supports and the existing structure and existing loadsupporting members .
The computed stresses must include the effect of the jacking sequence .
Calculations must include a lateral stiffness assessment of the temporary support system .
Shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
For temporary supports over railways comply with any additional requirements of the railway company involved .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Welding welder qualification and welding inspection for temporary supports must comply with AWS D .. Calibrate each jack within months of use and after each repair .
Each jack and its gauge must be calibrated as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be at the final jacking force and accompanied by a certified calibration chart .
Each load cell must be calibrated .
Calibration must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
Before starting bridge removal activities an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State must inspect and certify that the temporary supports jacking system and displacement monitoring system comply with the authorized shop drawings and the materials and workmanship are satisfactory for the work .
A copy of this certification must be available at the job site at all times .
An engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State must .
Be present during jacking activities or adjustments and during bridge removal activities .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .
Inspect jacking and removal activities and report daily on the progress of the operation and the status of the remaining structure .
The daily report must be available at the job site at all times . .
Immediately submit proposed procedures to correct or remedy unplanned occurrences .
.D Displacement Monitoring Perform an initial survey to record the location of the existing structure before starting work .
Monitor and record vertical and horizontal displacements of the temporary supports and the existing structure .
Use vandalresistant displacement monitoring equipment .
Perform monitoring continuously during jacking activities and at least weekly during removal and reconstruction activities .
Make monitoring records available at the job site during normal work hours .
Monitoring records must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
As a minimum monitor the existing structure at the supported bent and at the midspan of both adjoining spans .
Locate control points at each location near the center and at both edges of the superstructure .
As a minimum record elevations at the following times .
Before starting jacking activities .
Immediately after completing jacking .
After completing bridge removal .
Before connecting the reconstructed or retrofitted superstructure to the substructure .
After removing temporary supports .
MATERIALS .A General Manufactured assemblies must comply with section .Bd .
.B Design Criteria The Engineer does not authorize temporary support designs based on allowable stresses greater than those specified in section .B .
If falsework loads are imposed on temporary supports the temporary supports must also satisfy the deflection criteria in section .B .
The temporary support system must support the initial jacking loads and the minimum temporary support design loads and forces shown .
Adjust vertical design loads for the weight of the temporary supports and jacking system construction equipment loads and additional loads imposed by jacking activities .
Construction equipment loads must be at least psf of deck surface area of the frame involved .
Temporary supports must resist the described lateral design forces applied at the point where the column to be removed meets the superstructure .
If the temporary support lateral stiffness exceeds the described minimum stiffness increase the lateral design forces to be compatible with the temporary support stiffness .
Place temporary supports resisting transverse lateral loads within of the span length from the existing bent .
Place temporary supports resisting longitudinal lateral loads within the frame where columns are to be removed .
You may use the permanent piles as part of the temporary support foundation .
Do not move or adjust permanent piles from the locations shown .
If you install permanent piles longer than described to support the temporary supports above the top of the footing and later cut off the piles at their final elevation you must use shear devices adequate to transfer all pile reactions into the footing .
Design temporary support footings to carry the loads imposed without exceeding the estimated soil bearing values or anticipated settlements .
You must determine soil bearing values .
Where temporary supports are placed on the deck of an existing structure .
Temporary supports must bear either ..
Directly on girder stems or bent caps of the supporting structure .. On falsework sills that transmit the load to the stems or cap without overstressing any member of the new or existing structure SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .
Temporary supports must not induce permanent forces into the completed structure or produce cracking. . Place additional temporary supports beneath the existing structure where temporary support loads are imposed on the existing structure .
Design and construct the additional temporary supports to support all loads from the upper structure and construction activities .
Provide additional bracing as required to withstand all imposed loads during each phase of temporary support erection and removal .
Include wind loads complying with section .B in the design of additional bracing .
Mechanically connect the existing structure to the temporary supports and the temporary supports to their foundations .
Mechanical connections must be capable of resisting the lateral design forces .
Friction forces developed between the existing structure and temporary supports are not considered an effective mechanical connection and must not be used to reduce lateral forces .
Design mechanical connections to accommodate adjustments to the temporary support frame during use .
If the concrete is to be prestressed design temporary supports to support changes to the loads caused by prestressing forces .
Temporary supports must comply with the specifications for falsework in section .B. . CONSTRUCTION Where described install temporary crash cushion modules under section .
before starting temporary support activities .
Remove crash cushion modules when authorized .
Construct temporary supports under the specifications for falsework in section .C .
Equip each jack with a pressure gauge or load cell for determining the jacking force .
Each pressure gauge must have an accurately reading dial at least inches in diameter .
Each load cell must be provided with an indicator to determine the jacking force .
Provide a redundant system of supports during jacking activities .
The redundant system must include stacks of steel plates added as necessary to maintain the redundant supports at each jack location within inch of the jacking sill or corbels .
Before starting bridge removal work at a location being supported the temporary support system must apply a force to the structure that is equal to the initial jacking load or the dead load shown and hold that load until all initial compression and settlement of the system is completed .
Apply jacking loads simultaneously .
Control and monitor jacking operations to prevent distortion and stresses that would damage the structure .
Maintain total vertical displacements at control points to less than inch from elevations recorded before jacking or as authorized .
Stop jacking activities if unanticipated displacements cracking or other damage occurs .
Apply corrective measures before resuming jacking activities .
After reconstruction activities the monitored control points must not deviate by more than inch from the initial vertical survey elevations or other authorized elevations .
Remove temporary supports under the specifications for falsework in section .D .
If traffic is carried on the structure on temporary supports do not release temporary supports until the supported concrete has attained percent of the described strength .
Remove attachments from the existing structure .
Restore concrete surfaces to original conditions except where permanent alterations are shown. . PAYMENT Payment for crash cushion modules is not included in the payment for temporary support .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES TEMPORARY DECKING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for temporary decking for joint or deck reconstruction .
If you are unable to complete bridge reconstruction activities before the bridge is to be opened to traffic furnish and maintain temporary decking until that portion of the work is complete .
Temporary decking must comply with the specifications for existing structures in section and the falsework specifications in section .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit shop drawings for temporary decking .
Include the following .
Description location and value of all loads .
Details of the connection between the temporary decking and the existing structure .
Storage location of equipment and materials that allows for shift of work and placement of temporary decking within the time allowed .
Construction sequence and schedule details .
Cure time for concrete to be placed under a steel plate system .
Details for removing temporary decking and restoring the existing structure Shop drawings must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
.D Quality Assurance Temporary decking must comply with the falsework specifications in section .B section .B and the following .
For the design loading shown deflection must not exceed of the temporary decking span . .
Temporary decking must have a uniform surface with a coefficient of friction of at least .
when measured under California Test . . Steel plate systems must be mechanically connected to the existing structure and adjacent approaches .
If a steel plate spans a joint the mechanical connection must accommodate at least percent of the movement rating shown for that joint . .
Temporary decking must not overstress induce permanent forces into or produce cracking in the existing structure. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Temporary decking must consist of one of the following .
Steel plate system that spans the incomplete work. . Falsework with an asphalt concrete surface that spans the incomplete work .
Do not use falsework with an asphalt concrete surface to cover deck concrete that has not cured or to cover partially installed joint materials .
Construct temporary decking under the specifications for falsework in section except the first paragraph of section .D does not apply .
If there is a horizontal gap of more than inch or an elevation difference of more than inch between the temporary decking and the adjacent deck install tapers up to and away from the temporary decking .
Use the ratio for tapers specified in the special provisions .
If the temporary decking does not extend the entire width of the roadway taper the sides of the temporary decking at a horizontal vertical ratio .
Material for tapers must comply with section .B .
Cure tapers at least hours before allowing traffic on the temporary decking .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES For ramp locations tapers may be installed at horizontal vertical up to and away from the temporary decking .
If the temporary decking does not extend the entire width of the roadway taper the sides of the temporary decking at horizontal vertical .
Material used at these locations must be sufficiently rigid to support traffic .
If unanticipated displacements cracking or other damage occurs to the existing structure or to any new components installed in or adjacent to the deck stop work on the deck and perform corrective measures .
Edges of steel plate systems must be in full contact with the existing deck and the adjacent approach slab .
If used shims must be securely attached to the plate .
For falsework with an asphalt concrete cover asphalt concrete must be at least inches thick and compacted in place .
Do not allow traffic on deck concrete until it has attained the design compressive strength shown .
For RSC do not allow traffic on deck concrete until it has cured at least hours .
When temporary decking is no longer needed remove temporary decking materials and connections from the existing structure as soon as possible .
Restore modifications to the existing structure except where permanent alterations are shown. . PAYMENT Not Used JACKING SUPERSTRUCTURE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for lowering the bridge superstructure using a jacking support system .
You must design and construct the temporary jacking support system for the superstructure and determine the methods and equipment for lowering the superstructure .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit shop drawings with design calculations for the jacking support system .
Submit copies of shop drawings and copies of design calculations .
Include with the submittal .
Descriptions and values of all loads including construction equipment loads .
Descriptions of equipment to be used .
Details and calculations for jacking and supporting the structure .
Stress sheets anchor bolt layouts shop details and erection and removal plans for the temporary supports .
Assumed soil bearing values and design stresses for support footings including anticipated foundation settlement .
Details for bracing required during erection and removal .
Details of the displacement monitoring system including equipment location of control points and methods and schedule of taking measurements .
Details for jacking the structure if settlement occurs Calculations must show a summary of computed stresses in the jacking support system and the connections between the support system and the bridge superstructure .
The computed stresses must include the effect of the jacking sequence .
Calculations must include a lateral stiffness assessment of the jacking support system .
Shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
For jacking support systems over railways comply with any additional requirements of the railway company involved .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .D Quality Assurance .D General Calibrate each jack within months of use and after each repair .
Each jack and its gauge must be calibrated as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be at the final jacking force and accompanied by a certified calibration chart .
Each load cell must be calibrated .
Calibration must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
.D Displacement Monitoring Monitor and record vertical and horizontal displacements of the jacking support system and the existing structure .
Use vandalresistant displacement monitoring equipment .
Perform monitoring continuously during jacking activities .
Make monitoring records available at the job site during normal work hours .
Monitoring records must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
As a minimum monitor the existing structure at the supported bent and at the midspan of both adjoining spans .
Locate control points at each location near the center and at both edges of the superstructure .
As a minimum record elevations at the following times .
Before starting jacking activities .
Immediately after completing jacking .
Before connecting the superstructure to the substructure .
After removing jacking support system .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Design Criteria The jacking support system must resist the structure dead load and lateral design forces shown plus any additional loads from jacking equipment and activities .
You must determine soil bearing values for support footings .
If the jacking support stiffness exceeds the specified minimum stiffness increase the lateral design forces to be compatible with the jacking support lateral stiffness .
Systems involving modifications to the bridge that impair the structural integrity intended serviceability or design capacity of the bridge are not allowed. . CONSTRUCTION Construct the jacking support system under the specifications for falsework in section .C .
Equip each jack with a pressure gauge or load cell for determining the jacking force .
Each pressure gauge must have an accurately reading dial at least inches in diameter .
Each load cell must be provided with an indicator to determine the jacking force .
Provide a redundant system of supports during jacking activities .
The redundant system must include stacks of steel plates added as necessary to maintain the redundant supports within inch of the jacking sill or corbels .
Before removing falsework the jacking support system must apply a force to the structure that is equal to the initial jacking load or the dead load shown and hold that load until all initial compression and settlement of the system is completed .
Lower the superstructure uniformly to the position shown .
Lower the superstructure such that no distortion occurs that would damage the superstructure .
Distribute the load uniformly across each hinge abutment or bent .
If authorized place galvanized shims as necessary to provide uniform loading at bearing pads .
Stop jacking activities if unanticipated displacements cracking or other damage occurs .
Corrective measures must be authorized before use .
After lowering remove the jacking support system under the specifications for falsework in section .D .
Remove attachments required for lowering from the superstructure and apply the specified finish to concrete surfaces .
SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURES .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED PILING GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing piles .
Earthwork for reinforced concrete extensions must comply with section .
.B Definitions control zone Zone that has the same subsurface profile and engineering properties as a corresponding support location .
nominal driving resistance Sum of nominal resistance required to resist the factored axial loads and driving resistance from unsuitable or scourable penetrated soil layers that do not contribute to the design resistance .
nominal resistance Design capacity required to resist the factored axial loads .
.C Submittals .C General Before handling or installing piles at a location closer than the length of the pile being handled or installed to the edge of a traveled way open to public use submit a work plan of the measures to be used to provide for the safety of traffic and the public .
Submit a VECP for revisions to specified tip elevations shown or installation methods .
.C Test Borings If test borings are specified in the special provisions submit the log of test borings and the test boring report upon completion of all test borings .
Submit copies of the test boring report and the log of test borings to OSD Documents Unit .
The submittal must comply with the specifications for shop drawings .
Notify the Engineer of the submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
If corrections to the submittal are required submit copy of the corrected test boring report and the log of test borings to OSD Documents Unit .
The test boring report must include .
Summary of drilling methods drilling equipment drill platforms and drilling difficulties encountered .
Location map of the surveyed position of the test borings relative to the new pile locations in the California Coordinate System and bridge stationing .
Bore hole surveying notes .
Photographs of rock cores .
Copies of original daily drilling notes .D Quality Assurance .D General Piling must have sufficient length to attain the specified tip elevation shown and extend into the pile cap or footing .
.D Determination of Length You may conduct additional foundation investigation including installing and axial load testing of additional nonproduction indicator piling and performing test borings .
Locations of additional foundation testing must be authorized .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before starting additional foundation testing .
Complete additional foundation investigation before requesting revised specified pile tip elevations or revisions to the described installation methods .
The following revisions are not authorized SECTION PILING .
Specified installation methods if settlement or lateral loads control the design tip elevation .
Specified pile tip elevation above the design tip elevation shown for settlement or lateral loads .
Specified pile tip elevation if the tip elevation is controlled by liquefaction or scour The pile structural capacity design is based on the nominal strength as defined in Article .. of the Caltrans Bridge Design Specifications or the nominal resistance as defined in Article of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
Indicator compression pile load testing must comply with ASTM DDM .
The pile must sustain the st compression test load applied that is equal to the nominal driving resistance with no more than inch total vertical movement at the top of the pile measured relative to the top of the pile before the start of compression load testing .
Indicator tension pile load testing must comply with ASTM D except do not use the loading apparatus described as Tensile Load Applied by Hydraulic Jacks Acting Upward at One End of Test Beams .
The pile must sustain the st tension test load applied that is equal to the nominal resistance in tension shown with no more than inch total vertical movement at the top of the pile measured relative to the top of the pile before the start of tension load testing .
Remove indicator piling as specified for removing portions of bridges .
.D Load Test Piles If load test piles are shown complete load testing of each load test pile before drilling holes casting piling cutting piling to length driving piling and fabricating reinforcing steel cages for any piles represented by the load test pile .
Notify the Engineer at least days before drilling or driving piles to be load tested .
Except in cofferdams the bottom of the footing excavation must be level and dewatered before pile load testing .
The excavation must be kept dewatered during load testing .
Install load test piles with the same type of equipment to be used for installation of production piles .
Load test piles must comply with the specifications for piling as described .
Locate load test piles such that they may be cut off and become a part of the completed structure .
Remove load test and anchor piles not incorporated in the completed structure as specified for removing portions of bridges .
For load test anchorages in piles used as anchor piles .
HS threaded steel rods must comply with ASTM AAM for uncoated deformed Type II HS steel bars including the supplementary requirements except the maximum weight requirement does not apply .
Steel plates must comply with ASTM AAM Grade .
Anchor nuts must hold the HS steel rods at a load producing a stress of not less than percent of the specified ultimate tensile strength of the HS steel rod .
Pipe couplings and fittings must be commercially available materials of the types and ratings shown You may use additional cementitious material in load test and anchor piles .
You may use Type III cement in any load test and anchor pile not used as a part of the completed structure .
Furnish labor materials tools equipment and incidentals as required to assist the Department in the installation operation and removal of Departmentfurnished steel load test beams jacks bearing plates drills and other test equipment .
This is change order work .
The Department performs testing of load test piles when the concrete in the load test and anchor piles has developed a compressive strength of at least psi .
Allow the Department days to perform pile load tests at each test location .
Allow an additional days for the Department to revise the specified tip elevations .
SECTION PILING .D Dynamic Monitoring Section .D applies if dynamic monitoring of driven piling is specified in the special provisions .
The Department determines which piles from a control zone or support location receive dynamic monitoring .
The Department dynamically monitors driven piles using Departmentfurnished dynamic pile analyzer monitoring instruments .
Section .Ac does not apply to driven piles if dynamic monitoring is required .
The Department conducts penetration and bearing analyses of dynamically monitored piles and develops bearing acceptance criteria curves for these piles .
Penetration and bearing analyses are based on a wave equation analysis .
Except for load test and anchor piles do not install production piles until the Engineer provides you with the bearing acceptance criteria curves for any piles represented by the dynamically monitored piles .
Piles to be dynamically monitored must be .
Available to the Department at least business days before driving. . Safely supported at least inches off the ground in a horizontal position on at least support blocks .
If requested rotate the piles on the blocks . .
Positioned such that the Department has safe access to the entire pile length and circumference for the installation of anchorages and control marks for monitoring .
Prepare and drive piles to be dynamically monitored in the following sequence .
Before driving rotate and align the pile in the driving leads as ordered by the Department . .
Temporarily suspend driving operations for approximately minutes when the pile tip is feet above the specified tip elevation shown. . During the minute suspension bolt the pound instrument package securely to plugs or expansion anchors previously installed in the pile by the Department .
Connect electrical cables to the instrument package as ordered by the Department. . Resume driving operations as ordered by the Department .
Suspend driving operations approximately foot above the specified tip elevation . .
Remove the cables and instrument package from the pile and deliver them to the Engineer . .
The following business day install the instrument package on the pile and attach the cables and resume driving the pile to the specified tip elevation . .
Remove the cables and instruments from the monitored pile and deliver them to the Engineer .
Replace in kind any cables or instruments that are damaged by your activities .
After the pile has been dynamically monitored .
Allow days for the Department to revise the specified tip elevations and to provide bearing acceptance criteria curves .
If pile load testing is performed in addition to dynamic monitoring allow days for the Department to revise the specified tip elevations and to provide bearing acceptance criteria curves .D Test Borings Section .D applies if test borings are specified in the special provisions .
Notify the Engineer at least days before drilling test borings .
Drill test borings under the job site supervision of with the log of test borings stamped by and with the test boring submittal signed by a geologist or civil engineer who is registered in the State and has at least years of geotechnical engineering experience with deep foundations in both soil and rock .
Drill test borings at the center of each pile location shown .
Drill test borings by rotary drilling methods to a depth of at least feet below the specified tip elevation shown .
Test borings must be at least inches in diameter .
SECTION PILING Perform standard penetration tests in all soil types under ASTM D for each test boring at foot maximum intervals until bedrock is encountered blows with no discernible sampler advancement is observed or ordered .
Core the bedrock .
Continuously with at least percent core recovery .
Rock must not be logged from drill cuttings .
Rock quality designation must be made at foot maximum intervals . .
Using an outer and inner core barrel drilling system .
The outer core barrel must be fitted with a diamond impregnated or polycrystalline drill bit and have an outside diameter of at least inches .
The split inner tube core barrel must have an inside diameter of at least inches .
Photograph the rock cores .
Before removal from the split inner tube barrels and placement into core boxes .
After core boxes are filled and before boxes are removed from the drilling platform Rock core photographs must be in color by inches and labeled with the borehole number sample elevation scale and date and time of photograph .
Place the rock cores in rock core boxes labeled as specified in the Soil and Rock Logging Classification and Presentation Manual .
Include the support or pile location .
Store rock core boxes on or near the job site at an authorized location .
Preserve and secure the rock core samples in a weatherprotected facility until notified by the Engineer .
Dispose of rock cores or transport them to Geotechnical Services as ordered .
The log of test borings and the classification and description of soils and rock must comply with the Soil and Rock Logging Classification and Presentation Manual available at the Geotechnical Services website .
Use the same version of the Soil and Rock Logging Classification and Presentation Manual shown .
If no version is shown use the most current version of the manual .
After the test boring report and the log of test borings have been authorized allow days for the Engineer to notify you of confirmation of or revisions to the specified pile tip elevations .
Do not fabricate or manufacture to length steel pipe piling permanent steel casing micropiling and filled and unfilled steel casing until you have been notified. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION If the Contract allows the use of more than pile type use the same type of pile for all piles within each individual footing .
Dispose of drill cuttings under section .B .
Reinforced concrete extensions must comply with section . . PAYMENT Load test piles and adjacent anchor piles are paid for as the type or class of piling shown in the Bid Item List .
The payment quantity is the length used in the load testing .
Reinforced concrete extensions are paid for as furnish piling or CIDH concrete piling of the type of piling on which it is constructed .
The payment quantity is the length measured from the plane of pile cutoff to the top of the extension .
DRIVEN PILING .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for installing driven piles .
SECTION PILING Epoxycoated bar reinforcing steel used for pile anchors must comply with section .. Furnish piling includes .
Furnishing piles to the job site .
Splicing piles .
Furnishing and installing pile anchors and lugs Driving piles includes .
Driving and cutting the piles off at the elevations shown .
Furnishing special driving tips or heavier sections of steel piles .
Drilling holes or predrilling holes through embankments .
Disposing of material resulting from drilling holes or predrilling holes .A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General For pile driving hammers with no way of visually observing the ram stroke submit a printed readout as an informational submittal showing hammer energy during driving operations .
.Ab Driving System Submittal Section .Ab applies if a driving system submittal is specified in the special provisions .
The driving system submittal must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Allow days for the Departments review .
Allow an additional days for the review of any resubmittals .
Submit a revised driving system submittal if the hammers change from those shown in the submittal .
For the driving system submittal perform driveability studies as follows .
Model the proposed driving system including hammers cap blocks and pile cushions based on a wave equation analysis. . Use an authorized computer program . .
If the driveability analysis hammers indicate that openended pipe pile and steel shell penetration rates are less than foot per blows and the driving stresses exceed percent of the yield strength of the pipe and steel shell include assumptions for drilling through the center of the piles and shells . .
If a follower is used include an analysis of the driving system with the follower and an analysis of the driving system without the follower .
Include in the driving system submittal .
Results of the driveability analysis showing that the proposed driving systems will install piles to the specified tip elevation and nominal driving resistance shown .
Driving systems must generate sufficient energy to drive the piles with compressive and tensile stresses not more than percent of the yield strength of the pile as driven .
Results must include .. Pile compressive stress versus blows per foot .
.. Pile tensile stress versus blows per foot .
.. Nominal driving resistance versus blows per foot . .
Complete description of ..
Soil parameters used including soil quake and damping coefficients skin friction distribution and ratio of shaft resistance to total resistance .
.. Assumptions made regarding the formation of soil plugs drilling through the center of open ended steel shells and the use of closure plates shoes and other tip treatment . .
List of the hammer operation parameters assumed in the analysis including fuel settings stroke limitations and hammer efficiency .
SECTION PILING .
Copies of the test results from any previous pile load tests dynamic monitoring and all driving records used in the analyses . .
Completed Pile and Driving Data form .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Quality Control Reserved .Ac Department Acceptance For pile acceptance the required number of hammer blows in the last foot of driving is determined using the following formula Ru .
x Er x log .
x N where Ru nominal driving resistance kips Er manufacturers rating for footpounds of energy developed by the hammer at the observed field drop height N number of hammer blows in the last foot maximum value allowed for N is .B Materials Not Used .C Construction .C General If the Engineer revises the pile tip elevation for driven piles the work involved in furnishing splicing and driving the additional length of pile is change order work .
If you are ordered to place additional lugs on steel piles furnishing and placing these lugs is change order work .
.C Driving Equipment Install driven piles using an authorized impact hammer .
The impact hammer must be .
Steam hydraulic air or diesel .
Able to develop sufficient energy to drive the pile at a penetration rate of not less than inch per blow at the nominal driving resistance shown Do not use vibratory hammers oscillators or rotators to install driven piles .
Hammers with an external combustion engine that are not single action must have a transducer that records ram velocity .
Double acting diesel hammers with internal combustion engines must have a transducer that records bounce chamber pressure .
Steam or air hammers must have boiler or air capacity of at least that specified by the manufacturer .
The boiler or air compressor must be equipped with an accurate pressure gauge .
Maintain the valve mechanism and other parts of steam air or diesel hammers such that the length of stroke and number of blows per minute for which the hammer is designed is attained .
Do not use inefficient steam air or diesel hammers .
You may use followers or underwater hammers for driving piles if authorized .
If using a follower or underwater hammer verify its efficiency by furnishing the st pile in each bent or footing sufficiently long and drive the pile without the use of a follower or underwater hammer .
SECTION PILING .C Drilling If necessary to attain the specified tip elevation shown and if authorized you may drill holes with a diameter not greater than the least dimension of the pile to the specified depth before driving the piles .
.C Predrilled Holes For piles to be driven through embankments constructed under the Contract drive piles through predrilled holes where the depth of the new embankment at the pile location is in excess of feet .
The hole diameter must be at least inches larger than the greatest dimension of the pile cross section .
After driving the pile fill the space around the pile to the ground surface with dry sand or pea gravel .
.C Driving Use driving heads or driving blocks that hold the pile in position directly under the hammer when driving .
Protect the heads of driven piles from direct impact of the hammer with a cushion driving block .
Maintain the cushion in good condition during the entire driving operation .
Arrange the cushion driving block such that any reinforcing bars projecting above the pile are not displaced or damaged during driving .
Provide special driving tips or heavier pile sections or take other authorized measures to prevent damage to steel piles steel shells or steel casings during installation .
If you encounter obstructions to driving provide special driving tips or heavier pile sections subexcavate below the bottom of footing or take other measures to prevent damage to the pile during driving .
This is change order work .
Drive piles to the position and line shown .
The Engineer rejects piles materially out of line .
Dispose of rejected piles that interfere with the work .
You must remove or cut off and abandon in place any rejected piles that do not interfere with the work .
Except for piles to be load tested and sheet piles drive piles to at least the nominal driving resistance and the specified tip elevation shown .
Drive piles to be load tested and sheet piles to the specified tip elevation shown .
If the pile nominal driving resistance is not shown drive the pile to the nominal resistance shown .
.C Pile Cutoff Cut off driven piles at the elevations shown and anchor them to the structure .
Do not damage the pile below cutoff .
Dispose of the cutoff lengths of piles .
.D Payment Driven piling is paid for as furnish piling and drive pile of the class type size or alternative shown in the Bid Item List .
If you are ordered to place additional lugs on steel piles the Department does not pay for the additional work involved in driving piles due to these additional lugs .
The payment quantity for furnish piling is the length measured along the longest side of the pile from the specified tip elevation shown to the plane of pile cutoff. . STEEL PIPE PILING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing steel pipe piles .
.A Definitions shop welding Welding performed at a plant on the Departments Authorized Facility Audit List .
field welding Welding not performed at a plant on the Departments Authorized Facility Audit List .
SECTION PILING .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings for attaching handling devices to steel pipe piles .
Shop drawings must include the locations handling and fitting device details and connection details .
Allow days for review of the shop drawings .
.Ac Inspection Request Form Submit an inspection request form at least days before performing any welding of Class N steel pipe piles .
.Ad Certificate of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance for steel pipe piles .
The certificate of compliance must be signed by the plants QC representative .
The QC representative must be on record with the Departments Office of Structural Materials .
Include with the certificate of compliance .
Statement that the materials and workmanship comply with the Contract and the required tests and inspections have been performed as described. . Certified mill test reports for each heat number of steel used in pipe piles being furnished. . Test reports for tensile chemical and any specified NDT .
Test reports must be based on test samples taken from the base metal steel coil or from the manufactured or fabricated piles . .
Calculated carbon equivalent .
The carbon equivalent may be shown on the mill test report .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Quality Control .Abi General Reserved .Abii Plant Audit Fabricate steel pipe piles at a plant on the Departments Authorized Facility Audit List .
.Abiii Nondestructive Testing .AbiiiA General Section .Abiii applies to NDT of Class N steel pipe piles .
Except for welding performed under API L the acceptance criteria for RT and UT must comply with AWS D. for cyclically loaded nontubular connections for welds subject to tensile stress .
Perform NDT on backing ring welds using RT or UT for a material thickness of inch or greater or using RT for a material thickness less than inch .
.AbiiiB Shop Welds Section .AbiiiB applies to NDT of shop welds .
For welding performed under API L . Submit a DVD or VHS videocassette recording of the actual material testing if radiological testing is used or the actual radiographic film if film radiography is used .
Submit the recording before shipping the material from the plant . .
If film radiography is used to inspect pipe ends or repairs the transmitted film density must be from .
to .
in the area of interest weld base metal and image quality indicators. . Reinspect repaired defects using the NDT method that originally detected the defect except you may use film radiography for the inspection of repairs if the defect was originally detected using radiological testing .
SECTION PILING For welding performed under AWS D. .
Perform NDT on percent of each longitudinal circumferential or spiral weld using RT or UT . .
If repairs are required in a portion of the tested weld ..
Perform NDT on the repaired portion .
..
Perform additional NDT on untested areas on each side of the repaired portion .
The length of additional NDT on each side of the repaired portion must equal percent of the pipes outside circumference .
.. After this additional percent of NDT is performed and if additional repairs are required determine and record the total cumulative repair lengths from all NDT .
If the cumulative weld repair length is equal to or more than percent of the pipes outside circumference then perform NDT on the entire weld .
.AbiiiC Field Welds Section .AbiiiC applies to NDT of field welds .
Perform NDT on percent of each field weld by RT or UT at locations selected by the Engineer .
The Engineer may select several locations on a given splice .
The cover pass must be ground smooth at locations to be tested .
Personnel performing UT for field welds must have their qualifications verified before performing NDT by both written and practical exams .
For UT qualification procedures go to the METS website .
If repairs are required in a portion of the tested weld .
Perform NDT on the repaired portion . .
Perform additional NDT on untested areas on each side of the repaired portion .
The length of additional NDT on each side of the repaired portion must equal percent of the pipes outside circumference. . After this additional percent of NDT is performed and if additional repairs are required determine and record the total cumulative repair lengths from all NDT .
If the cumulative weld repair length is equal to or more than percent of the pipes outside circumference then perform NDT on the entire weld .
.Ac Department Acceptance Reserved .B Materials .B General .Ba General Piles not specified as Class N in the special provisions must comply with the specifications for Class R. The carbon equivalent of steel in steel pipe piles must not exceed .
percent .
Use the following formula to calculate the carbon equivalent CE C Mn Si Cr Mo V Ni Cu where CE carbon equivalent percent Sulfur content of steel in steel pipe piles must not exceed .
percent .
Seams in steel pipe piles must be CJP welds .
For welding and prequalifying base metal under Table .
of AWS D. treat steel pipe piles complying with ASTM A as either ASTM AM Grade or ASTM AM Grade .
Section does not apply to shop welds in steel pipe piles fabricated at a plant on the Departments Authorized Facility Audit List .
SECTION PILING For groove welds using submerged arc welding from both sides without backgouging qualify the WPS under Table .
of AWS D ..
Butt welded seams subsequently formed including skelp end welds must be percent ultrasonically tested in the final formed and welded condition .
The acceptance criteria for UT must comply with one of the following .
API L for APIlicensed facilities .
AWS D. for cyclically loaded nontubular connections for welds subject to tensile stress Except for tack welding do not use gas metal arc welding for welding of steel pipe piles .
If gas metal arc welding is used for tack welding do not deposit filler metal by short circuiting transfer .
.Bb Circumferential Welds Welds must comply with AWS D .. Circumferential welds must be CJP welds .
Locate circumferential welds at least inches away from a skelp end weld .
Backing rings must comply with the following .
Minimum thickness of the backing ring must be inch and the backing ring must be continuous. . Splices in the backing ring must be made by CJP welds .
These welds must be completed and inspected including performing any required NDT before final insertion into a pipe end . .
Attach backing rings to pipe ends using the minimum size and spacing of tack welds that will securely hold the backing ring in place .
Tack weld in the root area of the weld splice .
Remove and replace cracked tack welds before subsequent weld passes. . Gap between the backing ring and the steel pipe wall must not be greater than inch .
You may offset localized portion of the backing ring fitup by a gap equal to or less than inch if the localized portion is equal to or less than percent of the outside circumference of the pipe first seal welded using shielded metal arc E or E electrodes and marked such that it can be referenced during any required NDT . .
Backing rings must have enough width such that the backing ring does not interfere with the interpretation of the NDT .
For steel pipe piles with an outside diameter greater than inches and a wall thickness greater than inch you may increase the root opening tolerances to a maximum of inch .
If splicing steel pipe piles using a circumferential weld the piles must comply with the fitup requirements of clause of AWS D .. .Bc Tolerances Dimensional tolerances of steel pipe piles must comply with the following .
Outside diameter .
percent of the outside diameter shown .
Wall thickness to percent of the nominal wall thickness shown .
Straightness .
percent over the length of the pipe .Bd Markings Except for steel pipe piles marked with the API monogram mark each length of the steel pipe pile as follows .
Name and location of the piling manufacturer .
State Contract number for Class N only .
Heat number .
Welding process .
Outer diameter nominal wall thickness minimum wall thickness and length .
Year piling was produced .
Markings specified for each class of steel pipe piling Only Department authorized audited facilities are authorized to mark piling for use on a Contract .
SECTION PILING .Be Substitutions Reserved .B Class N Steel Pipe Piling Section .B applies to steel pipe piles specified as Class N in the special provisions .
Class N steel pipe piles must comply with one of the following .
API L minimum Grade X PSL and must be ..
Manufactured welded tested and inspected at a plant licensed to apply the API monogram ..
Marked with the API monogram on each length of steel pipe .
ASTM A Grade and the following .. Welding must comply with AWS D .. ..
Groove welds using submerged arc welding from both sides without backgouging require a procedure qualification record witnessed by the Engineer .
.. At the start of fabrication and for each thickness of the piling furnish macroetch crosssection test specimens prepared under clause .. of AWS D ..
Remove specimens at locations selected by the Engineer and in the presence of the Engineer .
Test specimens must indicate that the weld is free of cracks and has thorough fusion between adjacent layers of weld metal and between weld metal and base metal .
Undercut must not exceed inch .
..
Weighing of individual pipe is not required as specified in ASTM A .
.. Each length of pipe must be marked Caltrans Class N A .
.B Class R Steel Pipe Piling Section .B applies to Class R steel pipe piles .
Class R steel pipe piles must comply with one of the following .
API L minimum Grade X PSL and must be ..
Manufactured welded tested and inspected at a plant licensed to apply the API monogram except hydrostatic testing flattening tests and the API monogram are not required ..
Marked Caltrans Class R API on each length of steel pipe .
ASTM A Grade and the following .. Arc welding processes must comply with AWS D. ..
Groove welds using submerged arc welding from both sides without backgouging require a procedure qualification record witnessed by the Engineer .. Underfill is not allowed .. For electric resistance welded pipe remove the outer diameter flash to a maximum of inch .. Weld reinforcement must not exceed inch ..
Weighing of individual pipe is not required as specified in ASTM A .. Each length of pipe must be marked Caltrans Class R A .C Construction .C General You may retap steel pipe piles to prevent pile setup if the field welded splice remains at least feet above the work platform until the splice has been authorized .
When attaching handling devices to steel pipe piles align the welds parallel to the axis of the pile .
Welds must comply with the specifications for attaching backing rings in section .Bb .
Permanent bolted connections must be corrosion resistant .
.C Field Welds Field welds must comply with section .Bb .
Field welds made in the horizontal position where the longitudinal pipe axis is vertical must be single bevel groove welds .
Do not water quench field welds .
Allow welds to cool unassisted to ambient temperature .
SECTION PILING Remove ends of steel pipe piles to be spliced that have been damaged during driving to a sound and uniform section .
Pipe ends must comply with the tolerances for diameter edge alignment and roundness in section .B .
Pipe ends must be field cut using automated guided cutting equipment .
Do not use manual flame cutting .
.D Payment Not Used .
STRUCTURAL SHAPE STEEL PILING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing structural shape steel piling .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a certified material test report and a certificate of compliance that includes a statement that the materials and workmanship comply with the Contract and the required tests and inspections have been performed as described .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Structural shape steel piles must comply with ASTM AAM ASTM AAM ASTM AAM or ASTM AAM .
Splices must be CJP groove welds complying with AWS D .. .C Construction Field splices must be CJP groove welds complying with AWS D .. .D Payment Not Used .
PRECAST PRESTRESSED CONCRETE PILING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing PC PS concrete piles .
PC PS concrete piles must comply with sections and .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals If requested submit copies of shop drawings for PC PS concrete piles for use during construction .
Include the following details in the shop drawings .
Pile dimensions .
Material type .
Prestressing methods .
Tendon arrangement and working stresses .
Any addition or rearrangement of reinforcement from that shown Section .C does not apply to prestressing systems used for PC PS concrete piles .
Authorization of the shop drawings is not required .
SECTION PILING .A Quality Assurance The Department inspects PC PS concrete piles at the fabrication site .
Notify the Department at least days before fabricating any piles .
Materials to be used must be available to the Department for testing .
.B Materials .B General Threaded inserts and other fittings must comply with section .
.B Fabrication Place concrete for PC PS concrete piles in smooth mortartight forms .
Support the forms to prevent appreciable deformation or settlement during placing or curing .
Finish unformed surfaces to a smooth surface .
Piles in a corrosive environment must be steam or water cured under section ..
If piles in a corrosive environment are steam cured do one of the following .
Keep the piles continuously wet for at least days .
The days includes the holding and steam curing periods . .
Apply curing compound under section .B immediately after steam curing .
If piles to be placed in a corrosive environment are water cured the piles must be kept continuously wet by the application of water as specified in section .B .
When removed from the form the pile must .
Have true smooth even surfaces free from honeycombs and voids .
Be straight such that a line stretched from butt to tip on any pile face is not more than inch from the face of the pile at any point Except for PC PS concrete piles to be placed in a corrosive environment remove lifting anchors and fill holes under section .F .
For PC PS concrete piles to be placed in a corrosive environment remove lifting anchors to a depth of at least inch below the concrete surface .
Fill holes with epoxy adhesive before delivering piles to the job site .
The epoxy adhesive must comply with section .C .
If using pile anchor dowels anchor the dowels in cast or drilled holes in the concrete pile with neat cement paste .
The diameter of the holes must be the minimum consistent with placing the neat cement paste and dowel .
Use methods for drilling holes that do not damage the concrete reinforcement or prestressing steel .
The drilled hole must be free of dust and other deleterious material when placing the neat cement paste .
Neat cement paste and dowel must completely fill the drilled hole .
The dowels must be left undisturbed until the paste has hardened .
.B Substitutions Reserved .C Construction .C General PC PS concrete piles must not be driven until at least days after casting .
.C Handling When handling or transporting PC PS concrete piles provide slings or other equipment to avoid bending the pile or cracking the concrete .
Replace piles materially damaged in handling or during driving .
.C Splicing Precast Prestressed Concrete Piles Reserved SECTION PILING .D Payment Not Used .
STEEL SHEET PILING .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing permanent steel sheet piles .
.B Materials Steel sheet piles must be interlocking steel sheet complying with ASTM AAM .
The minimum section modulus per linear foot of wall must be the section modulus shown .
You may install used sheet piles if the piles are in good condition and no alterations have been made to reduce the section modulus .
Interlocks must be straight true and have no gouges or kinks .
Furnish piles in lengths measured from the specified tip elevation shown to the cutoff elevation .
Splices in steel sheet piles must be CJP welds complying with AWS D .. .C Construction Drive steel sheet piles to the specified tip elevation shown .
Remove and redrive or replace piles that are materially out of line .
.D Payment Not Used CASTINPLACE CONCRETE PILING .
GENERAL .A General Section .
includes general specifications for constructing CIP concrete piles .
CIP concrete piles include .
CIDH concrete piles .
CIDH concrete pile rock sockets .
Driven steel shells filled with concrete and reinforcement Concrete must comply with section .
Bar reinforcing steel must comply with section .
.B Materials .B General Unless otherwise shown concrete must have a minimum day compressive strength of psi .
Prequalify the concrete under section .Db .
The combined aggregate gradation must comply with the inch inch or inch maximum gradation specified in section .C .
.B Mass Concrete Section .B applies to CIP concrete piles with a diameter greater than feet .
The quantity of cementitious material must comply with the values shown in the following table Pile diameter D feet Maximum quantity of cementitious material lbcu yd D D SECTION PILING Cementitious material must comply with section .B except at least percent of the total cementitious material must be fly ash .
For piles with a diameter greater than feet concrete must comply with the specifications for mass concrete in section .
.C Construction Except for CIDH concrete piles constructed under slurry construct CIP concrete piles such that the excavation methods and the concrete placement procedures provide for placing the concrete against undisturbed material in a dry or dewatered hole .
Place and secure reinforcement symmetrically about the axis of the pile .
Securely block the reinforcement to provide the minimum clearance shown between the reinforcing steel cage and the sides of the drilled hole or steel shell .
Steel shells and dewatered drilled holes must be clean and free of water and debris before reinforcement and concrete are placed .
Provide a suitable light to the Engineer for inspecting the entire length of the steel shell or dewatered hole before placing reinforcement and concrete .
The methods used to place the concrete must prevent segregation .
Concrete must not be allowed to fall from a height greater than feet without the use of adjustable length pipes or tubes unless the flow of concrete is directed into the center of the hole and the concrete is not allowed to strike the reinforcement reinforcement bracing and other objects in the hole .
Vibrate concrete in the upper feet of CIP concrete piles .
After placing concrete cure the temporarily exposed surfaces of the CIP concrete piles under section .H .
.D Payment Bar reinforcing steel is not included in the payment for CIP concrete piling unless the CIP concrete piling is less than inches in diameter or for overhead sign structures standards and poles. . CASTINDRILLEDHOLE CONCRETE PILING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing CIDH concrete piles and CIDH concrete pile rock sockets .
.A Definitions dry hole .
Except for CIDH concrete piles specified as end bearing a drilled hole that .. Accumulates no more than inches of water in the bottom of the drilled hole during a period of hour without any pumping from the hole during the hour .
.. Has no more than inches of water in the bottom of the drilled hole immediately before placing concrete. . For CIDH concrete piles specified as end bearing a drilled hole free of water without the use of pumps .
.A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Pile Installation Plan Submit a pile installation plan .
Include complete descriptions details and supporting calculations for .
Concrete mix design certified test data and trial batch reports SECTION PILING .
Drilling or coring methods and equipment .
Proposed method for casing installation and removal if necessary .
Methods for placing positioning and supporting bar reinforcement .
Methods and equipment for determining ..
Depth of concrete ..
Theoretical volume of concrete to be placed including the effects on volume if casings are withdrawn .. Actual volume of concrete placed .
Methods and equipment for verifying the bottom of the drilled hole is clean before placing concrete .
Methods and equipment for preventing upward movement of reinforcement including the means of detecting and measuring upward movement during concrete placement operations .
Drilling sequence and concrete placement plan For concrete placed under slurry include complete descriptions details and supporting calculations in the pile installation plan for .
Concrete batching delivery and placing systems including time schedules and capacities .
Time schedules must include the time required for each concrete placing operation at each pile . .
Concrete placing rate calculations .
If requested base calculations on the initial pump pressures or static head on the concrete and losses throughout the placing system including anticipated head of slurry and concrete to be displaced . .
Suppliers test reports on the physical and chemical properties of the slurry and any proposed slurry chemical additives including SDSs. . Slurry testing equipment and procedures. . Methods of removal and disposal of excavation slurry and contaminated concrete including removal rates. . Methods and equipment for slurry agitating recirculating and cleaning .
.Ac Inspection Pipe Coupler Log If inspection pipes are required submit a log of the locations of inspection pipe couplers as an informational submittal upon completion of concrete placement in the hole .
.Ad Concrete Placement Log Submit the concrete placement log as an informational submittal within business day of completion of concrete placement in the hole .
.Ae Coring Logs and Concrete Cores If coring is performed under section .C submit coring logs and concrete cores .
.Af Testing Report If you perform testing on a rejected pile submit this additional information in a report .
The report must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Allow the Department days for review and analysis of this report .
.Ag Mitigation Plans For each rejected pile submit a mitigation plan for repair supplementation or replacement .
The mitigation plan must .
Comply with the specifications for shop drawings. . Be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
This requirement is waived for either of the following conditions ..
Proposed mitigation will be performed under the current Departmentpublished version of ADSC Standard Mitigation Plan A Basic Repair without exception or modification .
..
Engineer determines that the rejected pile does not require mitigation due to structural geotechnical or corrosion concerns and you elect to repair the pile using the current Departmentpublished version of ADSC Standard Mitigation Plan B Grouting Repair without exception or modification .
For the most recent version of the ADSC Standard Mitigation Plan go to SECTION PILING httpwww.dot.ca.govhqescgeotechftadscmitplan.htm Pile mitigation plans must include .
Designation and location of the rejected pile. . Review of the structural geotechnical and corrosion design requirements of the rejected pile . .
Step by step description of the mitigation work to be performed including drawings if necessary. . Assessment of how the proposed mitigation work addresses the structural geotechnical and corrosion design requirements of the rejected pile. . Methods for preservation or restoration of existing earthen materials . .
List of any affected facilities .
Include methods and equipment to be used for the protection of these facilities during mitigation . .
Your name and the names of any subcontractors on each sheet . .
List of materials with quantity estimates for the mitigation work and a list of personnel with their qualifications who will be performing the mitigation work .
For rejected piles to be repaired include the following in the pile mitigation plan .
Assessment of the nature and size of the anomalies in the rejected pile .
Provisions for access for additional pile testing if requested For rejected piles to be replaced or supplemented include the following in the pile mitigation plan .
Proposed location and size of additional piles .
Structural details and calculations for any modification to the structure to accommodate the replacement or supplemental piles Replacement piles must comply with the Contract for CIDH concrete piles .
.Ah Mitigation Report If repairs are performed submit a mitigation report as an informational submittal within days of completion of the repair .
The report must state exactly what repair work was performed and quantify the success of the repairs relative to the submitted mitigation plan .
The mitigation report must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
The mitigation report must include your name and the names of any subcontractors on each sheet .
.Ai Plastic Spacer Manufacturers Data and Sample If plastic spacers are proposed for use submit the manufacturers data and a sample of the plastic spacer .
Allow days for review .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Preconstruction Meeting Schedule and hold a preconstruction meeting for CIDH concrete pile construction at least business days after submitting the pile installation plan and at least days before the start of CIDH concrete pile construction .
You must provide a meeting facility .
The meeting must include the Engineer your representatives and any subcontractors involved in CIDH concrete pile construction .
The purpose of this meeting is to .
Establish contacts and communication protocol between you and your representatives any subcontractors and the Engineer .
Review the construction process acceptance testing and anomaly mitigation of CIDH concrete piles The Engineer conducts the meeting .
Be prepared to discuss .
Pile placement plan dry and wet SECTION PILING .
Acceptance testing including gammagamma logging crosshole sonic logging and coring .
Pile Design Data Form .
Mitigation process .
Timeline and critical path activities .
Structural geotechnical and corrosion design requirements .
Future meetings if necessary for pile mitigation and pile mitigation plan review .
Safety requirements including CalOSHA and Tunnel Safety Orders .Ac Quality Control Section .Ac applies if concrete is placed under slurry .
Before placing concrete under slurry produce a concrete test batch and transport it to the job site under the same conditions and in the same time frame anticipated during the placement of concrete in the piles .
At the job site place the test batch concrete in an excavated hole or suitable container to allow for testing .
Placing concrete under slurry is not required .
The test batch must demonstrate that the proposed mix design will achieve the minimum required slump after the specified set period .
Do not vibrate or agitate the concrete during the set period .
The Engineer tests the concrete for slump under California Test .
In addition to meeting the specified nominal slump the slump of the concrete must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Slump Requirements Time required to place concretea T hours Minimum set period before testingb hours Slump after set period inches T T T T aAs described in the pile installation plan bThe set period starts at the start of concrete placement .
After testing dispose of the concrete test batch .
.Ad Department Acceptance .Adi General Section .Ad applies to CIDH concrete piles except for piles less than inches in diameter or constructed in dry holes or holes dewatered without the use of temporary casing to control groundwater .
The Department performs acceptance testing using gammagamma logging to test the concrete density of the pile for homogeneity .
After notification by the Engineer of pile acceptance dewater the inspection pipes and cored holes and fill them with grout .
Grout must comply with section .C .
Fill inspection pipes and holes using grout tubes that extend to the bottom of the pipe or hole or into the grout already placed .
.Adii GammaGamma Logging The Department performs gammagamma logging under California Test .
Separate reinforcing steel as necessary to allow the Department access to the inspection pipes .
After requesting testing and providing access to the piles allow days for the Department to perform the testing and to prepare and provide the pile acceptance test report .
During testing do not perform construction activities within feet of any gammagamma logging operation .
If the Department determines a pile is anomalous under California Test part C the pile is rejected .
.Adiii Rejected Piles If a pile is rejected SECTION PILING .
Suspend concrete placement in the remaining piles .
Submit a revised pile installation plan .
Do not resume concrete placement until the revised pile installation plan is authorized Allow days for the Department to determine whether the rejected pile requires mitigation and to provide this information to you .
Day of the days is the st day after access has been provided to the Department to perform acceptance testing .
The Department may perform additional tests to further evaluate a rejected pile .
These tests may include crosshole sonic logging and other means of inspection selected by the Department .
The pile acceptance test report will indicate if the Department intends to perform any additional testing and when the testing will be performed .
Allow the Department additional days for a total of days to perform these tests and to provide supplemental results .
You may perform testing on the rejected pile .
The Department determines whether the rejected pile requires mitigation due to structural geotechnical or corrosion concerns .
The Department considers the estimated size and location of the anomaly and potential effects on the design .
The Department provides you with the conclusions of this analysis for developing the mitigation plan .
If a rejected pile does not require mitigation you may repair the pile under an authorized mitigation plan or the amount shown in the table will be deducted for each anomaly up to the maximum total deduction Anomaly location Anomaly deduction D feet D D Entirely or partially within the upper of the pile length Entirely within the lower of the pile length Maximum total deduction Note D Nominal pile diameter If a rejected pile requires mitigation or you elect to repair a rejected pile that does not require mitigation submit a mitigation plan for the repair supplementation or replacement of the rejected pile .
If the Engineer determines it is not feasible to repair the rejected pile submit a mitigation plan for replacement or supplementation of the rejected pile .
If the Engineer determines it is not feasible to use one of ADSCs standard mitigation plans to mitigate the pile schedule a meeting and meet with the Engineer before submitting a nonstandard mitigation plan .
The meeting attendees must include your representatives and the Engineers representatives involved in the pile mitigation .
The purpose of the meeting is to discuss the type of pile mitigation acceptable to the Department .
Provide the meeting facility .
The Engineer conducts the meeting .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Concrete Concrete placed under slurry must .
Have a nominal slump equal to or greater than inches .
The nominal and maximum slump and penetration specifications in section .G do not apply to concrete placed under slurry . .
Contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and be proportioned to prevent excessive bleed water and segregation .
SECTION PILING In a freezethaw area the formed portion of CIDH concrete piles must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
.B Aggregate Gradation For concrete placed under slurry the combined aggregate gradation must comply with the inch maximum gradation or the inch maximum gradation specified in section .C .
.B Permanent Steel Casings Permanent steel casings must comply with section .. .B Grout Grout must consist of cementitious material and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
Do not exceed gallons of water per lb of cement .
Cementitious material must comply with section .B except SCMs are not required .
Water must comply with section .D .
If municipally supplied potable water is used the testing specified in section .D is waived .
Admixtures must comply with section except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of .
percent by weight .
Grout used to backfill casings must comply with the following .
Aggregate must be used to extend the grout . .
Aggregate must consist of at least percent fine aggregate and approximately percent pea gravel by weight. . Fine aggregate must comply with section .C . .
Size of pea gravel must be such that percent passes the inch sieve at least percent passes the inch sieve and not more than percent passes the no .
sieve. . Grout must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Mix the grout as follows .
Add water to the mixer followed by cementitious material aggregates and any admixtures . .
Mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout. . Agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped. . Do not add water after initial mixing .
.B Slurry .Ba General Reserved .Bb Mineral Slurry Mineral slurry must be mixed and thoroughly hydrated in slurry tanks .
Sample and test slurry from the slurry tanks before placement in the drilled hole .
Recirculate or continuously agitate slurry in the drilled hole .
For recirculated slurry .
Remove drill cuttings from the slurry before discharging the slurry back into the drilled hole . .
Sample and test slurry at least every hours after starting its use until tests show that the samples taken from the slurry tank and from near the bottom of the hole have consistent specified properties .
Once consistent properties have been achieved sample slurry at least twice per shift as long as the specified properties remain consistent .
For nonrecirculated slurry .
Sample and test slurry from the drilled hole at least every hours after starting its use .
Sample the slurry at midheight and near the bottom of the hole .
SECTION PILING .
Recirculate slurry if tests show samples taken from midheight and near the bottom of the hole do not have consistent specified properties .
Sample and test slurry before final cleaning of the bottom of the hole and again just before placing concrete .
Sample the slurry at midheight and near the bottom of the hole .
Do not start cleaning the bottom of the hole or placing the concrete until tests show that the samples have consistent specified properties .
Mineral slurry must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Mineral Slurry Requirementsa Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Density Mud weight density API RP B section Before placement in the drilled hole and during drilling pcf .. b Before final cleaning and immediately before placing concrete pcf .. b Viscosity Marsh funnel and cup .
API RP B section .
Bentonite secqt Attapulgite secqt pH Glass electrode pH meter or pH paper .
Sand content Sand API RP B section Before final cleaning and immediately before placing concrete .
aSlurry temperature must be at least F when tested .
bIf authorized you may use slurry in salt water .
The allowable density of slurry in salt water may be increased up to pcf .
Remove any caked slurry on the sides or bottom of hole before placing reinforcement .
If concrete is not placed immediately after placing reinforcement the reinforcement must be removed and cleaned of slurry the sides of the drilled hole must be cleaned of caked slurry and the reinforcement again placed in the hole for concrete placement .
.Bc Synthetic Slurry Synthetic slurry material and quality characteristic requirements are specified in the special provisions .
Do not use synthetic slurries in holes drilled in primarily soft or very soft cohesive soils as determined by the Engineer .
A manufacturers representative must .
Provide technical assistance for the use of their material .
Be at the job site before introduction of the synthetic slurry into the drilled hole .
Remain at the job site until released by the Engineer Sample and test synthetic slurries .
When the slurry temperature is at least degrees F. . At midheight and near the bottom of the hole. . During drilling to verify the slurry properties . .
When drilling is complete but before final cleaning of the bottom of the hole .
When samples comply with the requirements shown in the tables for the slurry material selected clean the bottom of the hole of any loose or settled material. . After final cleaning and before placing concrete .
SECTION PILING .Bd Water Slurry Reserved .B Reserved .B Spacers Spacers must comply with section .D except you may use plastic spacers .
Plastic spacers must .
Comply with sections .
and .
of the Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institutes Manual of Standard Practice .
Have at least percent of their gross plane area perforated to compensate for the difference in the coefficient of thermal expansion between the plastic and concrete .
Be of commercial quality .B.B Reserved .C Construction .C General Except for CIDH concrete piles for sound walls and retaining walls you may propose to increase the diameter and revise the pile tip elevation of CIDH concrete piles with a diameter less than feet .
For CIDH concrete piles for sound walls and retaining walls you may propose to increase the diameter of CIDH concrete piles with a diameter less than feet except pile tip elevations must not be revised .
.C Drilled Holes The axis of the drilled hole must not deviate from plumb more than inches per feet of length .
For CIDH concrete piles with a pile cap the horizontal tolerance at the center of each pile at pile cutoff is the larger of of the pile diameter or inches .
The horizontal tolerance for the centertocenter spacing of adjacent piles is the larger of of the pile diameter or inches .
During excavation do not disturb the foundation material surrounding the pile .
Equipment or methods used for excavating holes must not cause quick soil conditions or cause scouring or caving of the hole .
For rock sockets equipment and drill methods must not result in softened materials on the borehole walls .
If drilling slurry is used during excavation maintain the slurry level at least feet above the piezometric head .
After excavation has started construct the pile expeditiously to prevent deterioration of the surrounding foundation material from air slaking or from the presence of water .
Remove and dispose of deteriorated foundation material including material that has softened swollen or degraded from the sides and the bottom of the hole .
Just before placing reinforcement or concrete clean the bottom of the hole to remove any loose sand gravel dirt and drill cuttings .
If caving occurs or deteriorated foundation material accumulates on the bottom of the hole clean the bottom of the hole after placing reinforcement and before placing concrete in the hole .
You must verify that the bottom of the hole is clean .
Remove water that has infiltrated the hole before placing concrete .
Do not allow fluvial or drainage water to enter the hole .
To control caving you may enlarge portions of the hole backfill the hole with slurry cement backfill concrete or other material and redrill the hole to the diameter shown .
Backfill material at enlarged piles must be chemically compatible with concrete and steel be drillable and have the necessary strength required for the conditions .
Dispose of material resulting from placing concrete .
SECTION PILING .C Temporary Steel Casings Furnish temporary steel casings where shown and where necessary to control water or to prevent quick soil conditions or caving of the hole .
Place temporary casings tight in the hole .
Section does not apply to temporary steel casings .
Temporary casings must be .
Watertight and of sufficient strength to withstand the loads from installation removal lateral concrete pressures and earth pressures .
Noncorrugated with smooth surfaces .
Clean and free of hardened concrete Remove the temporary casing during concrete placement .
In a dewatered hole maintain the concrete in the casing at a level of at least feet above the bottom of the casing or at a level above the bottom of the casing adequate to prevent displacement of the concrete by material from outside the casing whichever is greater .
If slurry is not used do not withdraw the temporary casing until the concrete head in the casing is greater than the groundwater head outside of the casing .
Maintain this positive concrete head during withdrawal of the casing .
You may vibrate or hammer the temporary casing to assist in removal of the casing from the hole prevent lifting of the reinforcement and prevent concrete contamination .
The withdrawal of casings must not leave voids or cause contamination of the concrete with soil or other materials .
.C Reinforcement Reinforcement for CIDH concrete piles with increased diameters and revised tip elevations must comply with the following .
Size and number of the reinforcing bars and hoops the percentage of bars required to extend to the pile tip and the size and pitch of spiral reinforcement must be the same as shown for the original piles . .
Required length of the spiral reinforcement and of any reinforcing bars that do not extend to the pile tip must be at least the length that would have been required for the original specified or ordered tip elevation . .
Diameter of the spiral or hoop reinforcement must remain the same as required for the original pile or may be increased to provide not less than the concrete cover required for the original pile .
Provide positive means to ensure that the reinforcement is centered in the pile .
Unless otherwise shown the bar reinforcing steel cage must have at least inches of clear cover measured from the outside of the cage to the sides of the hole or casing .
Place spacers at least inches clear from any inspection tubes .
Place plastic spacers around the circumference of the cage and at intervals along the length of the cage under the manufacturers instructions .
For a single CIDH concrete pile supporting a column .
If the pile and the column share the same reinforcing cage diameter this cage must be accurately placed as shown .
If the pile reinforcing cage is larger than the column cage and the concrete is placed under dry conditions maintain a clear horizontal distance of at least .
inches between the two cages .
If the pile reinforcing cage is larger than the column cage and the concrete is placed under slurry maintain a clear horizontal distance of at least inches between the two cages .C Vertical Inspection Pipes If the drilled hole is dry or dewatered without the use of temporary casing to control groundwater installation of inspection pipes is not required .
SECTION PILING Install vertical inspection pipes for acceptance testing as follows .
Inspection pipes must be schedule PVC pipe complying with ASTM D with a nominal pipe size of inches .
Watertight PVC couplers complying with ASTM D are allowed to facilitate pipe lengths in excess of those commercially available .
Log the location of the inspection pipe couplers with respect to the plane of pile cutoff. . Cap each inspection pipe at the bottom .
Extend the pipe from feet above the pile cutoff to the bottom of the reinforcing cage .
Provide a temporary top cap or similar means to keep the pipes clean before testing .
If pile cutoff is low the ground surface or working platform extend inspection pipes to feet above the ground surface or working platform . .
If any changes are made to the pile tip extend the inspection pipes to the bottom of the reinforcing cage . .
Install inspection pipes in a straight alignment parallel to the main reinforcement and securely fastened in place to prevent misalignment during installation of the reinforcement and placing of concrete in the hole .
Construct CIDH concrete piles such that the relative distance of inspection pipes to vertical steel reinforcement remains constant . .
Fill inspection pipes with water upon completion of the concrete placement to prevent debonding of the pipe . .
Inspection pipes must be completely clean dry and unobstructed when testing providing a inch diameter clear opening . .
Provide safe access to the tops of the tubes .
After placing concrete and before requesting acceptance testing test each inspection pipe in the Engineers presence by passing a inchdiameter by .footlong rigid cylinder through the length of pipe .
If an inspection pipe fails to pass the rigid cylinder .
Immediately fill the inspection pipes in the pile with water .
Core a nominal inch diameter hole through the concrete for the entire length of the pile for each inspection pipe that does not pass the rigid cylinder .
Locate cored holes as close as possible to the inspection pipes they are replacing and no more than inches clear from the reinforcement Coring must not damage the pile reinforcement .
Core holes using a double wall core barrel system with a split tube type inner barrel .
Coring with a solid type inner barrel is not allowed .
Coring methods and equipment must provide intact cores for the entire length of the pile .
Preserve cores and identify them with the exact location the core was recovered from the pile .
The coring operation must be logged by an engineering geologist or civil engineer licensed in the State and experienced in core logging .
Coring logs must comply with the Departments Soil and Rock Logging Classification and Presentation Manual .
Coring logs must include core recovery rock quality designation locations of breaks and complete descriptions of inclusions and voids encountered during coring .
The Department evaluates the portion of the pile represented by the cored hole based on the submitted core logs .
If the Department determines a pile is anomalous based on the coring logs the pile is rejected .
.C Permanent Steel Casing Installation Section .Ac and the th through th paragraphs of section .C do not apply to permanent steel casings .
For permanent steel casings placed in a drilled hole .
Casings must be watertight and of sufficient strength to prevent damage and to withstand the loads from installation drilling and tooling equipment lateral concrete pressures and earth pressures. . Use spacers to center the casing inside the drilled hole .
You may weld spacers to the outside of the casing . .
Fill voids in the annular space between the casing and the soil with grout. . Place grout from the bottom of the casing using grout tubes .
Place grout continuously until all voids have been filled and the grout reaches the top of the casing .
Free fall of the grout from the top to the bottom of the casing is not allowed .
SECTION PILING .
Pump grout into the annular space such that the grout head is maintained uniformly around the casing and no visible evidence of water or air is ejected at the top of the grout. . Place grout tubes along the circumference of the casing with a minimum of grout tubes per casing .
The spacing of the grout tubes must not exceed feet . .
Extend grout tubes to within foot of the bottom of the casing .
If the Engineer lowers the permanent steel casing tip elevation .
CIDH concrete pile including bar reinforcing steel and inspection pipes must extend to that same elevation .
Tip elevation of the rock socket must extend to maintain the length of the rock socket into rock as shown The additional work involved in lowering the permanent steel casing tip elevation is change order work .
.C Construction Joint Section .C applies to CIDH concrete piles if a construction joint is shown .
If a permanent steel casing is not shown you must furnish and install a permanent casing .
The permanent casing must .
Be watertight and of sufficient strength to prevent damage and to withstand the loads from installation procedures drilling and tooling equipment lateral concrete pressures and earth pressures . .
Extend at least feet below the construction joint .
If placing casing into rock the casing must extend at least feet below the construction joint. . Not extend above the top of the drilled hole or final grade whichever is lower. . Not increase the diameter of the CIDH concrete pile more than feet. . Be installed by impact or vibratory hammers oscillators rotators or by placing in a drilled hole .
Casings placed in a drilled hole must comply with section .C .
Section .Ac and the th through th paragraphs of section .C do not apply to permanent casings specified in section .C .
.C Placing Concrete Section .D does not apply to CIDH concrete piles .
You may construct CIDH concrete piles inches in diameter or larger by excavating and depositing concrete under slurry .
Form finish and cure portions of CIDH concrete piles shown to be formed under section .
.C Placing Concrete Under Slurry Section .C applies if placing concrete under slurry .
If drill cuttings settle out of the slurry clean the bottom of the drilled hole after placing reinforcement and before placing concrete in the drilled hole .
Verify that the bottom of the drilled hole is clean .
Carefully place concrete in a compact monolithic mass using a method that prevents washing of the concrete .
Vibrating of concrete is not required .
Placing concrete must be a continuous operation lasting no longer than the time specified for each concrete placing operation at each pile in your pile installation plan .
The delivery tube system must consist of one of the following .
Tremie tube or tubes each of which is at least inches in diameter fed by or more concrete pumps .
or more concrete pump discharge tubes each fed by a single concrete pump The delivery tube system must consist of watertight tubes with sufficient rigidity to keep the tube ends always in the mass of concrete placed .
If only delivery tube is used to place the concrete place the tube near the center of the hole .
Multiple tubes must be uniformly spaced in the hole .
SECTION PILING Internal bracing for the steel reinforcing cage must accommodate the delivery tube system .
Do not use tremies for piles without space for a inchdiameter tube .
During concrete placement provide a fully operational standby concrete pump at the job site that is adequate to complete the work in the time specified in the pile installation plan .
Do not allow concrete to fall into the slurry during concrete placing operations .
Cap the delivery tube with a watertight cap or plug the tube above the slurry level with a goodquality tightfitting moving plug that expels the slurry from the tube as the tube is charged with concrete .
The cap or plug must be designed to release as the tube is charged .
Extend the pump discharge or tremie tube to the bottom of the hole before charging the tube with concrete .
After charging the tube with concrete induce the flow of concrete through the tube by slightly raising the discharge end .
During concrete placement .
Embed the tip of the delivery tube within inches of the bottom of the hole until feet of concrete has been placed .
Maintain the embedment of the tip at least feet below the top surface of the concrete. . Do not rapidly raise or lower the delivery tube . .
Maintain the slurry level at least feet above the piezometric head .
If the seal is lost or the delivery tube becomes plugged and must be removed .
Withdraw and clean the tube .
Cap the tip of the tube to prevent slurry from entering .
Restart the operation by pushing the capped tube feet into the concrete and then reinitiating the flow of concrete Maintain a log of concrete placement for each drilled hole .
The log must .
Show the pile location tip elevation dates of excavation and concrete placement total quantity of concrete placed length and tip elevation of any casing and details of any hole stabilization method and materials used . .
Include an by inch graph of concrete placed versus depth of hole filled as follows .. Label the graph with the pile location tip elevation cutoff elevation and the dates of excavation and concrete placement .
..
Plot the graph continuously throughout concrete placement .
Plot the depth of drilled hole filled vertically with the pile tip at the bottom and the quantity of concrete placed horizontally .
.. Take readings at each feet of pile depth and indicate the time of the reading on the graph .
If a temporary casing is used maintain concrete placed under slurry at a level at least feet above the bottom of the casing .
The withdrawal of the casing must not cause contamination of the concrete with slurry .
The equivalent hydrostatic pressure inside the casing must be greater than the hydrostatic pressure on the outside of the casing .
Dispose of material resulting from using slurry .
.D Payment Not Used .
DRIVEN STEEL SHELLS FILLED WITH CONCRETE AND REINFORCEMENT .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing CIP concrete piles consisting of driven steel shells filled with concrete and reinforcement .
Furnish piling includes SECTION PILING .
Furnishing steel shells at the job site .
Furnishing concrete .
Furnishing reinforcement for piles with a diameter of less than inches .
Splicing steel shells Driving piles includes .
Driving and cutting off the steel shells at the elevations shown .
Furnishing special driving tips or heavier sections of steel shells .
Drilling holes or predrilling holes through embankments .
Cleaning out and disposing of material from openended steel shells .
Placing seal course concrete in openended steel shells .
Dewatering openended steel shells .
Placing reinforcement and concrete .
Disposing of material resulting from drilling holes predrilling holes or cleaning out openended steel shells .A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a cleanout method for openended steel shells as an informational submittal .
.A Quality Assurance After the steel shell is driven and before placing reinforcement and concrete the Engineer examines the steel shell for collapse or a reduced diameter at any point .
The Engineer rejects any steel shell that is improperly driven broken or shows partial collapse to an extent as to materially decrease its nominal resistance .
.B Materials Steel shells must comply with the specifications for steel pipe piles in section .. Steel shells must be sufficiently watertight to exclude water during concrete placement .
.C Construction .C General Drive steel shells under section .
Remove and replace rejected steel shells or drive a new shell adjacent to the rejected shell .
Fill rejected shells that can not be removed with concrete .
If a new shell is driven to replace a rejected shell enlarge the footing .
If the Engineer revises the pile tip elevation the work involved in furnishing splicing and driving the additional length of pile is change order work .
.C OpenEnded Steel Shells Section .C applies to openended steel shells .
Internal plates must not be used .
After driving clean out the steel shell as follows .
Do not disturb the foundation material surrounding the pile when cleaning out the steel shell. . Equipment or methods used must not cause quick soil conditions or cause scouring or caving around or below the pile. . Steel shells must be free of soil rock or other material deleterious to the bond between concrete and steel before placing reinforcement and concrete. . Bottom feet of the pile must not be cleaned out .
SECTION PILING After the steel shell has been cleaned out construct the pile expeditiously to prevent deterioration of the surrounding foundation material from the presence of water .
Remove deteriorated foundation materials from the bottom of the steel shell including materials that have softened swollen or degraded .
Dispose of material resulting from cleaning out the steel shells .
If conditions render it impossible or inadvisable in the Engineers opinion to dewater the steel shells before placing reinforcement and concrete seal the bottom of the steel shell under section .D .
After sealing dewater and clean out the steel shell .
.C CloseEnded Steel Shells Reserved .
.D Payment Driven steel shells filled with concrete and reinforcement are paid for as furnish piling and drive pile .
STEEL SOLDIER PILING .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for drilling holes and installing steel soldier piles in the holes .
Steel soldier piles must comply with section .. . MATERIALS Concrete anchors must comply with the specifications for studs in clause of AWS D .. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Clean and prepare piles in heat affected areas before splicing steel piles or welding concrete anchors .
.B Drilled Holes Drill holes for steel soldier piles into natural foundation material .
Drilled holes must be accurately located straight and true .
Plumb and align the pile before placing concrete backfill and lean concrete backfill .
The pile must be at least inch clear of the sides of the hole for the full length of the hole to be filled with concrete backfill and lean concrete backfill .
Ream or enlarge holes that do not provide the clearance around steel piles .
Furnish and place temporary casings or tremie seals where necessary to control water or to prevent caving of the hole .
Before placing the steel soldier pile remove loose materials existing at the bottom of the hole after drilling operations have been completed .
Do not allow surface water to enter the hole .
Remove all water in the hole before placing concrete .
If temporary casings are used they must comply with section .C .
Maintain alignment of the pile in the hole while placing backfill material. . PAYMENT Not Used MICROPILING Reserved ALTERNATIVE PILING Reserved RESERVED PRESTRESSING CONCRETE GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for prestressing concrete .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit test samples to METS .
Notify the Engineer of each submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
.C Certifications Submit the certifications specified in the following to METS .
ASTM AAM for uncoated sevenwire steel strand .
ASTM AAM for uncoated HSsteel bars .
ASTM AAM for filled epoxycoated sevenwire prestressing steel strand Include with each certification .
Representative loadelongation curve for each size and grade of strand and for each size of bar .
Copy of the QC tests performed by the manufacturer .C Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings for the proposed prestressing system to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of the submittal .
Include in the notification the date and list of contents of the submittal .
For initial review submit .
copies for railroad bridges unless the project includes a BNSF Railway underpass .
copies for railroad bridges if the project includes a BNSF Railway underpass .
copies for structures other than railroad bridges After initial review submit from to copies to OSD Documents Unit if requested .
The shop drawings must show complete details and substantiating calculations of the method and materials proposed for use in the prestressing activities including the addition or rearrangement of reinforcing steel .
The details must outline the method and sequence of stressing and include .
Complete specifications and details of the prestressing steel and anchorage system. . Jacking stresses . .
Type of ducts . .
Proposed arrangement of the prestressing steel in the members . .
Exact location of anchorage system components ducts and other related elements .
Show duct location data including elevations at least every th point of the span for each span. . Elongation calculations. . All other data pertaining to the prestressing .
Each shop drawing submittal must consist of drawings for a single bridge or portion of a bridge .
For multi frame bridges each frame must have a separate shop drawing submittal .
Allow the following time for review of the shop drawings .
days for railroad bridges .
days for structures other than railroad bridges SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE For railroad bridges comply with the requirements of the railroad company involved .
Include a grouting plan with your shop drawing submittal .
If you propose an alternative prestressing system for a CIP PS box girder bridge submit shop drawings including all details and checked calculations .
.C Alternative Prestressing Systems for CastInPlace Prestressed Box Girder Bridges The details shown for CIP PS box girder bridges are based on a bonded fulllength draped tendon prestressing system.You may submit a VECP for an alternative prestressing system using bonded partial length tendons .
The proposed system and associated details must comply with the following requirements .
Moment and shear resistances must be at least equal to those used for the design of the structure shown . .
Concrete strength must be at least that shown. . Not less than percent of the total prestressing force at any section must be provided by fulllength draped tendons. . Anchorage blocks for partiallength tendons must be located such that the blocks will not interfere with the placement of the utility facilities shown or any future utilities to be placed through openings shown. . Any temporary prestressing tendons must be detensioned and the temporary ducts must be filled with grout before completion of the work .
Temporary tendons must be either removed or fully encased in grout before completion of the work .
At your request the Department furnishes you with the demand moments and shears used in the design shown .
.C Test Samples Submit test samples for the materials to be used in the work as shown in the following table Material Number of test samples Test sample description Uncoated stranda footlong sample from each reel or pack Epoxycoated strand Uncoated stranda footlong sample of uncoated strand removed from each reel or pack before coating Coated stranda footlong sample from each reel or pack of coated strand Epoxy powder ounce sample from each batchb Epoxy patching material ounce sample from each batchb Bara footlong sample of each size for each heat Bar couplera Coupler from each lot of couplers with two footlong barsc Anchorage assembliesa Anchorage assembly from each lot of anchorage assemblies aRandomly selected by the Engineer .
bPackaged in an airtight container and identified with the manufacturers name and batch number .
cSubmit coupler and bar samples assembled .
The bars must be from the same bar heats to be used in the work .
Sampling must comply with the requirements of the ASTM to be used for testing the sample .
With each bar or strand test sample include a certificate from the manufacturer stating the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of each sample .
Identify each test sample by location and Contract number with weatherproof markings .
Allow days for the Departments testing .
SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE Obtain the Departments authorization of the material before incorporating it into the work .
.C Grouting Plan The grouting plan must include .
Detailed grouting procedures .
Type quantity and brand of materials to be used .
Type of equipment to be used and provisions for backup equipment .
Types and locations of grout inlets outlets and vents .
Methods to clean ducts before grouting .
Methods to control the rate of flow within ducts .
Theoretical grout volume calculations for each duct .
Duct repair procedures for an air pressure test failure .
Mixing and pumping procedures .
Direction of grouting .
Sequence of use of inlets and outlets .
Procedure for handling blockages .
Forms for recording grouting information .
Procedure for secondary grouting .
Names of people who will perform grouting activities and their relevant experience and certifications .C Daily Grouting Report Submit a daily grouting report for each day grouting is performed .
Submit the report within business days after grouting .
The report must be signed by the technician supervising the grouting activity .
The report must include .
Identification of each tendon .
Date the grouting occurred .
Time the grouting started and ended .
Date of placing the prestressing steel in each duct .
Date of stressing .
Type of grout used .
Injection end and applied grouting pressure .
Actual and theoretical quantities of grout used to fill each duct .
Ratio of actual to theoretical grout quantity .
Records of air grout and structure surface temperatures during grouting .
Summary of tests performed and the results .
Names of personnel performing the grouting activity .
Summary of problems encountered and corrective actions taken .
Summary of void investigation and repairs made .D Quality Assurance .D General For accurate identification assign an individual lot number and tag each lot of the following items to be shipped to the job site or casting site .
Bars of each size from each heat .
Strand from each reel or pack .
Anchorage assemblies .
Bar couplers The Department rejects any unidentified prestressing steel anchorage assemblies or bar couplers received at the job site or casting site .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE .Db Equipment and Calibration Equip each hydraulic jack used to tension prestressing steel with pressure gauges or pressure gauge and a load cell .
Each jack body must be permanently marked with the ram area .
Each pressure gauge must be fully functional and have an accurate reading clearly visible dial or display .
The dial must be at least inches in diameter and graduated in psi increments or less .
Each load cell must be calibrated and have an indicator that can be used to determine the force in the prestressing steel .
The range of each load cell must be such that the lower percent of the manufacturers rated capacity is not used in determining the jacking force .
Each jack and its gauges must be calibrated as a unit .
Each jack used to tension prestressing steel permanently anchored at percent or more of its specified minimum ultimate tensile strength must be calibrated by METS within year of use and after each repair .
You must .
Schedule the calibration of the jacking equipment with METS .
Mechanically calibrate the gauges with a dead weight tester or other authorized means before calibration of the jacking equipment by METS .
Verify that the jack and supporting systems are complete with proper components and are in good operating condition .
Provide labor equipment and material to install and support the jacking and calibration equipment and remove the equipment after the calibration is complete .
Plot the calibration results Each jack used to tension prestressing steel permanently anchored at less than percent of its specified minimum ultimate tensile strength must be calibrated by an authorized laboratory within days of use and after each repair .
.Dc Pressure Testing Ducts For posttensioned concrete bridges pressure test each duct with compressed air after stressing .
To pressure test the ducts .
Seal all inlets outlets and grout caps. . Open all inlets and outlets on adjacent ducts . .
Attach an air compressor to an inlet at end of the duct .
The attachment must include a valve that separates the duct from the air source . .
Attach a pressure gauge to the inlet at the end of the duct. . Pressurize the duct to psi. . Lockoff the air source. . Record the pressure loss after minute. . Repair the leaks with authorized methods and retest if a pressure loss exceeds psi .
Compressed air used to clear and test the ducts must be clean dry and free from oil or contaminants .
.Dd Duct Demonstrations for PostTensioned Members Before placing forms for deck slabs of box girder bridges demonstrate that any prestressing steel placed in the ducts is free and unbonded .
If no prestressing steel is in the ducts demonstrate that the ducts are unobstructed .
If prestressing steel is installed after the concrete is placed demonstrate that the ducts are free of water and debris immediately before installing the steel .
Before posttensioning any member demonstrate that the prestressing steel is free and unbonded in the duct .
Demonstrations must be performed in the presence of the Engineer .
SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE .De Void Investigation In the presence of the Engineer investigate the ducts for voids between and hours after grouting .
As a minimum inspect the inlet and outlet ports at the anchorages and at high points in the tendons for voids after removal of the inlet and outlet pipes .
Completely fill any voids found with secondary grout .
.Df Personnel Qualifications Perform posttensioning field activities including grouting under the direct supervision of a technician certified as a Level Bonded PT Field Specialist through the PostTensioning Institute .
Grouting activities may be performed under the direct supervision of a technician certified as a Grouting Technician through the American Segmental Bridge Institute .
Perform vacuum grouting under the direct supervision of a person who has been trained and has experience in the use of vacuum grouting equipment and procedures .
.D Department Acceptance The Department tests the prestressing steel test samples for compliance with section .B .
The Department tests the efflux time of grout under California Test .
The Department may verify the prestressing force using the Departments load cells .
The Department determines the reduction of area of each test sample bar with the deformations removed .
The deformations are removed by machining the bar no more than necessary to remove the deformations over a length of inches .
If couplers are used to extend bars the Department rejects the heat of bars and lot of couplers represented by the assembled unit test sample if the sample does not have a tensile strength of at least the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the bars .
Prestressing steel that sustained physical damage is rejected .
Prestressing steel is rejected if surface rust either can not be removed by handcleaning with a fine steel wool pad or leaves pits visible to the unaided eye after handcleaning .
If nonepoxycoated prestressing steel is installed in the ducts of posttensioned members after completion of concrete curing and if tensioning and grouting are completed within days after the installation then rust that may form during this period is not cause for rejection of the steel and the use of a corrosion inhibitor in the duct is not required after installation. . MATERIALS .A General Posttensioning prestressing systems must be on the Authorized Material List for posttensioning systems .
Organic zincrich primer must be on the Authorized Material List for organic zinc rich primer .
.B Prestressing Steel Uncoated strand must comply with ASTM AAM .
Epoxycoated strand must comply with ASTM AAM grit impregnated coating including annex A .
Bars must comply with ASTM AAM Type II including all supplementary requirements except the maximum weight requirements do not apply .
The reduction of area of bars with deformations removed must be at least percent .
If couplers are used to extend bars .
Assembled units must have a tensile strength of at least the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the bars .
Location of couplers in the member must be authorized SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE Protect the prestressing steel against physical damage and rust or other results of corrosion at all times from manufacture to grouting or encasing in concrete .
Package the prestressing steel in containers or shipping forms that protect the steel against physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
Except for epoxycoated strand a corrosion inhibitor that prevents rust or other results of corrosion must be placed in the container or shipping form incorporated in a corrosioninhibitorcarriertype packaging material or applied directly to the steel if authorized .
Corrosion inhibitors must not have a deleterious effect on the steel concrete or bond strength of the steel to concrete .
Clearly mark each shipping container or form with .
Statement that the package contains prestressing steel .
Type of corrosion inhibitor used .
Date packaged Immediately replace or restore any damaged container or shipping form to its original condition .
Do not store epoxycoated strand within feet of ocean or tidal water for more than days .
Patching material for epoxycoated strand must be .
Furnished by the manufacturer of the epoxy powder .
Applied under the manufacturers instructions .
Compatible with the original epoxy powder material .
Inert in concrete .C Grout Grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
Cement must comply with section .B .
Water must comply with section .D .
Admixtures must comply with section .E except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of .
percent by weight .
The efflux time of grout immediately after mixing must be at least seconds .
Determine the efflux time under California Test .
Secondary grout must .
Comply with ASTM C . Not have a deleterious effect on the steel concrete or bond strength of the steel to the concrete .D Ducts Ducts for prestressing steel must .
Be galvanized rigid ferrous metal. . Be fabricated with either welded or interlocked seams except galvanizing of the welded seams is not required. . Be mortar tight. . Have sufficient strength to maintain their correct alignment during placing of concrete. . Have positive metallic connections at joints between sections that do not result in angle changes at the joints. . Have waterproof tape at the connections. . Have bends that are not crimped or flattened. . Have ferrous metal or polyolefin transition couplings connecting the ducts to anchorage system components .
Ferrous metal transition couplings need not be galvanized. . Have an inside crosssectional area of at least .
times the net area of the prestressing steel for multistrand tendons .
SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE .
Have an inside diameter of at least inch larger than the diameter of the bar. . Have an outside diameter not exceeding percent of the girder web width .
Furnish all ducts or anchorage assemblies with pipes or other suitable connections for the injection of grout after prestressing .
.E Vents Vent all ducts having a vertical duct profile change of inches or more .
Vents must .
Be at least inchdiameter standard pipe or suitable plastic pipe. . Be connected to ducts using metallic or plastic structural fasteners .
Plastic components must not react with the concrete or enhance corrosion of the prestressing steel and be free from water soluble chlorides. . Be mortar tight and taped as necessary . .
Provide a means for injection of grout through the vents and for sealing the vents .
.F Permanent Grout Caps Permanent grout caps for anchorage systems of posttensioned tendons must .
Be glassfiberreinforced plastic with antioxidant additives .
The environmental stresscracking failure time must be at least hours under ASTM D condition C. .
Completely cover and seal the wedge plate or anchorage head and all exposed metal parts of the anchorage against the bearing plate using neoprene Oring seals. . Have a grout vent at the top of the cap. . Be bolted to the anchorage with stainless steel fasteners complying with ASTM F. All fastener components must be alloy . . Be pressure rated at or above psi .
.G Debonding Sheathing Sheathing for debonding prestressing strand must .
Be split or unsplit flexible polymer plastic tubing .
Have a minimum wall thickness of .
inch .
Have an inside diameter exceeding the maximum outside diameter of the strand by .
to .
inch Split sheathing must overlap at least inch .
Waterproofing tape used to seal the ends of the sheathing must be flexible adhesive tape .
The sheathing and waterproof tape must not react with the concrete coating or steel .
.H Anchorage System The anchorage system for posttensioning must .
Be capable of holding the prestressing steel at a force producing a stress of at least percent of the specified ultimate tensile strength of the steel .
Permanently secure the ends of the prestressing steel .
Be equipped with permanent grout caps .
CONSTRUCTION .A General .A General If authorized you may .
Apply a portion of the total prestressing force to a PC member before the member has obtained the concrete strength shown .
Move the member after applying the portion of prestressing force SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE Except for epoxycoated strand prestressing steel installed in members before placing and curing of the concrete must be continuously protected against rust or other results of corrosion until grouted .
Protect the steel by using a corrosion inhibitor placed in the ducts or applied to the steel in the duct .
After final fabrication of the strand do not perform any electric welding on the prestressing steel .
If electric welding is performed on or near members containing prestressing steel attach the welding ground directly to the steel being welded .
.A EpoxyCoated Strand Cover epoxycoated strand with an opaque polyethylene sheeting or other suitable protective material to protect the strand from exposure to sunlight salt spray and weather .
For stacked coils drape the protective covering around the perimeter of the stack .
The covering must be adequately secured and allow for air circulation around the strand to prevent condensation under the covering .
Cut epoxycoated strand using an abrasive saw .
Patch all visible damage to the epoxy coating caused by shipping job site or casting site handling installation or cutting of ends under ASTM AAM .
.A Ducts Accurately place prestressing ducts .
Securely fasten the ducts in place to prevent movement of the ducts during concrete placement .
After installation cover the duct ends and vents to prevent water or debris from entering .
Support ducts vertically and horizontally during concrete placement at a maximum spacing of feet .
If prestressing strand is installed using the pushthrough method use guide caps at the front end of each strand to protect the duct from damage .
.A Vents Place vents at the following locations .
Anchorage areas at both ends of the tendon .
Each high point .
feet upstream and downstream of each crest of a high point .
Each change in the cross section of duct .B Prestressing .B General Tension the prestressing steel using hydraulic jacks .
The force in the prestressing steel must be the value shown in the shop drawings .
After seating the maximum tensile stress in the prestressing steel must not exceed percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength shown .
.B PostTensioned Members .Ba General If requested for verification of the force in the prestressing steel furnish the resources necessary to install and support the Departments testing equipment at the prestressing steel location and to remove the equipment after the testing is complete .
Conduct the tensioning process such that the force being applied and the elongation of the prestressing steel can be measured at all times .
The maximum temporary tensile stress in the prestressing steel of posttensioned members must not exceed percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
If steam curing is used for PC members do not install prestressing steel for posttensioning until the steam curing is completed .
SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE Do not tension the prestressing steel of posttensioned members until at least days after the last concrete has been placed in the member and the concrete has attained the compressive strength described .
Distribute the prestressing force of posttensioned bridge girders with an approximately equal quantity in each girder and place the force symmetrically about the centerline of the structure .
In slabs distribute the prestressing force uniformly across the slab .
Sequence the stressing of posttensioned bridge girders such that no more than of the prestressing force in any girder is applied before an equal force is applied in the adjacent girders .
The maximum temporary force variation between girders must not exceed the prestressing force of the largest tendon used in all girders .
Do not apply an eccentric force about the centerline of the structure that exceeds of the total prestressing force at any time during the prestressing .
.Bb Losses Reserved .Bc Anchorages and Distribution The ends of posttensioned prestressing steel must be secured with a permanent type anchoring system .
You may omit steel distribution plates or assemblies if you use an anchorage device of a type that is sufficiently large and that is used in conjunction with a steel grillage embedded in the concrete that effectively distributes the compressive stresses to the concrete .
If loop tendon anchorages are used enclose the anchorages in ducts for their entire length .
Where the end of a posttensioned assembly is not to be covered by concrete recess the anchorage system such that the ends of the prestressing steel and all parts of the anchorage system are at least inches inside of the end surface of the members .
After posttensioning fill the recesses with concrete and finish flush .
The concrete used to fill the recess must be the same as that used for the structure .
The load from the anchorage system must be effectively distributed to the concrete such that .
Concrete bearing stress directly underneath the plate or assembly does not exceed psi .
When the prestressing steel is tensioned to percent of its specified ultimate tensile strength .. Bending stress in the plate material or assembly material does not exceed the yield point of the material .. No visible distortion is evident in the anchorage plate .Bd Bonding and Grouting .Bdi General Bond the posttensioned prestressing steel to the concrete by completely filling the entire void space between the duct and the prestressing steel with grout .
Ducts vents and grout caps must be clean and free from water and deleterious materials that would impair bonding of the grout or interfere with grouting procedures .
Compressed air used for cleaning must be clean dry and free from oil or contaminants .
Prevent the leakage of grout through the anchorage assembly by positive mechanical means .
Before starting daily grouting activities drain the pump system to remove any water from the piping system .
Break down and thoroughly clean the pump and piping system after each grouting session .
After completing duct grouting activities .
Abrasive blast clean and expose the aggregate of concrete surfaces where concrete is to be placed to cover and encase the anchorage assemblies .
Remove the ends of vents inch below the roadway surface SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE .Bdii Grouting Equipment Grouting equipment must be .
Capable of grouting at a pressure of at least psi .
Equipped with a pressure gauge having a fullscale reading of not more than psi .
Able to continuously grout the longest tendon on the project in less than minutes Grout must pass through a screen with clear openings of inch or less before entering the pump .
Fit grout injection pipes ejection pipes and vents with positive mechanical shutoff valves capable of withstanding the pumping pressures .
If authorized you may substitute mechanical valves with suitable alternatives after demonstrating their effectiveness .
Provide a standby grout mixer and pump .
.Bdiii Mixing and Proportioning Proportion solids by weight to an accuracy of percent .
Proportion liquids by weight or volume to an accuracy of percent .
Mix the grout as follows .
Add water to the mixer followed by the other ingredients . .
Mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout without an excessive temperature increase or loss of properties of the mixture. . Do not exceed gal of water per lb of cement or the quantity of water in the manufacturers instructions whichever is less. . Agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped .
Do not add water after the initial mixing .
.Bdiv Placing Pump grout into the duct within minutes of the st addition of the mix components .
Inject grout from the lowest point of the duct in an uphill direction in one continuous activity maintaining a oneway flow of the grout .
You may inject from the lowest anchorage if complete filling is ensured .
Before injecting grout open all vents .
Pump the grout at a rate of to feet of duct per minute .
Conduct grouting at a pressure range of to psi measured at the grout inlet .
Do not exceed maximum pumping pressure of psi at the grout inlet .
As grout is injected continuously discharge grout from the vent to be closed .
Do not close any vent until free water visible slugs of grout and entrapped air have been ejected and the consistency of the grout flowing from the vent is equivalent to the injected grout .
Close the vents in sequence in the direction of flow starting with the closest vent .
Before closing the final vent at the grout cap discharge at least gal of grout into a clean receptacle .
After closing all vents bleed all high point vents .
Lock a pressure of psi into the duct by closing the grout inlet valve .
.Bdv Weather Conditions If hot weather conditions will contribute to quick stiffening of the grout cool the grout by authorized methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping activities .
If freezing weather conditions are anticipated during and after the placement of grout provide adequate means to protect the grout in the ducts from damage by freezing .
.Bdvi Curing During grouting and for a period of hours after grouting eliminate vibration from Contractorcontrolled sources within feet of the frame in which grouting is taking place including from moving vehicles SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE jackhammers large compressors or generators pile driving activities soil compaction and falsework removal .
Do not vary loads on the span .
For PC concrete members do not move or disturb the members after grouting for hours .
If the ambient temperature drops below degrees F do not move or disturb the members for hours .
Do not remove or open valves until grout has set and cured for at least hours .
.Bdvii Grout Storage Store grout in a dry environment .
.Bdviii Blockages If the grouting pressure reaches psi close the inlet and pump the grout at the adjacent vent that has just been or is ready to be closed as long as a oneway flow is maintained .
Do not pump grout into a succeeding outlet from which grout has not yet flowed .
When complete grouting of the tendon can not be achieved by the steps specified stop the grouting .
.Bdix Secondary Grouting Perform secondary grouting by vacuum grouting .
The vacuumgrouting process must be able to determine the size of the void and measure the volume of grout filling the void .
Vacuum grouting equipment must consist of .
Volumeter for the measurement of void volume .
Vacuum pump with a capacity of at least cfm and equipped with a flow meter capable of measuring the amount of grout being injected .Bdx Vertical Tendon Grouting Provide a standpipe at the upper end of the tendon to collect bleed water and allow it to be removed from the grout .
The standpipe must be large enough to prevent the grout elevation from dropping below the highest point of the upper anchorage device .
If the grout level drops to the highest point of the upper anchorage device immediately add grout to the standpipe .
Remove the standpipe after the grout has hardened .
For vertical tendons in excess of feet high or if grouting pressure exceeds psi inject grout at a higher vent from which grout has already flowed to maintain oneway flow .
.B Pretensioned Members .Ba General Anchor the prestressing steel at stresses that will result in the ultimate retention of jacking forces at least equal to those shown .
If prestressing steel for pretensioning is placed in the stressing bed and is to be exposed to the elements for more than hours before encasing in concrete protect the steel from contamination and corrosion using authorized measures .
Do not cut or release prestressing steel in pretensioned members until the concrete in the member has attained a compressive strength of at least the value shown or psi whichever is greater .
If epoxy coated strand is used do not cut or release the steel until the temperature of the concrete surrounding the strand is less than degrees F and falling .
If requested check individuallytensioned strands using authorized methods and equipment for loss of prestress not more than hours before placing concrete for the members .
Strands showing a loss of prestress of more than percent must be retensioned to the original computed jacking force .
If prestressing steel in pretensioned members is tensioned at a temperature appreciably lower than the estimated temperature of the concrete and the prestressing steel at the time of initial set of the concrete the calculated elongation of the prestressing steel must be increased to compensate for the loss in stress .
SECTION PRESTRESSING CONCRETE The maximum temporary tensile stress in the prestressing steel of pretensioned members must not exceed percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
Cut and release the prestressing steel in pretensioned members in such an order that lateral eccentricity of the prestress force is a minimum .
Cut off pretensioned prestressing steel flush with the end of the member .
After cutting the steel clean and paint the exposed ends of the steel and a inch strip of adjoining concrete as follows .
Wire brush or abrasive blast clean to remove all dirt and residue on the metal and concrete surfaces . .
Immediately after cleaning apply coat of organic zincrich primer to the surfaces except apply coats to surfaces that will not be covered by concrete or mortar .
Do not use aerosol cans .
Mix the paint thoroughly when applying and work into any voids in the prestressing steel .
.Bb Debonding Prestressing Strands Where debond prestressing strands are shown debond the strands by encasing the strands in plastic sheathing along the entire length shown and sealing the ends of the sheathing with waterproof tape .
Distribute the debonded strands symmetrically about the vertical centerline of the girder .
The debonded lengths of pairs of strands must be equal .
Do not end debonding at any one cross section of the member for more than percent of the debonded strands or strands whichever is greater .
Thoroughly seal the ends with waterproof tape to prevent the intrusion of water or cement paste before placing the concrete. . PAYMENT Not Used CONCRETE STRUCTURES GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing concrete structures .
Earthwork for the following concrete structures must comply with section .
Sound wall footings .
Sound wall pile caps .
Culverts .
Barrier slabs .
Junction structures .
Minor structures .
Pipe culvert headwalls endwalls and wingwalls for a pipe with a diameter of feet or greater Falsework must comply with section .
Joints must comply with section .
Elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section .. Reinforcement for the following concrete structures must comply with section .
Sound wall footings .
Sound wall pile caps .
Barrier slabs .
Junction structures .
Minor structures .
PC concrete members You may use RSC for a concrete structure only where the specifications allow the use of RSC .
.B Definitions form panel Continuous section of form facing material unbroken by joint marks against which concrete is placed .
opening age Minimum age at which an element constructed with RSC may be opened to traffic .
pier column Extension of a column or pier into bedrock material .
.C Submittals .C General If requested submit concrete form design and materials data for each forming system .
Submit a deck placement work plan for concrete bridge decks .
If requested submit shop drawings for PC members proposed by you .
Include construction joint details foundation bedding and other requested information .
.C Permanent Steel Deck Forms Submit copies of shop drawings for permanent steel deck forms .
Include in the submittal .
Layout plan .
Grade of steel Physical and section properties of members .
Method of support and grade adjustment .
Method for accommodating skew .
Methods of sealing against grout leaks SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .C Bonding Materials Except for a bonding material previously authorized by the Department submit at least a pound test sample to METS .
Allow days for testing .
Obtain the Departments authorization of the bonding material before incorporating it into the work .
For a bonding material previously authorized by the Department submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of the material .
.C Rapid Strength Concrete For RSC submit the mix design at least days before use .
Include in the submittal .
Compressive strength test results for prequalification of RSC at age of break at days and at days .
Opening age in hours .
Proposed aggregate gradation .
Mix proportions of cementitious material aggregate and water .
Types and quantities of chemical admixtures if used .
Range of ambient temperatures over which the mix design will achieve the required minimum compressive strength .
Source of materials .C Chemical Adhesives Submit a certificate of compliance for chemical adhesive stating compliance with ICBO AC and Caltrans AugmentationRevisions to ICBO AC .
Revisions to ICBO AC are on the Authorized Material List for chemical adhesivecartridge epoxies .
Submit chemical adhesive manufacturers installation procedures and warnings or precautions as an informational submittal at least business days before starting work .
Submit test sample of each chemical adhesive system to be used from each lot to METS for testing at least days before use .
The test sample must consist of unit of chemical adhesive mixing nozzle and retaining nut .
A lot for chemical adhesives is units or fraction thereof of the same brand and product name .
Each test sample must be clearly marked with the following .
Manufacturers name and system model number .
Date of manufacture .
Lot number .
Shelf life or expiration date .
Current ICBO evaluation report number .C Colored Concrete Submit technical data manufacturers specifications and a work plan for mixing delivery placement finishing and curing of colored concrete .
.C Hinge Tiedowns Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Rapid Strength Concrete Prequalify RSC before use .
Prequalification of an RSC mix design includes determining the opening age and attaining the minimum specified day compressive strength .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Prequalify RSC under section .Db .
Determine the opening age of the RSC mix design as follows .
Fabricate at least test cylinders to be used to determine the age of break . .
Immediately after fabrication of the test cylinders store the cylinders in a temperature medium of degrees F until the cylinders are tested . .
Determine the age of break to attain an average strength of the test cylinders . .
Opening age is the age of break plus hour .
The average strength of the test cylinders must be at least psi .
Not more than test cylinders may have a strength of less than psi .
If compressive strength tests performed in the field show that the concrete has attained the specified average strength you may open the lane to traffic at the age of break .
Perform the compressive strength tests under the specifications for sampling and testing cylinders in section .Da .
If you choose to use this option notify the Engineer before starting construction .
.Dc Test Panels Test panels must be .
Constructed at an authorized location .
At least by feet by inches deep .
Constructed and finished using the personnel materials equipment and methods to be used in the work .
Authorized before starting work The Engineer may request that additional test panels be constructed until the specified finish texture and color are attained .
The Engineer uses the authorized test panel to determine acceptability of the work .
.D Department Acceptance .Da General Reserved .Db Testing Concrete Surfaces .Dbi General The Engineer tests roadway concrete surfaces for smoothness coefficient of friction and crack intensity .
The Engineer tests POC concrete deck surfaces for smoothness and crack intensity .
.Dbii Surface Smoothness The Engineer tests the surface smoothness of the following .
Completed roadway concrete surfaces of structures and approach slabs and the adjacent feet of approach pavement .
Surfaces of concrete decks to be covered with another material .
Completed concrete deck surfaces including ramps and landings of POCs You must schedule smoothness testing .
Allow days for the Engineer to perform smoothness testing .
Before the testing clean the test area and remove obstructions .
Except for POCs surface smoothness is tested using .
Bridge profilograph under California Test .
Two profiles are obtained in each lane approximately feet from the lane lines and profile is obtained in each shoulder approximately feet from the curb or rail face .
Profiles are taken parallel to the direction of traffic. . footlong straightedge placed transversely to traffic .
For POCs surface smoothness is tested using SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .
footlong straightedge placed parallel to the centerline of the POC .
footlong straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline of the POC Deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements .
Profile trace having no high points over .
foot .
Profile count of or less in any foot section for portions within the traveled way .
Surface not varying more than .
foot from the lower edge of a footlong straightedge placed transversely to traffic POC deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements .
Surfaces between grade changes must not vary more than .
foot from the lower edge of a foot long straightedge placed parallel to the centerline of the POC .
Surface must not vary more than .
foot from the lower edge of a footlong straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline of the POC Grind surfaces not complying with the smoothness requirements under section until the required smoothness is attained .
Grinding must not reduce the concrete cover on the reinforcing steel to less than inches .
Replace portions of decks that can not be corrected by grinding .
.Dbiii Coefficient of Friction After deck surfaces and approach slabs have been textured the Engineer tests the coefficient of friction of the concrete surfaces under California Test .
Deck surfaces and approach slabs must have a uniform surface texture with a coefficient of friction of not less than .
when opened to traffic or before seal coats are placed whichever occurs first .
If portions of completed deck surfaces or approach slabs have a coefficient of friction of less than .
those portions must be ground to produce a coefficient of friction of not less than .
or grooved parallel to the center line .
Grinding and grooving must comply with section .
The coefficient of friction requirements do not apply for bridge decks to be covered with membrane seals .
.Dbiv Crack Intensity The Engineer measures crack intensity of deck surfaces after curing before prestressing and before falsework release .
Clean the surface for the Engineer to measure surface crack intensity .
In any sq ft portion of a new bridge deck surface if there are more than feet of cracks having a width at any point of over .
inch treat the deck with methacrylate resin under section .B .
Treat the entire deck width between barriers to feet beyond where the furthest continuous crack emanating from the sq ft section is .
inch wide .
Treat the deck surface before grinding .
In any sq ft portion of a new POC deck surface if there are more than feet of cracks having a width at any point of over .
inch treat the deck with methacrylate resin under section .B .
Treat the entire deck width between the curbs to feet beyond where the furthest continuous crack emanating from the sq ft section is .
inch wide .
Treat the deck surface before grinding. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Concrete Except for minor structures the cementitious material content per cubic yard of concrete in structures or portions of structures must comply with the content shown in the following table SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Use Cementitious material content lbcu yd Deck slabs and slab spans of bridges Roof sections of exposed top box culverts Pier columns Seal courses min Other portions of structures Concrete for PC members Except for minor structures the minimum required day compressive strength for concrete in structures or portions of structures is the compressive strength described or psi whichever is greater .
.C Bonding Materials Bonding materials must be magnesium phosphate concrete modified highaluminabased concrete or portlandcementbased concrete .
Magnesium phosphate concrete must be either single component that is water activated or dual component with prepackaged liquid activator .
Modified highaluminabased concrete and portlandcementbased concrete must be water activated .
Bonding materials must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Compressive strength psi min California Test at hours at hours Flexural strength at hours psi min California Test Bond strength at hours psi min California Test Saturated surface dry concrete Dry concrete Water absorption percent max California Test Abrasion resistance at hours g max California Test Drying shrinkage at days percent max ASTM C . Soluble chlorides by weight percent max California Test .
Water soluble sulfates by weight percent max California Test .
Magnesium phosphate concrete must be formulated for a minimum initial set time of minutes and minimum final set time of minutes at degrees F. Store the materials in a cool dry environment before use .
The mix water used with wateractivated material must comply with section .D .
The quantity of water for singlecomponent type or liquid activator for dualcomponent type to be blended with the dry component must be within the limits recommended by the manufacturer and must be the least quantity required to produce a pourable batter .
If authorized you may add retarders to magnesium phosphate concrete .
The addition of retarders must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Magnesium phosphate concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing zinc cadmium aluminum or copper metals .
Modified high alumina based concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing aluminum .
.D Rapid Strength Concrete RSC placed in bridge decks must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES RSC must have a minimum day compressive strength of psi except RSC placed in bridge decks must have a minimum day compressive strength of psi .
.E Colored Concrete Color pigments for colored concrete must be iron oxides complying with ASTM CCM .
The dosage must not exceed percent by weight of cementitious material in the concrete mix design .
When test panels are specified cementitious materials and aggregates from the same sources used in the authorized test panel must be used for the colored concrete in the completed work .
.F Mortar Mortar must be composed of cement sand and water .
Materials for mortar must comply with section .
The proportion of sand to cement measured by volume must be to .
Mortar must contain only enough water to allow placing and packing .
Sand particles must be no larger than the size of the recess or space in which the mortar is to be placed .
.G Grout Grout must consist of portland cement and water with a water content of at most gallons per pounds of cement .
.H Chemical Adhesives Chemical adhesives for bonding dowels must be on the Authorized Material List for chemical adhesivecartridge epoxies .
The chemical adhesive must be appropriate for the installation conditions .
.I Miscellaneous Metal Materials for access opening covers for new structures must comply with section .
.J Miscellaneous Materials Plastic pipe for deck bleeder drains must be schedule PVC complying with ASTM D. Galvanized wire cloth for deck bleeder drains must be inch mesh with .inchdiameter wire. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Methods and Equipment Vehicles weighing over lb are not allowed on any bridge span until the concrete attains a compressive strength of at least psi .
Vehicles weighing over lb are not allowed on any span until the concrete attains a compressive strength of at least psi or attains an age of days .
Vehicles exceeding the weight limitations in Veh Code Div that cross bridges as allowed in section .B must not make repetitive crossings of any span until the concrete attains an age of days .
Vehicles with a gross weight over lb are not allowed on any span of PS concrete structures until the prestressing steel for that span is tensioned .
If authorized you may precast structural elements not designated as PC members .
You may use the slip form method for constructing pier shafts if the results are equal to those obtained by compliance with these specifications and adequate arrangements are made and carried out for curing finishing and protecting the concrete .
When slip forms are used for pier construction the line and grade furnished by the Engineer is limited to establishing control points and checks of slip form position .
You must provide targets markers or other devices for the Engineer to determine the pier shaft position .
Shotcrete is not allowed as an alternative construction method for reinforced concrete members .
You may construct warped portions of wingwalls at the ends of culverts using shotcrete complying with section .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .C Preparation .C General Bottom of footing elevations shown are approximate .
The Engineer may order changes in footing dimensions or elevations .
Where a roughened concrete surface is described roughen the existing concrete surface to a full amplitude of approximately inch by abrasive blasting water blasting or using mechanical equipment .
Pump water from the interior of foundation enclosures without removing concrete materials .
Do not pump water during concrete placement or for hours after placing concrete unless the pumping is done from a sump separated from the concrete work .
.C Forms .Ca General Forms must be .
Mortar tight .
True to the dimensions lines and grades of the structure .
Strong enough to prevent deflection during concrete placement Face exposed surfaces of concrete structures with form panels .
Form panels for exposed surfaces must be plywood complying with or exceeding the requirements of U.S .
Product Standard PS for Exterior BB Concrete Form Class I Plywood or any material that produces a similarly smooth uniform surface .
For exposed surfaces use only form panels in good condition and free of defects such as scars dents or delaminations .
Design and construct forms for exposed surfaces such that surfaces do not undulate more than inch or of the centertocenter distance between studs joists form stiffeners form fasteners or wales in any direction .
Stop using forms or forming systems that produce excessive undulations until modifications satisfactory to the Engineer are made .
The Engineer may reject portions of structures with excessive undulations .
Form exposed surfaces of each element of a concrete structure with the same forming material or with materials that produce similar surface textures color and appearance .
Use form panels in uniform widths of at least feet and uniform lengths of at least feet except at the ends of continuously formed surfaces where the final panel length is less than feet .
For members less than feet wide form panels must be the width of the entire member .
Arrange form panels in symmetrical patterns conforming to the general lines of the structure .
Place panels for vertical surfaces with the long dimension horizontal and horizontal joints level and continuous .
Form panels for curved column surfaces must be continuous for at least of the circumference or feet .
For walls with sloping footings that do not abut other walls you may place panels with the long dimension parallel to the footing .
Align form panels on each side of panel joints with supports or fasteners common to both panels so that a continuous unbroken concrete plane results .
Form filler panels that join prefabricated panels must have a uniform width of at least foot and produce a smooth uniform surface with consistent longitudinal joint lines between panels .
Construct forms for exposed surfaces with triangular fillets at least by inch .
Attach fillets so as to prevent mortar runs and to produce smooth straight chamfers at all sharp edges of the concrete .
Clean inside form surfaces of dirt mortar and foreign material .
Thoroughly coat forms to be removed with form oil before placing concrete .
Form oil must .
Be commercial quality or an equivalent coating .
Allow the ready release of forms .
Not discolor the concrete SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Do not place concrete in forms until .
All form construction work has been completed including removing foreign material .
All materials to be embedded in the concrete have been placed .
Engineer has inspected the forms Forms for concrete surfaces that will not be completely enclosed or hidden below the permanent ground surface must comply with the specifications for forms for exposed surfaces .
Interior surfaces of underground drainage structures are considered completely enclosed surfaces .
Use form fasteners to prevent form spreading during concrete placement .
Do not use twisted wire ties to hold forms in position .
Form fasteners and anchors must be of those types that can be removed as specified for form bolts in section .F without chipping spalling heating or otherwise damaging the concrete surface .
You may cast anchor devices into the concrete for supporting forms or lifting PC members .
Do not use driven types of anchorages for fastening forms or form supports to concrete except for interior surfaces of girders in PS box girder bridges where .
Girders have more than inches of cover over the reinforcement .
Anchorages do not penetrate the girder more than inches and have a minimum spacing of inches .
Anchorages are placed at least inches clear from the edge of concrete .Cb Removing Forms Remove all forms except soffit forms for deck slabs of CIP box girders forms for the interior voids of PC members and the forms in hollow abutments or piers may remain in place for any of the following conditions .
Permanent access into the cells or voids is not shown .
Utility facilities are not to be installed in the completed cells or voids .
Utility facilities to be installed in completed cells or voids are to be inserted into casings that are placed before the completion of the cell or void .
Permanent access is shown or utility facilities other than those in preplaced casings are to be installed in cells or voids and you .
Remove the portions of the forms that obstruct access openings or conflict with utility facilities . .
Provide a longitudinal crawl space at least feet high and feet wide throughout the length of these cells or voids .
Use a forming system that leaves no sharp projections into the cells or voids .
Remove forms between the hinge and feet past the access openings in cells of CIP box girder bridges with access openings near the hinges Clear the inside of the cells or voids of all loose material before completing the forming for the deck of CIP box girders or for the cells or voids of other members when the forms are to remain in place or after the removal of the forms or portions of forms .
You may remove forms that do not support the dead load of concrete if hours have elapsed after concrete placement and the concrete has sufficient strength to prevent damage to the surface .
You may remove forms for railings or barriers after the concrete has hardened .
Protect exposed surfaces from damage .
.Cc Permanent Steel Deck Forms .Cci General Permanent steel deck forms and supports must comply with ASTM AAM Designation SS Grades through coating designation G. Permanent steel deck forms are only allowed where shown or if specified as an option in the special provisions .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .Ccii Design Requirements Design permanent steel deck forms based on the combined dead load of forms reinforcement and plastic concrete with an allowance for construction loads of at least psf .
The combined dead load must be assumed to be at least pcf for normal concrete and pcf for lightweight concrete .
Configure forms such that the weight of deck slab and forms is at most percent of the weight of the deck slab as shown .
Compute the physical design properties under AISIs North American Specification for the Design of Cold Formed Steel Structural Members .
The design span for form sheets is the clear span of the form plus inches measured parallel to the form flutes .
Maximum allowable stresses and deflections are as follows .
Tensile stress must not exceed the lesser of .
times the specified yield strength or psi. . Dead load deflection must not exceed the lesser of .
times the form span or inch .
The dead load for deflection calculations must be at least psf total. . You may use form camber based on the actual dead load condition .
Do not use camber to compensate for deflection exceeding the allowable limits .
.Cciii Installation Do not weld steel deck forms to flanges of steel girders .
Permanent steel deck forms must not interfere with movement at deck expansion joints .
Clearance between deck forms and bar reinforcement must be at least inch .
Do not use permanent steel deck forms for sections of deck slabs with longitudinal expansion joints unless additional supports are placed under the joint .
Do not rest form sheets directly on top of girder flanges .
Fasten sheets securely to form supports .
Provide at least inch of bearing at each end .
Place form supports in direct contact with girder flanges .
Attach supports using bolts clips or other authorized means .
Locate transverse deck construction joints at the bottom of flutes .
Field drill inch weep holes at not less than inches on center along the joint line .
Repair galvanized form surfaces damaged before installation by wire brushing to remove loose and cracked coating and applying coats of zincrich primer .
Do not use aerosol cans .
You do not need to repair minor heat discoloration in welded areas .
.D Placing Concrete .D General Thoroughly moisten forms and subgrade with water immediately before placing concrete .
Place and consolidate concrete using methods that do not cause segregation of the aggregate and produce dense homogeneous concrete without voids or rock pockets .
Place concrete while fresh and before initial set .
Do not retemper partially hardened concrete with additional water .
Place concrete continuously in each integral part of the structure .
Do not start work unless placement can be completed uninterrupted .
Place concrete for girder spans in at least operations .
The last operation must consist of placing the deck slab .
Allow at least days between operations .
Place concrete as close to its final position as possible .
Do not use vibrators for extensive shifting of concrete .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Except for CIP piles do not allow fresh concrete to fall more than feet without using pipes tubes or double belting to prevent segregation .
Do not use double belting unless the member thickness is less than inches .
Except for concrete placed as pipe culvert headwalls and endwalls slope paving and aprons and concrete placed under water consolidate concrete using highfrequency internal vibrators within minutes of placing concrete in the forms .
Do not attach vibrators to or hold them against forms or reinforcing steel .
Do not displace reinforcement ducts or prestressing steel during vibrating .
For structure footings over .
feet in depth that have a top layer of reinforcement reconsolidate the concrete to a depth of foot after placing consolidating and initial screeding of the concrete .
Reconsolidate the concrete as late as the concrete will respond again to vibration but not less than minutes after the initial screeding .
Vibrators used for concrete with epoxycoated reinforcement or prestressing steel must have a resilient covering to prevent damage to the epoxy coating .
If concrete is inaccessible for adequate consolidation by other means external vibrators must be used and the forms must be sufficiently rigid to resist displacement or damage .
Do not place concrete for horizontal members until the concrete in supporting vertical members has been consolidated and settlement due to bleeding is complete .
Where shown apply a bond breaker to joint surfaces .
Do not construct drainage structures to final grade until adjacent paving or surfacing is complete .
.D Concrete Bridge Decks For concrete decks placed on continuous steel girders or PC concrete girders place the portion of deck over the supports last .
For decks on PC concrete girders place intermediate and end diaphragms at least days before placing the deck concrete .
For decks on structural steel install cross frames the entire width of the bridge before placing the deck concrete .
Deck closure pours must comply with the following .
During primary deck placement and for at least hours after completing the deck placement reinforcing steel protruding into the closure space must be free from any connection to reinforcing steel concrete forms or other attachments of the adjacent structure. . Closure pour forms must be supported from the superstructure on both sides of the closure space .
.D Concrete Placed Under Water Only seal course concrete may be placed under water .
If the Engineer determines that it is impossible or inadvisable to dewater excavations before placing concrete place a seal course under the water using a tremie or a concrete pump .
The seal course must be at least feet thick and thick enough to seal the cofferdam .
The tremie must be a watertight tube at least inches in diameter with a hopper at the top .
When concrete is deposited into the hopper flow is induced by raising the discharge end .
Equip discharge and tremie tubes with a device to prevent water from entering the tube when charging the tube with concrete .
Support the tubes so as to allow for free movement of the discharge end over the entire work surface and rapid lowering of the tube .
Fill the tubes using a method that prevents washing of the concrete .
Keep the discharge end submerged in the concrete at all times .
The tube must contain enough concrete to prevent water entry .
Place the concrete carefully in a compact mass .
Concrete flow must be continuous until completion of the seal course .
The seal course must be monolithic and homogeneous .
Do not disturb concrete after placement .
Maintain still water at the point of placement .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Cure the seal course concrete for at least days before dewatering the cofferdam .
Increase the curing time for seal course concrete placed in water that is below degrees F. Periods of time when the water temperature is continuously below degrees F is not considered as curing time .
Dewater the cofferdam after the seal course has adequate strength to resist the hydrostatic load .
After dewatering clean the top of the concrete of all scum laitance and sediment .
Remove local high spots to provide the specified clearance for reinforcing steel before placing fresh concrete .
.D Construction Joints Place construction joints only where described unless authorized .
At horizontal construction joints .
Thoroughly consolidate fresh concrete surfaces without completely removing surface irregularities .
At joints between girder stems and decks roughen the surfaces of fresh concrete to at least a inch amplitude Abrasive blast clean construction joint surfaces before placing fresh concrete against the joint surfaces .
Remove surface laitance curing compound and other foreign materials .
Flush construction joint surfaces with water and allow the surfaces to dry to a surfacedry condition immediately before placing concrete .
If authorized in an emergency you may place a construction joint at a location not described .
The Engineer determines the location of the construction joint and the quantity of additional reinforcing steel to be placed across the joint .
Locate longitudinal construction joints in bridge decks along lane lines if a joint location is not shown .
.D Colored Concrete When placing colored concrete .
Monitor the water content weight of cementitious materials and size weight and color of aggregate to maintain consistency and accuracy of the mixed colored concrete . .
Schedule delivery of concrete to provide consistent mix times from batching until discharge .
Do not add water after a portion of the batch has been discharged. . Use consistent finishing practices to ensure uniformity of texture and color . .
Protect surrounding exposed surfaces during placement finishing and curing activities of colored concrete .
If more than concrete pump is used to place concrete designate the pumps to receive colored concrete .
The designated pumps must receive only colored concrete throughout the concrete placement operation .
Cure colored concrete by the formsinplace method or the curing compound method .
If the curing compound method is used the curing compound must be clear or match the color of the colored concrete and must be manufactured specifically for colored concrete .
Do not use curing compounds containing calcium chloride .
The time between completing surface finishing and applying the curing compound must be the same for each colored concrete component .
.D Bearing Surfaces For elastomeric bearing pads wood float finish the concrete bearing surface to a level plane that varies at most inch from a straightedge placed in any direction and is within inch of the specified elevation .
The bearing area must extend at least inch beyond the limits of the bearing pads .
For bearing assemblies or masonry plates not embedded in concrete construct the concrete bearing area above grade and grind to a true level plane that does not vary perceptibly from a straightedge placed in any direction and is within inch of the elevation shown .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .D Pier Columns Place concrete for pier columns against firm undisturbed foundation material on the bottom and sides of the pier column excavations except place concrete against forms where shown .
Immediately before placing concrete all excavated surfaces against which the concrete is to be placed must be free from standing water ice mud debris and loose material .
.E Miscellaneous Construction .E General Where shown paint the bridge name bridge number and bent number in neat inchhigh black letters and figures .
Where shown and before backfilling to within feet of finished grade install temporary bumpers at the ends of bridges and grade top culverts .
Where pipes outside the structure join the structure cast bell recesses in the concrete to receive the pipe or cast sections of the pipe in the concrete .
If bell recesses are used mortar the pipe end into the bell .
.E Placing Mortar Place mortar in recesses and holes on surfaces under structural members and at other locations where described .
Clean concrete areas to be in contact with mortar of loose or foreign material that would prevent bonding between the mortar and the concrete surfaces .
Flush the concrete areas with water and allow them to dry to a surfacedry condition immediately before placing the mortar .
Tightly pack mortar to completely fill spaces .
Locations where mortar can escape must be mortartight before placing mortar .
Cure mortar for days using the water method under section .B .
Do not load mortar until hours after placement unless authorized .
.E Drill and Bond Dowels For drill and bond dowels drill the holes without damaging the adjacent concrete .
Holes for bonded dowels must be inch larger than the nominal dowel diameter .
If reinforcement is encountered during drilling before the specified depth is attained notify the Engineer .
Unless coring through the reinforcement is authorized drill a new hole adjacent to the rejected hole to the depth shown .
Coat the surface of any dowel coated with zinc or cadmium with a colored lacquer .
Allow the lacquer to dry thoroughly before installing the dowel .
Each drilled hole must be clean and dry when placing the bonding material and dowel .
The bonding material and dowel must completely fill the drilled hole .
The surface temperature must be at least degrees F when magnesium phosphate concrete is placed .
Thoroughly dry finishing tools cleaned with water before working magnesium phosphate concrete .
Leave dowels undisturbed for hours or until the dowels can be supported by the concrete .
Cure modified highaluminabased concrete and portlandcementbased concrete using the curing compound method .
Do not cure magnesium phosphate concrete .
Replace dowels that fail to bond or are damaged .
.E Drill and Grout Dowels Drill the holes under section .E .
For drill and grout dowels drill the holes inch larger than the nominal dowel diameter .
Immediately before placing dowels holes must be cleaned be thoroughly saturated with water have all free water removed and be dried to a saturated surface dry condition .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Place grout into the holes and insert the dowels .
Retempering of grout is not allowed .
Cure grout at least days or until the dowels are encased in concrete .
Immobilize the dowels during the curing period .
Cure using curing compound method or by keeping the surface continuously damp .
Replace dowels that fail to bond or are damaged .
.E Drill and Bond Dowels Chemical Adhesive For drill and bond dowel chemical adhesive the drilled hole diameter and depth must comply with the ICBO evaluation report for the size of dowel being installed unless otherwise shown .
Increase the drilled hole depth specified in the ICBO evaluation report by percent when dowels are epoxy coated .
Drill the holes without damaging the adjacent concrete .
If reinforcement is encountered during drilling before the specified depth is attained notify the Engineer .
Unless coring through the reinforcement is authorized drill a new hole adjacent to the rejected hole to the depth shown .
Immediately after inserting the dowels into the chemical adhesive support the dowels as necessary to prevent movement until the epoxy has cured the minimum time specified in the Authorized Material List for chemical adhesivecartridge epoxies .
Replace dowels that fail to bond or are damaged .
Drill new holes adjacent to rejected dowels and install replacement dowels .
.E Nonskid Abrasive Finish Where shown place a nonskid abrasive finish on pedestrian walkways stair treads and landings .
The nonskid finish must consist of commercialquality aluminum oxide silicon carbide or almandite garnet grit particles sieve size no .
to or no .
to .
Uniformly apply grit particles at a rate of at least .
lbsq ft onto the floated concrete surface while the concrete is plastic .
Bury the particles into the concrete to a depth of approximately .
times the diameter of each particle .
.E Drains in Walls Where shown construct drain holes and weep holes in abutment walls wingwalls and retaining walls .
Cover retaining wall and abutment wall drains at the back face of the wall with inch mesh .inch diameter aluminum or galvanized steel wire hardware cloth .
Mount hardware cloth in forms before pouring concrete or fasten the cloth to the exterior concrete surface with masonry nails .
In addition to wall drains install hydrostatic pressure relief holes inches in diameter at the bottom of walls immediately above footings at approximately foot centers .
.E Deck Bleeder Drains The Engineer provides the exact location for each deck bleeder drain .
Drill the holes for drains in existing bridges using a diamond core drill bit .
Do not spall hole edges .
Holes must be inches in diameter .
Install drains such that the top of the pipe is approximately inch below the concrete deck surface .
Replace drains out of position as determined by the Engineer .
Secure plastic pipe installed in existing bridges with an epoxy adhesive .
Score the outside surfaces of the pipe before installing the pipe .
Spread epoxy on both the pipe and hole surfaces .
Epoxy must completely fill the space between the pipe and the hole .
Install drains before placing the deck seal .
Center the wire cloth above the drains .
Place the cloth after placing the deck seal and before placing the HMA .
Secure the cloth using an authorized method to prevent movement during HMA placement .
Do not damage the deck seal .
.E Utility Facilities Where shown utility facilities will be carried in or on structures .
Install hangers anchor bolt inserts manhole frames and covers sleeves and other accessories required for the utility facility that must be cast in the concrete .
The utility owner will furnish these items .
The utility owner will furnish and install conductors and casings when the structure is ready for the installation and before any work that interferes with installation is started .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Notify the Engineer at least days before the date structures are ready for utility installation .
The Engineer will notify the utility owner .
.E Concrete Headers and Steel Plates Concrete for concrete headers must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
Steel plates and attachment hardware must comply with section except that galvanizing is not required .
.E Diaphragm Bolsters Reserved .E Hinge Tiedowns Reserved .F Finishing Concrete .F General Strike off exposed surfaces of consolidated concrete to the lines and grades shown .
Provide a uniform surface texture having the specified finish without undulations or irregularities .
The Engineer determines the acceptability of the surface finishes .
Finish sidewalks curbs and stairways on structures under section except surfaces are not marked .
.F Ordinary Surface Finish Apply ordinary surface finish to all concrete surfaces as a final finish or before applying a higher class finish .
Ordinary surface finish must be the final finish for the following surfaces .
Undersurfaces of slab spans box girders spandrel arch spans and floor slabs between girders of superstructures .
Inside vertical surfaces of T girders of superstructures .
Surfaces to be buried underground or covered with embankment and surfaces of culverts above finished ground that are not visible from the traveled way Ordinary surface finish includes .
Filling holes or depressions .
Repairing rock pockets and unsound concrete .
Removing fins and projections flush to the surface .
Removing stains and discolorations visible from traveled ways You do not need to remove fins from surfaces that are buried underground or enclosed .
Remove form bolts and metal placed for your convenience to at least inch below the concrete surface .
Clean and fill the resulting holes with mortar .
You do not need to remove form bolts in box girder cells except you must remove bolts flush if deck forms are removed from the cells .
Fill bolt holes with mortar under section .E .
Fill depressions and pockets with packed mortar or shotcrete as determined by the Engineer .
Cure filler under section .H .
For exposed surfaces add enough white cement to the patching material to match the surrounding concrete after drying .
If the Engineer determines that rock pockets are extensive remove and replace the affected portions of the structure .
.F Class Surface Finish Class surface finish includes finishing concrete surfaces to produce smooth even surfaces of uniform texture and appearance without bulges depressions or other imperfections .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Class surface finish must be the final surface finish for the following surfaces .
Except for those surfaces listed in ordinary surface finish the surfaces of bridge superstructures including the undersurfaces of deck overhangs .
Surfaces of bridge piers piles columns and abutments and retaining walls above finished ground and to at least foot below finished ground .
Surfaces of open spandrel arch rings spandrel columns and abutment towers .
Surfaces of pedestrian undercrossings except floors and surfaces to be covered with earth .
Surfaces of culvert headwalls above finished ground and endwalls visible from a traveled way .
Interior surfaces of culvert barrels having a height of feet or more for a distance equal to the culvert height where visible from a traveled way .
Interior surfaces of pump house motor and control rooms and enginegenerator rooms .
Surfaces of railings Do not apply Class surface finish until a uniform appearance can be attained .
Use power carborundum stones or disks to remove bulges and other imperfections .
Sand areas not complying with the Class surface finish requirements using power sanders or other authorized abrasive means until the specified surface finish is attained .
.F Class Surface Finish Where a Class surface finish is described .
Apply an ordinary surface finish to the concrete surface. . Abrasive blast the surface to a rough texture and then thoroughly wash the surface with water. . Pneumatically apply a mortar coat approximately inch thick in at least passes to the damp surface .
The coating must firmly bond to the concrete surface .
The mortar coat must consist of either sand portland cement and water mechanically mixed before entering the nozzle or premixed sand and portland cement with water added before leaving the nozzle .
The proportion of cement to sand must be at least to .
Use sand with a grading suitable for the work .
You may substitute cementitious material complying with section for portland cement .
You may use admixtures specified in section if authorized .
Do not mortar coat areas where bridge name or other designations are to be painted .
The coating surface must be uniform without unsightly bulges depressions or other imperfections and as left by the nozzle .
Protect the coating from damage and keep it damp for days after placing .
Remove and replace loose areas of coating .
Where a Class surface finish is described for a pedestrian undercrossing use silica sand and white portland cement .
.F Finishing Roadway Surfaces .Fa General Construct concrete roadway surfaces of structures approach slabs sleeper slabs and adjoining approach pavement and concrete decks to be covered with another material to the grade and cross section shown .
Surfaces must comply with the specified smoothness surface texture and surface crack requirements .
The Engineer sets deck elevation control points for your use in establishing the grade and cross section of the deck surface .
The grade established by the deck elevation control points includes all camber allowances .
Elevation control points will not be closer together than approximately feet longitudinally and feet transversely to the bridge centerline .
Before starting concrete placement for any deck section .
Set to grade all rails and headers used to support or control the finishing equipment .
Check rails and headers to ensure the completed deck complies with smoothness requirements SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .
Move the finishing equipment over the length of the section to check steel and bulkhead clearances For approach slabs sleeper slabs and other roadway surfaces of concrete structures texture the roadway surface as specified for bridge deck surfaces in section .Fb .
Finish bridge decks to be covered with membrane seals to a smooth surface free of mortar ridges and other projections .
Where a future widening is shown strike off deck surfaces under curbs railings barriers and sidewalks to the same plane as the roadway and leave undisturbed .
Deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements .
Profile trace having no high points over .
foot .
Profile count of or less in any foot section for portions within the traveled way .
Surface not varying more than .
foot from the lower edge of a footlong straightedge placed transversely to traffic Complete the smoothness testing and any required grinding before applying seal coats .
.Fb Bridge Deck Surface Texture .Fbi General Except for bridge widenings texture roadway surfaces of bridge decks approach slabs and sleeper slabs and other roadway surfaces of concrete structures longitudinally by grinding and grooving or by longitudinal tining .
For bridge widenings texture the roadway surfaces longitudinally by longitudinal tining .
Do not texture bridge decks that are to be covered with an overlay .
If a bridge is opened to traffic before the overlay is placed texture the deck by longitudinal tining .
.Fbii Grinding and Grooving When texturing the deck surface by grinding and grooving place a inch of sacrificial concrete cover on the bridge deck above the finished grade shown .
Place items to be embedded in the concrete based on the final profile grade elevations shown .
Construct joint seals after completing the grinding and grooving .
Before grinding and grooving deck surfaces must comply with the smoothness and deck crack treatment requirements .
Grind and groove the deck surface as follows .
Grind the surface to within inches of the toe of the barrier under section .
Grinding must not reduce the concrete cover on reinforcing steel to less than inches . .
Groove the ground surfaces longitudinally under section .
The grooves must be parallel to the centerline .
.Fbiii Longitudinal Tining When texturing the deck surface by longitudinal tining perform initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device that produces striations parallel to the centerline .
Perform final texturing with spring steel tines that produce grooves parallel with the centerline .
The tines must .
Be rectangular in cross section .
Be from to inch wide on inch centers .
Have enough length thickness and resilience to form grooves approximately inch deep Construct grooves to within inches of the layout line of the concrete barrier toe .
Grooves must be from to inch deep and inch wide after concrete has hardened .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES For irregular areas and areas inaccessible to the grooving machine you may hand construct grooves .
Handconstructed grooves must comply with the specifications for machineconstructed grooves .
Tining must not cause tearing of the deck surface or visible separation of coarse aggregate at the surface .
.F Finishing Pedestrian Overcrossing Surfaces Construct deck surfaces including ramps and landings of POCs to the grade and cross section shown .
Surfaces must comply with the specified smoothness surface texture and surface crack requirements .
The Engineer sets deck elevation control points for your use in establishing the grade and cross section of the deck surface .
The grade established by the deck elevation control points includes all camber allowances .
Except for landings elevation control points include the beginning and end of the ramp and will not be closer together than approximately feet longitudinally and feet transversely to the POC centerline .
Landing elevation control points are at the beginning and the end of the landing .
Broom finish the deck surfaces of POCs .
Apply the broom finish perpendicular to the path of travel .
You may apply water mist to the surface immediately before brooming .
Clean any discolored concrete by abrasive blast cleaning or other authorized methods .
POC deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements .
Surfaces between grade changes must not vary more than .
foot from the lower edge of a foot long straightedge placed parallel to the centerline of the POC .
Surface must not vary more than .
foot from the lower edge of a footlong straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline of the POC .G Concrete Surface Textures .G General Provide the concrete surface textures shown .
The Engineer determines the acceptability of the surface textures .
Construct a test panel for each type of concrete surface texture shown .
Fractured rib texture must consist of straight ribs of concrete with a fractured texture on the raised surface between ribs .
Grooves between ribs must be continuous with no apparent curves or discontinuities and straight to within inch in feet .
The texture must have random shadow patterns .
Broken concrete at adjoining ribs and groups of ribs must have a random pattern .
The texture must not have repetitive fractured surfaces or secondary shadow patterns .
Heavy blast texture must consist of an abrasiveblasted concrete surface of uniform color and sandy texture with air and water bubbles in the concrete partially exposed .
Formed relief texture must consist of a formed relief constructed to the dimensions and shapes shown with a Class surface finish .
Intersecting corners of plane surfaces must be sharp and crisp without easing or rounding .
Cure concrete surface textures by the formsinplace or water methods .
.G Form Liners Use form liners for concrete surface textures except for heavy blast and formed relief textures .
Other forming methods must be authorized .
Form liners must be manufactured from an elastomeric material by a manufacturer of commercially available concrete form liners and leave a crisp sharp definition of the concrete surface texture .
Form liners must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Shore A hardness ASTM D Tensile strength psi min ASTM D SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Comply with the form liner manufacturers instructions for use .
Seal and repair cuts and tears in form liners under the form liner manufacturers instructions .
Do not use form liners that are delaminated or deformed .
Extend form liners the full length of texturing with transverse joints at foot minimum spacing .
Do not use small pieces of form liners .
Align grooves straight and true .
Grooves must match at joints between form liners .
For grooved patterns joints in the direction of grooves must be located in depressions .
Butt adjoining liners together without distortion open cracks or offsets .
Clean joints between liners and remove mortar before use .
Adhesives must be compatible with the form liner material and the concrete .
Adhesives must be recommended by the liner manufacturer and not cause swelling of the liner material .
Cast form liner patterns to prevent recurring textural configurations exhibited by repeating recognizable shadow patterns .
Remove surfaces with recurring textural configurations by reworking using authorized methods or by replacement .
Use a form release agent recommended by the form liner manufacturer .
The release agent must not .
Cause swelling of the liner material .
Cause delamination from the forms .
Stain the concrete .
React with the liner material Coat form liners with a thin film of release agent .
For textures with longitudinal patterns apply the release agent using a natural bristle brush in the direction of the pattern .
Clean excess release agent from liners using compressed air .
Remove release agent buildup due to liner reuse at least every uses .
Form liners must release without leaving pieces of liner on the concrete or removing concrete from the surface .
Except for formed relief textures abrasive blast concrete surface textures with fine abrasive after removing forms to remove sheen without exposing coarse aggregate .
.H Curing Concrete Structures Except for bridge decks cure newly placed concrete for CIP structures using the water method or the formsinplace method under section .B .
Cure the top surface of bridge decks using both the curing compound method and the water method .
The curing compound must be curing compound no . .
Cure the top surface of bridge decks to be sealed with butyl rubber membrane using only the water method .
For bridge decks and flat slabs using the water method without a curing medium keep the entire surface damp by applying water with an atomizing nozzle that forms a mist and not a spray until the concrete has set .
After the concrete has set continuously sprinkle the entire concrete surface with water for at least days .
You may use a pigmented curing compound complying with section .B for .
Concrete surfaces of construction joints .
Concrete surfaces that are to be buried underground .
Concrete surfaces not visible from a public traveled way where only a ordinary surface finish is to be applied and a uniform color is not required If you use the curing compound method on the bottom slab of box girder spans the curing compound must be curing compound no . .
If ordered during periods of hot weather apply water to concrete surfaces being cured by the curing compound method or by the formsinplace method until the Engineer determines that a cooling effect is no longer required .
This work is change order work .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES For RSC using portland cement .
Cure the concrete using the curing compound method .
Fogging of the surface with water after the curing compound has been applied is not required . .
Immediately repair any damage to the film of the curing compound with additional curing compound .
Do not repair damage to the curing compound after the concrete is opened to traffic. . Cover the surface with an insulating layer or blanket when the ambient temperature is below degrees F during the curing period .
The insulation layer or blanket must have the Rvalue rating shown in the table below .
A heating tent may be used instead of or in combination with the insulating layer or blanket .
Temperature range during curing period F Rvalue rating min .I Protecting Concrete Structures Maintain concrete at a temperature of not less than degrees F for hours after placing and at not less than degrees F for an additional days. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for seal course concrete is the actual volume of seal course concrete placed except the maximum payment quantity is the volume of concrete contained between vertical planes foot outside the neat lines of the seal course shown .
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the seal course concrete quantity .
JOINTS .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for constructing sealing and protecting joints in concrete structures .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for polyethylene material for snowplow deflectors .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .B General Premolded expansion joint filler must comply with ASTM D. Expanded polystyrene must be commercially available polystyrene board with a flexural strength of at least psi when tested under ASTM C and a compressive yield strength from to psi at percent compression .
Face the surfaces of expanded polystyrene that concrete is placed against with inchthick hardboard complying with ANSI A .. You may use other facing materials that provide equivalent protection .
Secure the hardboard using nails waterproof adhesive or other authorized means .
.B Snowplow Deflectors Snowplow deflectors must consist of ultrahighmolecularweight polyethylene plates with anchorage devices .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Anchorage devices must comply with ASTM A UNS designation S or S. Ultrahighmolecularweight polyethylene plates must be UV stabilized and comply with ASTM D and the requirements shown the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Density pcf min ASTM D Tensile strength ultimate psi min ASTM D Tensile strength yield psi min ASTM D Elongation at break percent ASTM D Hardness Shore D min ASTM D .C Construction .C General Construct open joints using a suitable material that you subsequently remove .
Do not chip or break concrete corners when removing the material .
Reinforcement must not extend across an open joint .
For filled joints place premolded or expanded polystyrene joint filler in position before placing concrete .
Fill holes and joints with mastic to prevent the passage of mortar or concrete .
Finish concrete edges at joints using an edger .
.C Snowplow Deflectors Drilling and bonding anchorage devices must comply with the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section .E .
Where shown apply a thread locking system to the anchorage devices under section .B .
.D Payment Not Used .
SEALED JOINTS .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section .
includes general specifications for fabricating and installing sealed joints .
Sealed joints must .
Be in planned position .
Resist the intrusion of foreign material and water .
Provide bumpfree passage of traffic MR is measured normal to the longitudinal joint axis .
Use the seal type shown in the following table for the MR shown Movement rating Seal type MR inch Type A or B inch MR inches Type B inches MR inches Strip seal joint seal assembly MR inches Modular unit joint seal assembly or seismic joint .Ab Definitions Reserved .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .Ac Submittals Submit a work plan for cleaning expansion joints .
Include details for preventing material equipment or debris from falling onto traffic or railroad property .
.Ad Quality Assurance Reserved .A Materials You may clean and paint metal surfaces of joint seal assemblies instead of galvanizing .
Cleaning and painting must comply with the specifications for new structural steel in section except SSPCQP SSPCQP and AISCSSPCQP certifications are not required .
Finish coats are not required .
Do not paint stainless steel or anchorages embedded in concrete .
.A Construction The Engineer may order you to install a joint seal larger than required by the MR .
This work is change order work .
The joint opening at the time of placement must be that shown adjusted for temperature .
Do not impair the joint clearance .
Cover or otherwise protect joints at all times before joint seals are installed .
Do not allow debris or foreign material to enter joints .
Clean expansion joints at existing bridges before installing joint seals .
Remove all existing seal material dirt debris damaged waterstops and joint filler .
Use methods that do not damage existing sound concrete .
Verify the joint size after cleaning .
Clean existing joints with undamaged waterstops to the top of the waterstop unless the waterstop is to be removed .
Clean existing joints without waterstops and joints with damaged waterstops down to the hinge or bearing seat .
Repair joint damage as ordered .
Cleaning joints below existing waterstops that are damaged and repairing existing joint damage is change order work .
.A Payment Joint seals and joint seal assemblies are measured from end to end along the centerline of the completed seal including return sections and curb faces .
.B Type A and AL Joint Seals .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for installing Type A and AL joints seals .
Type A and AL joint seals consist of fieldmixed silicone sealant placed in grooves in the concrete .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance and certified test report for each batch of sealant .
At least days before use submit quart test samples of the following to METS .
Both components from each batch of sealant .
Manufacturerrequired primers SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .Bd Quality Assurance .Bdi General Reserved .Bdii Department Acceptance The Department tests sealants under California Test .
.B Materials The sealant must be a component silicone type that withstands a percent movement .
The sealant must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Modulus at percent elongation psi California Test Recovery inches max California Test Notch test California Test Notched or loss of bond inch max Water resistance California Test Notched or loss of bond inch max Ultraviolet exposure California Test No more than slight cracking or checking Cone penetration mm California Test ..
The sealant must be selfleveling and cure rapidly enough to not flow on grades up to percent .
Label sealant containers or provide identification tickets for tanks of component material .
Include the following .
Material designation .
Lot number .
Manufacturers name and instructions for use .
Dates of manufacture packing and expiration Do not use material that has expired unless it is retested and authorized .
Polyethylene foam or rod stock for retaining sealant must be commercial quality with a continuous impervious glazed surface .
.B Construction .Ba General Do not use sealant or adhesive that has skinned over or can not be redispersed by hand stirring .
Abrasive blast clean joints and remove foreign material with highpressure air immediately before installing seals .
Protect waterstops during cleaning .
Joint surfaces must be surface dry when seals are placed .
Place the sealant using equipment that mixes and extrudes the sealant into the joint .
The equipment and the sealant placement must be as recommended by the sealant manufacturer .
Do not use liquid components that have been exposed to air for more than hours .
.Bb Type A Seal Preparation For Type A joint seals do not start cutting grooves until joint material is delivered to the job site .
Concrete saws for cutting grooves in the concrete must have diamond blades with a minimum thickness of inch .
Cut both sides of the groove simultaneously for a minimum st pass depth of inches .
The completed groove must have .
Top width within inch of the width shown or ordered .
Bottom width not varying from the top width by more than inch for each inches of depth .
Uniform width and depth SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Cutting grooves in existing decks includes cutting any conflicting reinforcing steel .
Saw cutting grooves is not required at the following locations .
Joints armored with metal .
Joints in curbs sidewalks barriers and railings if grooves are formed to the required dimensions .
Existing joints where Type A seals are to be installed Remove all material from the deck joint to the bottom of the saw cut .
Remove foreign material from joints in curbs sidewalks barriers railings and deck slab overhangs .
The Engineer may order you to saw cut grooves at existing joints to be sealed with a Type A joint seal .
This work is change order work .
Repair spalls fractures or voids in the grooved surface at least hours before installing the joint seal .
Bevel the lips of saw cuts by grinding .
.Bc Type AL Seal Preparation For Type AL joint seals remove expanded polystyrene and foreign material to the depth of the joint seal .
Grind or edge the lip of the joint .
.B Payment Not Used .C Type B Joint Seals .C General .Ca Summary Section .C includes specifications for installing Type B joint seals .
Type B joint seals consist of preformed elastomeric joint seals placed in grooves in the concrete .
.Cb Definitions Reserved .Cc Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance with certified test report for each lot of elastomeric joint seal and lubricantadhesive .
Test reports must include the seal MR the manufacturers minimum uncompressed width and test results .
Submit each joint seal test sample selected by the Engineer for testing with its certificate of compliance at least days before use .
.Cd Quality Assurance .Cdi General Reserved .Cdii Quality Control The Engineer selects test samples of joint seal material and lubricantadhesive at random from each lot of material .
Test samples are selected from stock at the job site or at a location acceptable to the Engineer and the manufacturer .
Joint seal test samples must be at least feet long .
Demonstrate the adequacy of installation procedures for Type B seals before starting installation activities .
.Cdiii Department Acceptance Reserved .C Materials Preformed elastomeric joint seals must SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .
Comply with ASTM D . Consist of a multichannel nonporous homogeneous material furnished in a finished extruded form .
Have a minimum seal depth at the contact surface of at least percent of the minimum uncompressed seal width designated by the manufacturer .
Provide an MR of at least that shown when tested under California Test .
Have the top and bottom edges in continuous contact with the sides of the groove throughout the entire range of joint movement .
Be furnished full length for each joint with at most shop splice in any foot length For seals that would admit water or debris fill each cell to a depth of inches at the open ends with open cell polyurethane foam or close the cells by other authorized means .
You may make field splice per joint if authorized .
Splice location and method must be authorized .
Seals must be manufactured full length and then cut at the splice location and rematched before splicing .
Shop and field splices must have no visible offset of exterior surfaces and no evidence of bond failure .
Combination lubricantadhesive must comply with ASTM D. .C Construction Prepare joints under section .Bb except remove all material from the deck joint to the top of the waterstop or to the depth of the seal to be installed plus inches .
Thoroughly clean contact surfaces and the top surface of the seal to within inch from either edge immediately before applying the lubricantadhesive .
Liberally apply the lubricantadhesive to vertical groove surfaces and the sides of the joint seal under the manufacturers instructions .
Install joint seals full length for each joint using equipment that does not distort or damage the seal or the concrete .
The top edges of the installed seal must be in a plane normal to the sides of the groove .
.C Payment Not Used .D Joint Seal Assemblies with a Movement Rating of inches or Less .D General .Da Summary Section .D includes specifications for fabricating and installing joint seal assemblies with an MR of inches or less .
Joint seal assemblies with an MR of inches or less must consist of metal or metal and elastomeric assemblies placed in recesses over joints .
Strip seal joint seal assemblies consist of a joint cell .
If authorized you may use an alternative joint seal assembly if .
Quality of the alternative assembly and its suitability for the intended application are at least equal to that of the joint seal assembly shown .
The factors to be considered include the ability of the assembly to resist the intrusion of foreign material and water throughout the full range of movement for the application and the ability to function without distress to any component . .
Alternative joint seal assembly has had at least year of proven satisfactory service under conditions similar to those described .
.Db Definitions Reserved .Dc Submittals .Dci General For alternative joint seal assemblies submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of joint seal materials .
The certificate must state that the materials and fabrication involved comply with the specifications and the data submitted in obtaining the authorization for the alternative joint seal assembly .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .Dcii Shop Drawings For alternative joint seal assemblies submit copies of shop drawings for each joint seal assembly to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of your submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
After review submit to copies as requested for final authorization and use during construction .
Include details of the joint seal assembly and anchorage components method of installation blockout details and additions or rearrangements of reinforcing steel .
If requested submit supplemental calculations for each proposed alternative joint seal assembly .
Include in the shop drawings the thermal equation for setting the minimum joint opening at installation .
Shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer .
Allow days for the Departments review .
Submit corrected copy to OSD Documents Unit for each joint seal assembly within days of final authorization .
.Dd Quality Assurance Reserved .D Materials .Da General Metal parts must comply with section .
Bolts nuts and washers must comply with ASTM A .
Sheet neoprene must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section .B .
Fabricate sheet neoprene to fit the joint seal assembly accurately .
.Db Alternative Joint Seal Assemblies Alternative joint seal assemblies must have CIP anchorage components for casting into the deck .
The anchorage components must include anchor studs spaced at a maximum of inches .
The studs must be at least inch in diameter and inches long except the studs may be inches long in the overhang .
Instead of complying with section metal parts may comply with ASTM AAM .
Elastomer must be neoprene complying with the requirements shown in Table of ASTM D except recovery and compressiondeflection tests are not required and the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Hardness points Type A durometer ASTM D modified Compression set percent max hours at C ASTM D modified The design loading must be the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Design Truck with percent dynamic load allowance .
The tire contact area must be inches measured normal to the longitudinal assembly axis by inches wide .
The assembly must provide a smoothriding joint without slapping of components or tire rumble .
The MR of the assembly must be measured normal to the longitudinal axis of the assembly .
Dimensions for positioning the assembly within the MR during installation must be measured normal to the longitudinal axis .
Do not consider skew of the deck expansion joint .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES The maximum depth and width of the recess must be such that the primary reinforcement providing the necessary strength of the structural members is outside the recess .
The maximum depth at abutments and hinges is inches .
The maximum width on each side of the expansion joint is inches .
Horizontal angle points and vertical corners at curbs must be premolded sections or standard sections of the assembly that have been miter cut or bent to fit .
.D Construction Deck surfaces must comply with section .F before placing and anchoring joint seal assemblies .
POC deck surfaces must comply with section .F before placing and anchoring joint seal assemblies .
Preassemble metal parts of assemblies before installation to verify geometry .
Except for primary reinforcement continue reinforcement through the recess construction joint into the recess and engage anchorage components of the assembly .
Thoroughly clean joints immediately before installing sheet neoprene .
Install sheet neoprene at such time that it will not be damaged by construction activities .
Place the assembly in the blockedout recess in the concrete deck surface .
The depth and width of the recess must allow the installation of the assembly anchorage components or anchorage bearing surface to the lines and grades shown .
For alternative joint seal assemblies install elastomer under the manufacturers instructions .
Thoroughly clean the joint and blockout immediately before elastomer installation .
.D Payment Not Used .E Joint Seal Assemblies with a Movement Rating Over inches .E General .Ea Summary Section .E includes specifications for fabricating and installing joint seal assemblies with an MR over inches .
Joint seal assemblies and seismic joints consist of metal or metal and elastomeric assemblies anchored or cast into a recess in the concrete over the joint .
.Eb Definitions Reserved .Ec Submittals .Eci General Reserved .Ecii Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings for each joint seal assembly to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of your submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
If requested submit supplemental calculations for each proposed alternative joint seal assembly .
Shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer .
Allow days for the Departments review .
After review submit to copies as requested for final authorization and use during construction .
Include details of the joint seal assembly and anchorage components method of installation blockout details and additions or rearrangements of reinforcing steel .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Submit corrected copy to OSD Documents Unit for each joint seal assembly within days of authorization .
.Eciii Certificate of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of joint seal assembly materials .
.Ed Quality Assurance .Edi General Vertical expansion joints in barriers must be accessible for inspection after recess concrete is placed .
Joint seal assemblies will not be authorized without evidence of year of satisfactory service under similar conditions .
.Edii Quality Control A qualified representative of the assembly manufacturer must be present during the installation of the st assembly and available during remaining installations .
.Ediii Department Acceptance Reserved .E Materials .Ea General Joint seal assemblies must consist of a metal frame system supporting rails and support bars with intervening neoprene glands .
Neoprene glands must comply with the requirements shown in Table of ASTM D except recovery and compressiondeflection tests are not required and the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Hardness points Type A durometer ASTM D modified Compression set percent max hours at C ASTM D modified Metal parts of the joint seal assembly must comply with section or ASTM AAM .
Bolts nuts and washers must comply with the specifications for HS steel fastener assemblies in section .
Anchorage components must include anchor studs spaced at a maximum of inches .
Studs must be at least inch in diameter and inches long except the studs may be inches long in the overhang .
Assemblies must be assembled completely at the fabrication site .
.Eb Design Requirements If the assembly consists of more than component design the assembly such that the external components can be removed and reinstalled at any position within the larger half of the MR to allow for inspection of the internal components .
Except for components in contact with the tires the design loading must be the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Design Truck with percent dynamic load allowance .
Each component in contact with the tires must support a minimum of percent of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Design Truck with percent dynamic load allowance .
The tire contact area must be inches measured normal to the longitudinal assembly axis by inches wide .
The assembly must provide a smoothriding joint without slapping of components or tire rumble .
The maximum width of unsupported or yielding components or grooves in the roadway surface of the assembly must be inches measured in the direction of vehicular traffic .
Assemblies must be capable of adjustment to the a dimension shown .
The assembly must have CIP anchorage components that form a mechanical connection between the joint components and the concrete deck .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .E Construction Measure dimensions for positioning the assembly during installation normal to the longitudinal axis of the assembly disregarding the skew of the deck expansion joint .
Deck surfaces must comply with section .F before placing joint seal assemblies and anchorages .
Place each assembly into a blockedout recess in the concrete deck surface .
The depth and width of the recess must allow the installation of the assembly anchorage components or anchorage bearing surface to the lines and grades shown .
Except for primary reinforcement continue reinforcement through the recess construction joint into the recess and engage anchorage components of the assembly .
Install each assembly with a watertight continuous return inches up into barriers at the low side of the deck .
Neoprene glands must be continuous without field splices or joints .
.E Payment Not Used .F Asphaltic Plug Joint Seals .F General .Fa Summary Section .F includes specifications for constructing asphaltic plug joint seals .
Asphaltic plug joint seals consist of an asphaltic binder and aggregate joint seal system .
.Fb Definitions Reserved .Fc Submittals .Fci General Reserved .Fcii Shop Drawings Submit copies of shop drawings for the proposed asphaltic plug joint seal system to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of your submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
Allow days for the Departments review .
After review submit to copies as requested for final authorization and use during construction .
.Fciii Product Data Submit evidence from the manufacturer that linear feet of the joint seal has had at least years of satisfactory service under similar conditions .
.Fciv Certificate of Compliance Submit certificates of compliance for materials used in the joint seals .
Submit a copy of the certified test report for binder material .
.Fcv Samples Submit a pound test sample of binder material to METS .
The test sample must be removed from the same material to be shipped to the job site .
Submit the test sample at least days before shipment to the job site .
.Fd Quality Assurance .Fdi General Reserved SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .Fdii Quality Control Binder material must be tested and certified by an authorized laboratory .
A technical representative of the joint seal manufacturer must be present during installation .
.F Materials All joint components must be from a single manufacturer .
The binder must be a thermoplastic polymericmodified asphalt thermoplastic polymermodified bitumen polymermodified asphalt sealant or modified elastomeric binder complying with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Asphalt compatibility ASTM D Pass Bond nonimmersed at F at F ASTM D Pass cycles Pass cycles Cone penetration nonimmersed mm g total weight seconds at F g total weight seconds at F ASTM D modified min max Ductility cm min at F ASTM D Flexibility at F ASTM Da Pass Flow mm max hours at F ASTM D Resilience percent min at F ASTM D Softening point F min ASTM D Tensile adhesion percent min ASTM D Safe heating temperature F Recommended pouring temperature F aDo not oven age specimens .
After hours at standard conditions allow specimens to condition at F for hours before testing .
Binder material delivered to the job site must be labeled with .
Manufacturers name .
Lot or batch number .
Dates of manufacturing packaging and expiration .
Manufacturers instructions for use Binder material must be retested and recertified for use if the expiration date passes .
Aggregates must comply with .
Section .C except the results of cleanness value and sand equivalent tests must comply with the requirements for both operating range and contract compliance .
Asphaltic plug manufacturers instructions The polyethylene backer rod must be commercial quality with a continuous impervious glazed surface that can withstand the hot liquid binder material and is suitable for retaining the hot liquid binder while it hardens .
The bridging plate must be inches wide and at least inch thick and comply with ASTM AAM .
Cut the bridging plate into inchminimumlength sections .
Place holes for locating pins along the longitudinal plate centerline inches on center .
The locating pins must be at least d common steel nails or equal .
.F Construction Uniformly double wash and dry natural aggregates before use .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Remove existing expansion dams and asphaltic concrete to the limits shown .
Do not damage the deck or remaining asphaltic concrete .
Steel dowels exposed when removing concrete must be cut off flush with the existing concrete or at the bottom of concrete removal whichever is lower .
Patching around or over dowels in sound concrete is not required .
Chip voids back to sound concrete and fill voids with magnesium phosphate concrete .
Clean expansion joints under section .C .
Repair spalls if ordered .
Repairing spalls is change order work .
Abrasive blast blockout surfaces to receive the asphaltic plug joint seal .
Clean and dry blockout surfaces and the adjacent inches of roadway immediately before placing the joint seal .
Use a hot air lance producing a minimum temperature of degrees F and a directional velocity of at least ftsec .
There must be no moisture present during installation .
Place the top of the backer rod to a depth of at least inch and at most equal to the width of the existing gap below the bottom of the blockout .
Center bridging plate sections over the existing gap .
Place the sections flat on the bottom of the blockout .
The sections must be butt jointed .
Do not overlap the sections or allow gaps between the plate and blockout .
Install the joint seal under the manufacturers instructions .
.F Payment Not Used .
SLIDING JOINTS .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing sliding joints .
Sliding joints consist of neoprene strips lubricated with silicone grease and covered with sheet metal .
.B Materials Neoprene strips must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section .B .
Silicone grease must comply with Society of Automotive Engineers AS .
Sheet metal must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel smooth and free of kinks bends or burrs .
Joints must be butt joints sealed with plastic ductsealing tape .
.C Construction Apply a uniform film of silicone grease to the upper surface of the neoprene strip before placing the sheet metal .
Float the concrete surfaces where neoprene strips are placed to a level plane and finish with a steel trowel .
Do not allow grout or concrete seepage into the sliding joint during concrete placement .
.D Payment Not Used .
WATERSTOPS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing waterstops .
.A Definitions Reserved SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for waterstop material .
The certificate of compliance for PVC waterstop must include a statement that the material complies with item of Army Corps of Engineers CRDC .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Waterstops must be manufactured from neoprene or PVC .
Neoprene must be manufactured from a vulcanized elastomeric compound containing neoprene as the only elastomer and comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tensile strength min psi ASTM D Ultimate elongation min percent ASTM D Compression set max percent hours at C ASTM D Method B Tear strength min kNm ASTM D Die C Hardness Type A points ASTM D Ozone resistance strain hours at .
F ASTM D except parts per No cracks Brittleness temperature at C ASTM D Section ..
Pass Flame propagation ASTM C Must not propagate flame Change in volume max percent IRM immersed hours at C ASTM D Change in mass max percent immersed days at C ASTM D After accelerated aging under ASTM D for hours at degrees C the elastomer must not show quality characteristic changes greater than those shown in the following table Quality characteristic Requirement Tensile strength percent Elongation at break percent Hardness points PVC waterstops must be manufactured from PVC complying with CRDC and comply with the ozone resistance requirement for neoprene .
Furnish waterstops full length for straight portions of joints .
Manufacturers shop splices must be fully vulcanized .
.C Construction Use spacers wire or other authorized methods to secure reinforcing bars supporting waterstops .
If waterstops are out of shape or position after placing concrete remove the concrete and reset waterstops .
Field splices for neoprene waterstops must be one of the following .
Vulcanized .
Mechanical using stainless steel parts .
Made with a splicing union of the same stock as the waterstop Completed field splices must have a fullsize tensile strength of pounds per inch of width .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Field splice PVC waterstops by heat sealing under the manufacturers instructions .
Do not burn the plastic when melting .
Cut and splice waterstops at changes in direction as necessary to avoid buckling or distortion of the waterstop .
.D Payment Not Used .
STRIP WATERSTOPS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing strip waterstops .
.B Materials The neoprene sheet must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section .B .
The neoprene adhesive must comply with Federal Specification MMMA .
The protective board must be at least inchthick wood or fiberboard that is at least ft long and the width shown .
The neoprene sheet must be smooth and free from pin holes or surface blemishes and show no sign of delamination .
.C Construction Join neoprene sheets as follows .
Lap the sheets at least inches . .
Apply the adhesive to both faces at the manufacturers recommended rate. . Let the adhesive dry to an aggressive tack. . Bring the sheets together and roll in both directions to obtain a tight bond .
Abrasive blast clean the concrete surfaces to receive a strip waterstop .
Allow the cleaned surfaces to air dry hours before applying the adhesive .
Surfaces where adhesive is to be applied must have a cloth finish or a buffed finish .
Surfaces must be clean and dry when the adhesive is applied .
Apply the adhesive to the concrete and neoprene sheet at the manufacturers recommended rate .
Let the adhesive dry to an aggressive tack .
Apply the sheet to the concrete surface and roll in both directions to obtain a tight bond .
Completely cover the installed strip waterstops with layer of protective board attached with adhesive .
The protective board must remain in place until backfilling is complete .
.D Payment Not Used BEARINGS .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing bearings .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .
ELASTOMERIC BEARING PADS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and installing elastomeric bearing pads .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Samples .Abi General Reserved .Abii Plain Elastomeric Bearing Pads For plain elastomeric bearing pads the Engineer selects a test sample that is at least by inches from each lot of pads or batch of elastomer to be furnished whichever results in the larger number of test samples .
You may designate that test samples be taken at the point of manufacture or at the job site .
Job site test samples are completed pads as shown .
Submit plain elastomeric bearing pad test samples at least days before use .
Furnish additional pads to replace the pads selected for testing .
.Abiii SteelReinforced Elastomeric Bearing Pads Submit test sample from each lot of steelreinforced bearing pads at least days before use .
The size of the test sample must be as shown in the following table Bearing pad thickness Test sample size inches or less Smallest complete bearing shown More than inches .
.inchthick test sample at least by inches cut by the manufacturer from the center of the thickest complete bearinga aSubmit the test sample and the remaining parts of the complete bearing .
.Ac Certificate of Compliance .Aci General Reserved .Acii Plain Elastomeric Bearing Pads Submit a certificate of compliance with certified test results for the elastomer for plain elastomeric bearing pads .
.Aciii SteelReinforced Elastomeric Bearing Pads Submit a certificate of compliance with certified test results from the bearing manufacturer for steel reinforced elastomeric bearing pads .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Department Acceptance .Abi General Reserved SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .Abii Plain Elastomeric Bearing Pads The Department takes specimens from the test sample prepares them by cutting and grinding and tests them for tensile strength elongation tear strength and ozone resistance under section .B .
.Abiii SteelReinforced Elastomeric Bearing Pads The Department tests a specimen taken from the test sample for tensile strength elongation and strength under section .B .
Specimens must show no loss of bond between the steel and elastomer laminates .
.B Materials .B General Elastomeric bearing pads inch or less in thickness must comply with section .B .
Elastomeric bearing pads over inch in thickness must comply with section .B or section .B .
Silicone grease must comply with Society of Automotive Engineers AS .
Sheet metal must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel smooth and free of kinks bends or burrs .
Joints must be butt joints sealed with plastic ductsealing tape .
.B Plain Elastomeric Bearing Pads For plain elastomeric bearing pads pads inch or less in thickness must be either laminated or all elastomer .
Pads over inch in thickness must be laminated .
The stacking of individually laminated pads to attain thicknesses over inch or the cold bonding of individual laminated pads is not allowed .
Elastomeric bearing pads may be cut from large sheets .
Cutting must be performed so as to avoid heating of the material to produce a smooth edge with no tears or other jagged areas and to cause as little damage to the material as possible .
Neoprene must be the only polymer in the elastomeric compound and must be not less than percent by volume of the total compound .
The elastomer must comply with ASTM D Type CR Grade with a shear modulus of psi .
The elastomer must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tensile strength min psi ASTM D Ultimate elongation min ASTM D Compression set max hours at C ASTM D Method B Tear strength min kNm ASTM D Die C . Hardness Type A points ASTM D with kg mass Ozone resistance strain hours at C ASTM D except parts per No cracks Instantaneous thermal stiffening at C ASTM D Not more than times the stiffness measured at C Low temperature brittleness at C ASTM D Section ..
Pass After accelerated aging under ASTM D for hours at degrees C the elastomer must not show quality characteristic changes greater than those shown in the following table SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Quality characteristic Requirement Tensile strength loss Ultimate elongation loss but not less than percent total elongation of the material Hardness points .B SteelReinforced Elastomeric Bearing Pads Steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads must comply with the specifications for steellaminated elastomeric bearings in ASTM D and the following .
Bearing pads must consist of alternating steel laminates and internal elastomer laminates with top bottom and side elastomer covers .
Steel laminates must have a nominal thickness of .
inch gauge .
Internal elastomer laminates must have a thickness of inch .
Top and bottom elastomer covers must each have a thickness of inch .
The combined thickness of internal elastomer laminates and top and bottom elastomer covers must be equal to the bearing pad thickness shown .
The elastomer cover to the steel laminates at the sides of the bearing must be inch .
If guide pins or other devices are used to control the side cover over the steel laminates any exposed portions of the steel laminates must be sealed by vulcanized patching. . Total bearing thickness must be equal to the sum of the thicknesses of the elastomeric laminates and covers and the steel laminates. . Elastomer must comply with section .B .
.C Construction Notify the Engineer of the type of bearing pad to be used before constructing the bearing seats .
The bearing seat elevation must correspond to the selected bearing thickness .
Where shown lubricate the upper surface of the elastomeric bearing pad with a uniform film of silicone grease before placing the sheet metal cover .
Do not allow grout or concrete seepage into the sliding surface during concrete placement .
.D Payment Not Used .
PTFE SPHERICAL BEARINGS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and installing PTFE spherical bearings .
PTFE spherical bearings consist of PTFE and stainless steel bearing surfaces stainless steel plates and anchors .
PTFE spherical bearings are either fixed type with spherical bearing surfaces or expansion type with spherical and sliding bearing surfaces .
.A Definitions load category PTFE spherical bearings of differing vertical load capacity within a range defined as follows .
Bearings of kips capacity or less .
Bearings over kips up to and including kips capacity .
Bearings over kips capacity Bearings in different load categories that have vertical load capacities within kips of each other are considered to be in load category for proof testing .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .A Submittals .Aa General Submit proof that the bearing manufacturer has furnished PTFE spherical bearings that have had at least years of satisfactory service for projects with similar conditions to this project .
Submit certificates of compliance for the materials used in PTFE bearings .
Submit test reports for prooftested bearings signed by the personnel conducting the testing .
Include bearing numbers of the tested bearings and the names of the personnel interpreting the test results .
If proof tests can not be performed at the specified load submit a testing plan listing additional physical tests to be performed .
.Ab Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of your submittal .
Include in the notification the date and list of contents of the submittal .
For initial review submit copies for railroad bridges and copies for other structures .
After review submit to copies as requested for authorization and use during construction .
Allow days for the Departments review for railway bridges and at least days for all other structures .
Shop drawings must include a description of the method of mechanical interlocking of PTFE fabric to the metallic substrate .
At locations other than hinges shop drawings must include temporary support details for the bearing sole plate during concrete placement .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General The bearing manufacturer must have furnished PTFE spherical bearings that have had at least years of satisfactory service for projects with similar conditions to this project .
A qualified representative of the bearing manufacturer must be present during installation of the st bearing and be available during remaining installations .
Templates for the spherical surfaces must be available for inspection .
.Ab Quality Control .Abi General Reserved .Abii Proof Testing Proof test the PTFE spherical bearings in the Engineers presence as follows .
Test fixedtype bearings for compression. . Test expansiontype bearings for compression and initial static coefficient of friction .
Proof test bearing from each lot of production bearings .
A lot of bearings is bearings or fraction thereof of the same type within a load category .
The Engineer selects random test samples from each lot of production bearings .
Notify the Engineer at least days before starting proof testing .
If proof tests can not be performed at the specified load perform the additional physical tests described in the testing plan in the presence of the Engineer .
The tests must demonstrate that the requirements for proof testing at the specified load are satisfied .
Before proof testing the test bearings must be conditioned for hours at degrees F. Clean the bearing surfaces before testing .
For compression testing of PTFE spherical bearings SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .
Rotate the bearings at the design rotation or .
radians whichever is greater and hold for hour at a load of .
times the maximum vertical load capacity .
You may rotate the bearing by inserting a beveled plate between the bearing and the restraining surface before loading . .
Maintain the bearing in a rotated position during testing .
For coefficient of friction testing of PTFE spherical bearings .
Continuously load the bearing to the minimum dead load for hours before testing .
Maintain the dead load during testing. . Measure the initial static coefficient of friction on the st movement of the bearing. . Measure the initial static and dynamic coefficients of friction at a sliding speed of not more than inch per minute .
The initial static friction must not exceed that specified . .
Cycle the test bearings for a minimum of movements .
Each movement must consist of at least inch of relative movement at a sliding speed of not more than inches per minute .
After cycling measure the initial static and dynamic coefficients of friction at a sliding speed of not more than inch per minute .
The initial static friction must not exceed that specified .
Prooftested bearings must not show any signs of the following .
Bond failure of bearing surfaces .
Separation or liftoff of plates from each other or from PTFE surfaces .
Excessive transfer of PTFE to the stainless steel surface .
Other defects If a prooftested bearing fails to comply with the above requirements proof test all the remaining bearings in the lot .
.B Materials .B General Welding must comply with AWS D. except welding of stainless steel must comply with AWS D .. PTFE spherical bearings must be selflubricating .
PTFE surfaces must be unfilled fabric made from virgin PTFE oriented multifilament and other fibers .
Filament resin must comply with ASTM D. At the highest point of substrate and after compression the PTFE fabric must have a thickness from to inch .
Steel plates must comply with ASTM AAM .
Stainless steel plates must comply with ASTM AAM Type and be at least inch thick .
Surfaces of flat stainless steel that mate with PTFE surfacing must have a minimum no .
mirror finish .
Surfaces of curved stainless steel that mate with PTFE surfacing must have a finish of less than microinches root mean square .
Determine the finish under ANSI B .. PTFE spherical bearings must have an initial static coefficient of friction of at most .. Stud connectors must comply with section ..
Protect bearing surfaces from contamination and weather damage .
.B Fabrication Flat stainless steel surfaces must be a weld overlay on structural steel plate or a solid or sheet stainless steel .
Curved stainless steel surfaces must be solid stainless steel except curved stainless steel surfaces over inches thick may be a weld overlay on structural steel plate .
If a weld overlay is used for stainless steel surfacing attach the overlay by submerged arc welding using Type L electrodes .
The completed overlay must have a inch minimum thickness after fabrication .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES If stainless steel sheets are used for stainless steel surfacing attach the sheets by perimeter arc welding using Type L electrodes .
After welding the stainless steel surface must be smooth and without waves .
Plate radius dimensional tolerances are from .
to .
inch for convex plates and from .
to .
inch for concave plates .
Use fullsize convex and concave metal templates for the spherical surfaces of each bearing radius .
PTFE fabric backing material on bearing surfaces must be epoxy bonded and mechanically interlocked to the steel substrate .
Bonding must be performed under controlled factory conditions .
The mechanical interlock on the spherical concave surface must be integrally machined into the steel substrate .
Welded retention grids are not allowed on the concave surface .
Except for the selvage oversaw or recess edges such that no cut fabric edges are exposed .
During fabrication the maximum temperature of bonded PTFE surfaces must be degrees F. After bonding to the substrate the PTFE surface must be smooth and free from bubbles .
Assemble PTFE spherical bearings at the fabrication site .
The PTFE and stainless steel interfaces must be in full bearing after completing assembly .
Use at least steel straps bolted to threaded holes in the masonry and sole plates to secure each bearing assembly as a unit for shipment .
Steel straps must not be welded and be adequate to use for lifting the bearing assembly .
Bearings must be shipped as a unit and remain intact when uncrated and installed .
.C Construction Prepare concrete surfaces to receive PTFE spherical bearings under section .C .
The Engineer must be present during the dismantling of each bearing assembly at the job site .
Temporarily support PTFE bearing sole plates during concrete placement .
Temporary supports must prevent rotation or displacement of the bearings .
Temporary supports must not inhibit the function of the PTFE bearings after concrete is placed or restrict movement at bridge joints due to temperature changes and prestress shortening .
Materials for temporary supports must comply with the requirements for form fasteners in section .Ca .
Replace or resurface damaged bearings and bearings with scratched mating surfaces .
Resurfacing must be performed at the bearing manufacturers plant .
.D Payment The payment quantity for PTFE spherical bearings does not include the test bearings .
A PTFE spherical bearing with more than PTFE surface is bearing .
..
RESERVED PRECAST CONCRETE MEMBERS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing precast concrete members .
Prestressing concrete members must comply with section .
Cure PC concrete members under section ..
Furnishing PC concrete members includes furnishing members to the job site ready to incorporate into the work .
Erecting PC concrete members includes erecting members into final position in the work .
.B Definitions Reserved SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .C Submittals .C General Submit a certificate of compliance signed by the manufacturers QC representative for each PC concrete box culvert shipment .
For PC PS concrete girders submit a girder erection work plan .
Include procedures details and sequences for unloading lifting and erecting girders and for temporary bracing installation .
The work plan must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
.C Shop Drawings .Ca General Submit shop drawings for PC concrete members .
.Cb Girders For PC PS concrete girders shop drawings must include .
Anticipated deflections of the girders before deck placement and the methods of accommodation .
Include the following anticipated deflections .
Upward deflection due to prestressing forces .
Downward deflection due to girder dead load .
Deflection due to creep and shrinkage from the time of girder stressing to the planned deck placement .
Deflection calculations that consider the age of the girder concrete when stressing and the planned placement of the deck .
Use the concrete producers estimated modulus of elasticity at the applicable concrete age for calculating deflections .
For segmental or splicedgirder construction shop drawings must include the following additional information .
Details showing construction joints or closure joints .
Arrangement of bar reinforcing steel prestressing tendons and pressure grouting pipe .
Materials and methods for making closures .
Construction joint keys and surface treatment .
Other requested information For segmental girder construction shop drawings must include concrete form and casting details .
.Cc Closure Wall Panels Submit copies of shop drawings for PC concrete closure wall panels as an informational submittal .
Include in the submittal .
Panel dimensions .
Materials .
Prestressing methods .
Tendon arrangement and stresses .
Additions or rearrangement of reinforcing steel from that shown .Cd Box Culverts Shop drawings for PC concrete box culverts must include the construction method dimensions reinforcement including splice type and location and height of earth cover .
.Ce Deck Panels Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General PC materials must be available to the Department for inspection .
Allow the Department free access at all times to any portion of the fabrication site where material is stored or work is performed .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .D Quality Control Reserved .D Department Acceptance PC concrete members are inspected at the fabrication site .
Notify the Department when materials are delivered to the fabrication site .
Allow days after notifying the Department before starting fabrication. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Delivery Storage and Handling Carefully handle store transport and erect PC concrete members to avoid twisting racking or other distortion that would result in cracking or damage to the members .
Handle store transport and erect PC members in an upright position such that the points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the member are approximately the same as when the member is in its final position .
.C Materials For a project in a freezethaw area reinforcement must be epoxy coated under section ..
Bearing plates threaded inserts and other metal fittings must comply with section Concrete for keyways must have a cementitious material content of at least lbcu yd and a inch maximum grading .
Penetration of the concrete must be near the lower limit of the specified nominal penetration .
Grout must comply with ASTM CCM .
Deck shear connector rods shown as tie rods must comply with the following .
Steel fastener components must comply with section . .
Lock washers must be ANSI heavy duty spring washers. . All metal must be hotdip galvanized after fabrication under ASTM AAM .
.D Fabricating Precast Concrete Members .D General Reserved .D Girders Box Girders and Double T Girders Before curing activities the top surface of each PC member must be given a coarse texture by brooming with a stiff bristled broom or by other suitable devices that results in uniform transverse scoring .
The top surface texture of the following PC members must have at least a inch amplitude .
Girders .
Box girders with a concrete deck shown .
T girders with a concrete deck shown Wood float portions of the top surface of box girders to be covered by expanded polystyrene .
For segmental or splicedgirder construction materials for construction joints or closure joints at exterior girders must match the color and texture of the adjoining concrete .
At splicedgirder closure joints .
If shear keys are not shown the vertical surfaces of the girder segment ends must be given a coarse texture as specified for the top surface of PC members. . Posttensioning ducts must extend out of the vertical surface of the girder segment closure end sufficiently to facilitate splicing of the duct .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES For spliced girders pretension strand extending from the closure end of the girder segment to be embedded in the closure joint must be free of mortar oil dirt excessive mill scale and scabby rust and other coatings that would destroy or reduce the bond .
.D Slabs Forms for circular voids in concrete slabs must be watertight and constructed of an authorized material that does not break or deform during concrete placement and not increase the span dead load .
Before curing the top surface of concrete slabs must be given a coarse texture by brooming with a stiff bristled broom or by other suitable devices that results in uniform transverse scoring .
The requirements of the th and th paragraphs of section .Dbii do not apply .
.D Closure Wall Panels Exposed surfaces of closure wall panels must match the adjacent CIP concrete .
Prestressing steel must be placed not more than inches from panel edges and spaced not more than inches on center between edge tendons .
Anchorage hardware must comply with section .
Bolt holes must comply with section .Eb except holes must not be punched full size .
.D Box Culverts Reinforcement for PC concrete box culverts may be welded wire reinforcement .
Manufacturing tolerances for PC sections must comply with the tolerances specified in section of AASHTO M . You may use the dry cast method of construction where shown on the authorized shop drawings .
Results must be equal to those obtained under section .
External vibrators must be used .
Forms must be sufficiently rigid to resist displacement or damage .
Dry casting forms may be removed after consolidating if no slumping of the concrete occurs .
Form the ends of members such that sections can be laid together to make a continuous line of box sections with a smooth interior free of irregularities in the flow line .
Splices in circumferential reinforcement must be lapped .
Welded splices for the outside apron of steel are allowed only where shown .
Wall reinforcement on the inside of the box may be lapped and welded at any location or connected by welding at the corners to slab reinforcement at the inside of the box .
Handling devices or holes are allowed in members for handling and laying .
Clean and fill the resulting holes with mortar .
Exposed spacers standoffs or ends of longitudinals used to position reinforcement are not a cause for rejection .
Do not weld spacers or standoffs to circumferential reinforcement .
You may weld spacers or standoffs to longitudinal reinforcement .
Clearly mark each PC unit .
Use indentation waterproof paint or other authorized means .
Include contract number date of manufacture manufacturer and the design earth cover .
Mark each unit by indentation on the inner or outer surface so that the top is evident immediately after stripping forms .
Paint the word TOP with waterproof paint on the inside and outside surfaces of the tops of each unit .
.D Lagging For a project in a freezethaw area concrete for PC concrete lagging must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
If concrete lagging is steam cured supports for reinforcement must be stainless steel containing at least percent chromium .
.D Deck Panels Reserved SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Girders Box Girders and Double T Girders For girders and box girders or double T girders with a concrete deck shown clean top surfaces of laitance and curing compound before placing deck concrete .
You may make adjustments to accommodate girder deflections before placing deck concrete including adjustments to bearing seat elevations .
Adjustments are limited by the following .
Minimum permanent vertical clearance under the structure is not reduced. . Deck profile grade and cross slope can not be changed . .
Except for box girders a minimum of inch of deck slab concrete is maintained between the deck slab reinforcement and the top of the girders. . For box girders a minimum of inch of deck slab concrete is maintained between the top of expanded polystyrene in the area between the girder webs and the deck slab reinforcement .
Adjustments to accommodate girder deflections are not considered a change in dimensions .
Grout keyways after PC members are in final position .
Before grouting abrasive blast clean the keyways to expose clean aggregate .
Flush keyways with water and allow them to dry to a surface dry condition immediately before placing the grout .
No equipment or other loads are allowed on spans that have been grouted until hours after the last grout is placed .
Do not tension or tighten transverse posttensioning tendons until hours after grouting the last keyway .
The specifications for prestressing force distribution and sequencing of stressing in the posttensioning activity in .Ba do not apply if posttensioning of spliced girders before starting deck construction is described .
The composite deckgirder structure must be posttensioned in a subsequent stage .
Temporary splicedgirder supports must comply with the specifications for falsework in section .
Before posttensioning of spliced girders remove the forms at CIP concrete closures and intermediate diaphragms to allow inspection for concrete consolidation .
.C Slabs For slab spans with a concrete overlay clean the slab top surfaces under section .D .
For slab spans with an HMA overlay removal of laitance and curing compound from the top surfaces is not required .
Where the ends of transverse rods will be exposed recess exposed nuts and ends of rods at least inch below the member surface .
Snug tighten nuts after the deck units are positioned and before placing mortar in the keyways .
Fill the anchor dowel holes with mortar after the slabs are in final position .
Fill keyways with concrete .
Keyways must be mortartight before placing concrete .
Thoroughly consolidate the concrete in keyways .
Tighten nuts hours after concrete in the keyways has been placed .
Burr threads at the ends of bolts or rods to prevent loosening .
Fill recesses with mortar after tightening nuts .
No equipment or other loads are allowed on spans until hours after the last mortar is placed in anchor dowel holes or the last concrete is placed in keyways .
For slab spans with a concrete overlay at least slabs adjacent to a span must be in place before the concrete overlay is placed in that span .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .D Closure Wall Panels Reserved .E Box Culverts Construct box culverts using PC members where described .
You must select the combination of concrete dimensions and reinforcement if more than allowable combination is shown .
Structure excavation and backfill must comply with section .
Laying of PC concrete box culverts must comply with the specifications for laying reinforced concrete pipe in section .C .
Joints must comply with the specifications for cement mortar or resilient material joints in section .F .
You may use an external sealing band complying with ASTM C instead of joint material .
.F Lagging Place concrete lagging for soldier piles walls level .
Place a concrete leveling course if required .
Each lagging member must be continuous over piles and cantilever at least inches beyond pile centerlines .
Continuity over piles is not allowed .
.G Deck Panels Reserved .
PAYMENT Payment for diaphragm dowels and bolts in PC concrete members is not included in the payment for any type of furnish or erect PC concrete member .
The payment quantity for PC concrete lagging is the wall area shown without deductions for spacing between lagging or openings for piping .
PC concrete box culvert is measured as specified for concrete pipe in section ..
APPROACH SLABS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing approach slabs and paving notch extensions .
Structure approach drainage system must consist of geocomposite drain filter fabric plastic pipe treated permeable base and drainage pads and comply with section .
Structure excavation and backfill must comply with section .
Treated permeable base must comply with section .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals If using RSC submit the RSC mix design at least days before constructing the trial slab .
.D Quality Assurance .D General If woven tape fabric is shown notify the Engineer of the source of woven tape fabric at least days before use .
Notify the Engineer of the type of treated permeable base to be used under approach slabs at least days before starting placement .
After notification do not change the type of permeable base without authorization .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Rapid Strength Concrete Before starting work on approach slabs constructed using RSC prepare a trial slab for each concrete mix design .
Trial slabs must be .
Constructed finished and cured within the allowed time with the materials tools equipment personnel and methods to be used in the work .
by feet by inches thick .
Constructed near the job site outside the project limits at an authorized location Trial slabs must demonstrate that you are capable of producing approach slabs within the anticipated time periods including delivery placement finishing and curing times and under similar atmospheric and temperature conditions expected during construction activities .
Multiple trial slabs for each concrete mix design may be required to encompass variable atmospheric conditions .
Test the trial slab concrete for compressive strength under section .D .
Trial slab concrete must develop the following minimum compressive strengths .
psi at the age of break .
psi at days .
psi at days .
MATERIALS .A General Hardboard and expanded polystyrene must comply with section .B .
.B Fabric Filter fabric must be Class A. Woven tape fabric must .
Be fabric of woven strips or tapes .
Retain at least percent tensile strength when tested under ASTM D with hours exposure .
Comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Weight min ozsq yd ASTM D Grab breaking load min lb ASTM D Apparent elongation min percent ASTM D Toughnessa min lb aPercent apparent elongation times the grab breaking load .C Concrete Concrete for approach slabs and paving notch extensions must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and comply with one of the following .
Cure for at least days before opening to traffic .
Comply with the specifications for RSC For paving notch extensions you may use magnesium phosphate concrete modified highaluminabased concrete or portlandcementbased concrete complying with the specifications for bonding materials in section .
The concrete may be extended by using a clean uniform rounded aggregate filler with a moisture content of at most .
percent .
The quantity of aggregate filler must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Concrete strengths for the extended concrete must be at least that specified SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES for the bonding materials .
The aggregate gradation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing inch No .
For a project in a freezethaw area concrete for approach slabs and paving notch extensions must comply with section .I .
Concrete for drainage pads must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
.D Aggregate Base AB must be produced from commercialquality aggregates consisting of broken stone crushed gravel or natural roughsurfaced gravel and sand in any combination .
Gradation must comply with the inch maximum gradation specified in section .B .
.E Bar Reinforcement Bar reinforcing steel must comply with section .
In a freezethaw area epoxy coat bar reinforcement under section ..
Galvanize unbonded portions of bar reinforcement under section .
.F Miscellaneous Joint Materials Steel components of abutment ties must comply with section .
PVC conduit used to encase abutment tie rods must be commercial quality .
Steel angles plates and bars at concrete barrier joints must comply with section .
Type AL joint seals must comply with section .B .
The pourable seal between the steel angle and concrete barrier must comply with the specifications for Type A and AL joint seals in section .B .
Sealants may be mixed by handheld powerdriven agitators and placed by hand methods .
Sliding joints for the sleeper slabs must comply with .. Building paper must be commercialquality pound asphalt felt .
.G Hot Mix Asphalt HMA for a temporary roadway structural section must comply with the specifications for minor HMA in section . . CONSTRUCTION .A General Drill and bond bar reinforcement and abutment tie rods under section .E .
Finish and treat the top surfaces of approach slabs under section .F .
Edger finish the slab edges .
Cure approach slabs using curing compound no. . Abrasive blast clean the concrete surfaces and thoroughly clean joints immediately before placing the joint seals .
Joint surfaces must be dry when seals are placed .
.B Type N Approach Slabs .B General Reserved SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .B Filter Fabric Place filter fabric immediately after grading and compacting the subgrade .
Handle and place filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
Adjacent borders of filter fabric must be overlapped from to inches or stitched .
If overlapping the borders the preceding roll must overlap the following roll in the direction the material is being spread .
If stitching the border use yarn of a contrasting color .
Yarn size and composition must be as recommended by the fabric manufacturer .
Use to stitches per inch of seam .
Do not operate equipment or vehicles on filter fabric .
.B Treated Permeable Base Place and compact ATPB at a temperature from to degrees F. Do not use material stored for more than hours in the work .
Compact ATPB base as soon as the mixture has cooled sufficiently to support the weight of the equipment without undue displacements .
Use a vibratingshoetype compactor or a roller weighing from .
to tons .
Compact CTPB with a vibratingshoetype compactor or with a steeldrum roller weighing from .
to tons .
Compaction must start within hour of spreading and must consist of complete coverages of the CTPB .
.C Type EQ Approach Slabs Reserved .D Type R Approach Slabs .D General The Type R approach slab thicknesses shown are minimums .
Thicknesses may vary due to material removed .
At locations where the removal of existing materials and approach slab construction is not required to be completed within the same work shift the requirements for a temporary roadway structural section and trial slab do not apply .
.D Removal of Existing Facilities Remove portions of existing structures pavement and base approach slabs asphalt concrete surfacing concrete pavement subsealing material and cementtreated base as necessary for the construction of the new approach slab .
Remove portions of seattype abutments under section ..
Saw cut full depth the outline of concrete pavement to be removed using a powerdriven saw .
Do not use power impact tools within .
feet of pavement to remain in place .
Before removing asphalt concrete cut the outlines of excavations in asphalt concrete on a neat line to a minimum depth of .
foot using a powerdriven concrete saw or wheeltype rockcutting excavator .
These excavations must be permanently or temporarily backfilled to conform to the grade of the adjacent pavement before opening the lane to traffic .
Dispose of materials no longer used in the work .
.D Existing Base Material Uniformly grade and compact the existing base material remaining in place after removing the existing pavement and base materials to the required depth .
The finished surface of the base material at any point must not extend above the authorized grade .
Fill areas of base material that are low as a result of overexcavation with structure approach slab concrete at the same time that the new concrete is placed .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Where pavement subsealing has been performed under existing approach slabs remove the full depth of subsealing material .
Where removal of CTB is required to construct the approach slab remove the full depth of the CTB .
Fill voids between the new approach slab and the base material remaining in place that are caused by removal of subsealing material or CTB with either AB or approach slab concrete .
If you fill these voids with structure approach slab concrete fill the voids at the same time that the new concrete is placed .
.D Aggregate Base Spread and compact AB for filling voids below the structure approach slab concrete by methods that will produce a wellcompacted uniform base free from pockets of coarse or fine material to the authorized grade .
Where the required thickness of AB is inches or less the base may be spread and compacted in layer .
Where the required thickness of AB is more than inches the base must be spread and compacted in or more layers of approximately equal thickness .
The maximum compacted thickness of any layer must not exceed inches .
.D Profile Grade Establish a grade line for the new approach slab that will provide a smooth profile grade .
The profile grade must be authorized .
.D Temporary Roadway Structural Section If approach slabs can not be constructed before the lane is opened to traffic fill the excavation with a temporary roadway structural section .
Temporary structural section must consist of a .footthick layer of commercial quality cold mix over AB .
Keep a standby quantity of cold mix and AB at the job site for a temporary roadway structural section .
Spread and compact the AB and cold mix .
Produce a wellcompacted uniform base having a surface of uniform smoothness texture and density without pockets of coarse or fine material .
You may spread and compact AB and cold mix in layer each .
The finished surface must not vary more than .
foot from the lower edge of a foot straightedge placed parallel with the centerline and must match the elevation of the existing pavement and structure along the joints between the existing pavement and structure and the temporary surfacing .
Maintain the temporary structural section until it is replaced with the approach slab .
.E Paving Notch Extensions The construction joint between the paving notch extension and the existing abutment must comply with the specifications for horizontal construction joints in section .D .
Patch spalls in the existing paving notch when placing the paving notch extension .
The surface temperature must be at least degrees F during concrete placement .
Contact surfaces to receive concrete may be damp but not saturated .
Retempering of concrete is not allowed .
Finishing tools cleaned with water must be thoroughly dried before working concrete .
The Engineer may require you to use a flowcontrolled modified material when placing concrete on slopes over percent .
Except for magnesium phosphate concrete cure the concrete using the curing compound method .
Allow hours between placing the paving notch extension and placing the approach slab. . PAYMENT The payment quantity of aggregate base approach slab is the volume used to fill voids below approach slab concrete .
The payment quantity does not include the volume of AB used to fill an overexcavation .
SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES MASS CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing mass concrete elements .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a thermal control plan with design calculations for each mass concrete element .
The thermal control plan and the calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Submit copies of the control plan and copies of the design calculations .
Include the following .
Mix design .
Duration and method of curing .
Maximum allowable temperature differentials between the hottest point of the concrete and the exterior concrete faces .
Procedures to control concrete temperature differentials at time of placement .
Methods of controlling temperature differentials .
Temperature differential monitoring and recording system details .
Temperature sensor types and locations .
Measures to ensure compliance with maximum temperature and temperature differential requirements Determine the maximum allowable temperature differential assuming cracking due to heat of hydration does not occur .
Submit temperature data daily as an informational submittal .
Submit a daily progress report as an informational submittal .
A copy of the daily report must be available at the job site .
Submit a modified thermal control plan to correct deficiencies for replacement mass concrete .
Include supporting calculations .
.D Quality Assurance .D General An engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State must .
Inspect and test the temperature monitoring and recording systems before concrete placement .
Be present during mass concrete activities .
Provide daily progress reports .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Temperature Monitoring Provide a temperature monitoring and recording system for mass concrete elements .
The system must consist of temperature sensors connected to a data acquisition system .
The system must be capable of recording printing and downloading temperature data to a computer .
Locate temperature sensors within mass concrete elements such that the maximum temperature difference within the element is monitored .
At a minimum monitor temperatures at the following locations .
Calculated hottest location .
outer faces .
corners except for CIP piling elements .
Top surfaces SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES Record temperature readings automatically at least every hour .
Install a redundant set of sensors near the primary set with recording capability .
Make records using the redundant set if the primary set fails .
You may discontinue hourly temperature recording under the following conditions .
Maximum internal temperature is falling .
Difference between the interior concrete temperature and the average daily air temperature is less than the allowable temperature differential for consecutive days .
There are no mass concrete elements to be cast adjacent Protect the temperature sensor wiring to prevent movement during concrete placement .
Keep wire runs as short as possible .
Do not let the ends of temperature sensors come into contact with concrete supports forms or reinforcement .
Do not damage the monitoring and recording system when placing and consolidating concrete .
Correct equipment failures in temperature control and monitoring and recording systems immediately .
The temperature acceptance criteria for mass concrete elements are as follows .
Maximum allowable temperature must not exceed degrees F. .
Maximum temperature differential must not exceed that listed in the thermal control plan. . MATERIALS Grout for cooling pipes must be a nonshrink grout mix complying with ASTM CCM and ASTM CCM for .
percent shrinkage and .
percent minimum and .
percent maximum expansion. . CONSTRUCTION You may use mechanical cooling systems to control internal concrete temperatures during curing .
Mechanical cooling systems must comply with the thermal control plan .
Embed the cooling system within the mass concrete element .
Surface connections to cooling pipes must be removable to inches below the concrete surface .
Design the forms such that cooling or temperature monitoring is not disturbed during form removal .
Secure the cooling pipes to prevent movement during concrete placement .
Replace damaged cooling pipes immediately .
Pressure test the cooling system for leaks at psi for minutes before placing concrete .
Coolant must be circulating when concrete placement starts .
Pressure grout the cooling pipes after cooling is complete .
Place the grout under the manufacturers instructions .
After the surface connections are removed the holes must be reamed and filled with mortar .
Remove mass concrete elements that do not comply with the temperature acceptance criteria. . PAYMENT Not Used MINOR STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for constructing minor structures .
Minor structures include .
Pipe culvert headwalls and endwalls for a pipe with a diameter less than feet .
Drainage inlets .
Other structures described as minor structures SECTION CONCRETE STRUCTURES .B Materials Concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
Nonshrink grout must be a dry packaged type complying with ASTM CCM .
Metal frames covers grates and other miscellaneous iron and steel used with minor structures must comply with section .
PC units for drainage inlets must be round oval or rectangular in cross section or any combination .
Transitions from a rectangular grate opening to a round or oval basin must be made in not less than inches .
Provide means for field adjustment to meet final grade paving or surfacing .
.C Construction You may construct forms for drainage inlets using any material that produces the interior dimensions and wall thicknesses shown .
Undulations of interior wall surfaces must not exceed inch .
Extend the outside forms at least inches below the top of the inlet .
You may place concrete against excavated earth below this depth except you must use fulldepth outside forms or other protection when work activities or unstable earth may cause hazardous conditions or contamination of the concrete .
You may construct minor structures using PC units or a combination of PC and CIP structures as an alternative to CIP construction provided that the structure in place substantially complies with the specified CIP construction .
You may use PC drainage inlets as an alternative to CIP drainage inlets .
Remove exterior forms to at least inches below the final ground surface .
Exterior forms below this depth may remain if their total thickness is not more than inch .
Cure concrete surfaces of minor structures using the water method the formsinplace method or the curing compound method .
.D Payment The Department does not adjust the payment quantity for minor structures designated as final pay on the Bid Item List if the constructed height of the minor structure is within inches of the vertical dimensions shown .
Metal frames and covers or frames and grates are not included in the payment for minor structures. . PRECAST DRAINAGE INLETS Reserved RESERVED REINFORCEMENT GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for fabricating and placing reinforcement .
.B Definitions affected zone Portion of the reinforcing bar where any properties of the bar including the physical metallurgical or material characteristics have been changed by either .
Fabrication or installation of a splice .
The weld and inch adjacent to the weld is part of the affected zone. . Manufacturing process for headed bar reinforcement .
lot .
count or fraction thereof of the same type of mechanical splice coupler model for each .. Bar size .. Bar deformation pattern ..
Hoop diameter .
count or fraction thereof of CJP buttwelded splices or resistancebuttwelded splices for each .. Bar size ..
Hoop diameter .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Shop Drawings If a portion of an assemblage of bar reinforcing steel exceeds feet in height and is not encased in concrete submit shop drawings and design calculations for a temporary support system .
Temporary support system shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
The temporary support system must be designed to .
Resist all expected loads .
Prevent collapse or overturning of the cage If form installation or other work requires changes to or the temporary release of any part of the temporary support system the shop drawings must show the support system to be used during these changes or the temporary release .
The minimum horizontal wind load to be applied to the reinforcing steel assemblage or to a combined assemblage of reinforcing steel and forms must be the sum of the products of the wind impact area and the applicable wind pressure value for each height zone .
The wind impact area is the total projected area of the assemblage normal to the direction of the applied wind .
Determine wind pressure values using the following table SECTION REINFORCEMENT Wind Pressure Height zone H feet above ground Wind pressure value psf H H H .C Certificates Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of reinforcement .
If requested submit the following .
Copy of the certified mill test report for each heat and size of reinforcing steel showing physical and chemical analysis .
copies of a list of all reinforcement before starting reinforcement placement .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Bar Reinforcement Reinforcing bars must be deformed bars complying with ASTM AAM Grade except you may use .
Deformed bars complying with ASTM AAM Grade in .. Junction structures .. Sign and signal foundations .. Minor structures ..
Concrete crib members .. Mechanicallystabilizedembankment concrete panels .. Masonry block sound walls .
Deformed or plain bars complying with ASTM AAM Grade or in .. Slope and channel paving ..
Concrete barriers Type and .
Plain bars for spiral or hoop reinforcement in structures and concrete piles You may substitute welded wire reinforcement for reinforcing bars in the following .
Slope paving and lined ditches .
Retaining walls .
Concrete barriers .
Sidewalks curbs and gutters on structures .
Nonstructural aesthetic additions .
Culvert headwalls end walls and wing walls .
Shotcrete .
Deck overlays .
Shear reinforcement stirrups in PC girders Substituted welded wire reinforcement must be on an equivalent area basis .
The Engineer determines the exact location .
If the welded wire reinforcement does not provide the required area of steel supplement it with reinforcing bars .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT .C Welded Wire Reinforcement Welded wire reinforcement must comply with ASTM AAM .
.D Reinforcing Wire Reinforcing wire must comply with the specifications for plain wire in ASTM AAM. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Cleaning Before concrete is placed the reinforcement to be embedded must be free of mortar oil dirt excessive mill scale and scabby rust and other coatings that would destroy or reduce the bond .
.C Bending Do not bend or straighten bars in a way that damages the material .
Do not use bars with kinks or improper bends .
Hooks and bends must comply with the Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete published by ACI .
.D Placing Firmly and securely hold reinforcement in position by .
Wiring at intersections and splices . .
Using precast mortar blocks or ferrous metal chairs spacers metal hangers supporting wires or other authorized devices of sufficient strength to resist crushing under applied loads .
Do not use aluminum plastic or wood supports .
Do not place bars on layers of fresh concrete as the work progresses .
Metal supports must have a clear cover of at least inch .
Do not consider protective coatings on metal supports when determining clear cover .
Where the clear cover to reinforcement shown or determined by the Engineer exceeds the minimum specified clear cover increase the clear cover for metal supports accordingly .
The centertocenter spacing of parallel bars must be at least .
times the bar diameter .
The clear distance between bundles of bars and adjacent bundles or single bars must be at least . . times the maximum size of the coarse aggregate .
times the larger bar diameter for bar bundles . . times the larger bar diameter for bar bundles Tie bundle bars together at not more than foot centers .
Unless otherwise shown reinforcement must have a inch clear cover measured from the surface of the concrete to the outside of the reinforcement .
Adjust or relocate reinforcement in posttensioned concrete during the installation of prestressing ducts or tendons as required to provide described clearances to the prestressing tendons anchorages jacks and equipment .
Obtain authorization for any adjustments or relocations .
End each unit of spiral reinforcement at both ends by lapping the spiral reinforcement on itself for at least diameters followed by a degree hook with a inch tail hooked around an intersecting longitudinal bar or a mechanical lap splice coupler .
Discontinuities in spiral reinforcement may be made only where shown or authorized .
The spiral on each side of a discontinuity or a lap splice is a separate unit .
Where discontinuities in spiral reinforcement are not allowed splice the spiral reinforcement .
Lap splices in spiral reinforcement must be lapped at least diameters followed by a degree hook with a inch tail hooked around an intersecting longitudinal bar or a mechanical lap splice coupler .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT Roll welded wire reinforcement flat before placing concrete .
Secure welded wire reinforcement in place with devices that prevent the reinforcements vertical and transverse movement .
Do not tack weld on reinforcing bars unless shown .
For column and pile bar reinforcing cages measuring feet in diameter and larger .
Tie all reinforcement intersections with double wire ties on at least vertical bars of each cage equally spaced around the circumference . .
Tie at least percent of remaining reinforcement intersections in each cage with single wire ties .
Stagger tied intersections from adjacent ties . .
Provide bracing to avoid collapse of the cage during assembly transportation and installation. . PAYMENT The payment quantity of bar reinforcing steel is the calculated weight of the reinforcing bars and wire .
The payment quantity of bar reinforcing steel includes the lap of bars for lap splicing including locations where you use a continuous bar instead of the splice shown .
The payment quantities are based on the following Bar Reinforcing Steel Quantities Deformed bar designation no .
Weight pounds per foot Nominal diameter inches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
NOTE Bar numbers approximate the number of eighths of an inch included in the nominal diameter of the bars .
The nominal diameter of a deformed bar is equal to the diameter of a plain round bar having the same weight per linear foot as the deformed bar .
The cross sectional area of reinforcing wire in hundredths of square inches is equal to its Wsize number .
The density of reinforcing wire is .
lbcu in .
The payment quantity of welded wire reinforcement is determined based on the measured area covered by the reinforcement and does not include laps .
The payment quantity for bar reinforcing steel bridge includes diaphragm dowels and bolts in PC concrete members .
If alternative transverse deck reinforcement placement details are shown the payment quantities are based on the detail that shows truss bars .
Bar reinforcing steel involved in bridge work is paid for as bar reinforcing steel bridge or bar reinforcing steel epoxy coatedbridge unless it is included in a separate bid item .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT EPOXYCOATED REINFORCEMENT AND EPOXYCOATED PREFABRICATED REINFORCEMENT .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for fabricating and placing epoxycoated reinforcement and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement .
The substitution of welded wire reinforcement for bar reinforcement specified in .B is not allowed for epoxycoated bar reinforcement or epoxycoated prefabricated bar reinforcement .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Samples .Abi General Reserved .Abii Epoxy Powder Test Samples Submit a test sample from each batch of epoxy powder to be used for epoxy coating reinforcement to METS .
Each test sample must be .
Weighed to ounces .
Packaged in an airtight container .
Identified with the manufacturers name and batch number .Abiii Patching Material Test Samples Submit a test sample from each batch of patching material to be used to repair epoxy coating on reinforcement to METS .
Each test sample must be .
Weighed to ounces .
Packaged in an airtight container .
Identified with the manufacturers name and batch number .Abiv Test Samples Submit test samples of epoxycoated reinforcement and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement to METS .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Except for field welding of butt splices complete welding of the reinforcement before epoxy coating .
If a part of a bar or wire is described to be epoxy coated coat the entire bar unless the bar or wire is spliced outside the limits of epoxy coating in which case epoxy coating is not required on the part of the bar or wire beyond the splice .
Do not store reinforcement within feet of ocean or tidal water for more than months .
Patching material and the patching process must be suitable for field application .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT The following must be on the Authorized Material List for fusion bonded epoxy powders and corrosion protection coverings .
Epoxy powder .
Corrosion protection covering for splices .C Construction Except for lap splices cover splices of reinforcement with a corrosion protection covering .
Install covering under the manufacturers instructions .
.D Payment The weight of epoxy coating is not included in the weight of reinforcement .
Bar or wire reinforcement extending beyond the limits for epoxycoated reinforcement shown is paid for as bar reinforcing steel bridge. . EPOXYCOATED REINFORCEMENT .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and placing epoxycoated reinforcement .
In a freezethaw area epoxy coat the following .
All longitudinal and transverse reinforcement in a bridge deck inches or less in thickness .
Longitudinal and transverse reinforcement within inches of the top surface of a bridge deck greater than inches in thickness .
Reinforcement that extends to within inches of the top surface of the bridge deck .
Reinforcement within or that extends to within inches of the top surface of abutment backwalls if the top surface of the backwall is at deck level .
Reinforcement in concrete barriers .
Reinforcement at locations shown .A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Test Samples For each shipment of epoxycoated reinforcement to the job site or PC plant submit two inchlong test samples from each size of reinforcement .
Before transporting test samples .
Securely bundle and package the test samples in a way that preserves their condition during transportation .
Identify each test sample by shipment and Contract number using weatherproof markings .
Attach a completed Sample Identification Card to the test samples .Ac Certificates Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of epoxycoated reinforcement .
Include the following with the submittal .
Certification that the coated reinforcement complies with ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement or ASTM AAM Class A Type for wire reinforcement .
All certifications specified in ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement or ASTM AAM for wire reinforcement SECTION REINFORCEMENT Submit a certificate of compliance for the patching material including a certification that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
Instead of providing a certification for the patching material you may identify on the container that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Perform qualification testing and certifications required by ASTM AAM and ASTM AAM at an authorized laboratory .Ab Department Acceptance Test samples must comply with the requirements for coating thickness and coating adhesion specified in ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement or ASTM AAM Class A Type for wire reinforcement as follows .
If both test samples comply with the requirements the Department accepts all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
If both test samples do not comply with the requirements the Department performs additional test on the reinforcement of the same size from the same shipment .
This additional test consists of testing test samples randomly selected by the Engineer for coating thickness and adhesion .
If both test samples do not comply with the specified requirements the Department rejects all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
.B Materials Epoxycoated reinforcement must comply with .
ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement .
ASTM AAM Class A Type for wire reinforcement Fabrication and handling of epoxycoated bar reinforcement at the job site and PC plant must comply with ASTM DDM .
Coating must be light green .
.C Construction If damage to the coating occurs during field bending patch the area immediately .
Job site and PC plant practices must comply with sections X .. through X .. of appendix X of ASTM AAM for wire reinforcement except replace should with must .
.D Payment Not Used .
EPOXYCOATED PREFABRICATED REINFORCEMENT .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and placing epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab Test Samples For each shipment of epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement to the job site or PC plant submit two inchlong test samples from each size of reinforcement .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT Before transporting test samples .
Securely bundle and package the test samples in a way that preserves their condition during transportation .
Identify each test sample by shipment and Contract number using weatherproof markings .
Attach a completed Sample Identification Card to the test samples .Ac Certificates Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of epoxycoated reinforcement .
Include with the submittal .
Certification that the coated reinforcement complies with ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement or ASTM AAM Class A Type for wire reinforcement .
All certifications specified in ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement or ASTM AAM for wire reinforcement Submit a certificate of compliance for the patching material including a certification that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
Instead of providing certification for the patching material you may identify on the container that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Perform qualification testing and certification required by ASTM AAM and ASTM AAM at an authorized laboratory .
.Ab Department Acceptance Test samples must comply with the requirements for coating thickness and coating adhesion specified in ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement or ASTM AAM Class A Type for wire reinforcement as follows .
If both test samples comply with the requirements the Department accepts all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
If both test samples do not comply with the requirements the Department performs additional test on the reinforcement of the same size from the same shipment .
This additional test consists of testing test samples randomly selected by the Engineer for coating thickness and adhesion .
If both test samples do not comply with the specified requirements the Department rejects all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
.B Materials Epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement must comply with .
ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement .
ASTM AAM Class A Type for wire reinforcement Coating must be purple or gray .
.C Construction Do not bend epoxycoated prefabricated bar or wire reinforcement after coating application .
Job site and PC plant practices must comply with sections X .. through X .. of appendix X of ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement except replace should with must .
.D Payment Not Used GALVANIZED BAR REINFORCEMENT .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for fabricating and placing galvanized bar reinforcement .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT .
MATERIALS Galvanize bar reinforcement under ASTM AAM Class except chromating is not required. . CONSTRUCTION Job site and PC plant practices must comply with sections X .. through X .. of appendix X of ASTM AAM for bar reinforcement except replace should with must. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED HEADED BAR REINFORCEMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for fabricating headed bar reinforcement .
.B Definitions lot count or fraction thereof of headed bar reinforcement for each Bar size Head size Head type Method of manufacture Heat number of bar material Heat number of head material A reinforcing bar with a head on each end is counted as headed reinforcing bars for establishing and testing production lots .
.C Submittals .C General If any part of the head is fabricated in the field submit a prequalification report as specified under section .Cc .
.C Samples .Ca General Reseved .Cb Test Samples Submit test samples to METS .
Include copies of the certificates of compliance with the test samples .
.C Test Reports Submit a QC test report for each lot .
Each test report must include .
Lot number .
Bar size .
Type of headed bar reinforcement .
Physical condition of each test sample .
Notable defects on any test sample .
Affected zone limits of each test sample .
Location of visible necking area on each test sample .
Ultimate strength of each test sample SECTION REINFORCEMENT .C Certificates Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of headed bar reinforcement .
Include with the submittal copies of .
Mill test reports for bar reinforcement and head material .
QC test reports .
Daily production logs .D Quality Assurance .D General Section .
does not apply to headed bar reinforcement .
.D Qualifications If any part of the head is fabricated in the field the operator and procedure must be prequalified as specified for service and ultimate butt splices under section .D .
Welding welder qualifications and inspection of welding must comply with AWS C .. .D Test Samples After completing fabrication of a lot of headed bar reinforcement including preparation for any required epoxy coating notify the Engineer that the lot is ready for testing .
After receiving notification that lots are ready for QC testing the Engineer randomly selects department acceptance test samples to be removed from each lot and places tamperproof markings or seals on the test samples .
Test samples must be feet long for bar reinforcement sizes no .
and below and feet long for bar reinforcement sizes no .
and above .
Before transporting test samples to an authorized laboratory and METS .
Securely bundle and package the test samples for each test in a way that preserves their condition during transportation .
Identify each test sample by lot number and Contract number using weatherproof markings .
Attach a completed Sample Identification Card to each bundle A test sample is rejected if the tamperproof marking or seal is disturbed before testing .
.D Quality Control .Da General Maintain a daily production log for the fabrication of headed bar reinforcement for each production lot .
The log must include .
Production lot numbers .
Number of bars in each production lot .
Heats of bar and head material used in each production lot .
Fabrication records including tracking and production parameters for welds or forgings .Db Quality Control Testing A QC test must consist of tensile testing headed bar reinforcement test samples selected from each lot of completed headed bar reinforcement before shipping the lot to the job site or PC plant .
Tensile test headed bar reinforcement test samples .
At a laboratory on the Authorized Laboratory List .
In the condition received .
Under ASTM AAM Do not perform tests on test samples from bundles containing fewer than test samples .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT At least business days before performing any testing at the authorized laboratory notify the Engineer of .
Date of the testing .
Location of the authorized laboratory where the tests will be conducted .
Number of lots to be tested At fracture headed bar reinforcement test samples must comply with the requirements specified in section .
as follows .
If only test sample complies with the requirements the Department rejects all headed bar reinforcement in the lot . .
If only test samples comply with the requirements perform additional test on the same lot of headed bar reinforcement .
This additional test must consist of tensile testing test samples randomly selected by the Engineer and removed by you from the lot .
If any of the test samples from this additional test do not comply with the specified requirements the Department rejects all headed bar reinforcement in the lot . .
If or more test samples comply with the requirements the Department accepts all headed bar reinforcement in the lot .
Tag each headed bar in a production lot to be shipped to the job site or PC plant in a way that allows accurate identification at the job site or PC plant .
.Dc Quality Control Test Report The quality control test report must be prepared by the laboratory performing the testing and signed by an engineer representing the laboratory .
The engineer must be registered as a civil engineer in the State .
.D Department Acceptance The Department tests headed bar reinforcement as specified for QC testing in section .Db .
The Department will notify you of the Department acceptance test results for each bundle of test samples of splices within business days after METS receives the bundle unless more than bundle is received on the same day in which case allow additional business days for each additional bundle received. . MATERIALS Headed bar reinforcement must comply with ASTM AAM .
At fracture headed bar reinforcement must .
Comply with the tensile requirements of ASTM AAM Class A. . Show signs of visible necking in the reinforcing bar .
The visible necking must be located at least bar diameter away from the affected zone .
Equipment used to perform friction welding must be fitted with an inprocess monitoring system to record essential production parameters that describe the process of welding the head onto the reinforcement .
Record the following parameters .
Friction welding force .
Forge force .
Rotational speed .
Friction upset distance and time .
Forge upset distance and time Headed bar reinforcement must have full size heads and must be on the Authorized Material List .
If headed bar reinforcement is to be epoxy coated .
Round edges of heads .
Remove sharp edges burrs and weld flash that would prevent proper coating of the headed bar SECTION REINFORCEMENT Do not use threaded heads if headed bar reinforcement is to be epoxy coated. . CONSTRUCTION Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for headed bar reinforcement is the quantity of heads .
Reinforcing bar used for headed bar reinforcement is paid for as bar reinforcing steel .
The length of bar used in calculating the weight of reinforcing bar is the entire length of the completed headed bar including the head thickness .
SPLICING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for splicing bar reinforcement .
Reinforcing bar splices consist of lap splices service splices or ultimate butt splices .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Section .C applies to service and ultimate butt splices .
.C Product Data .Ca General Reseved .Cb Radiographic Film Developing Process Records If requested submit records of radiographic film developing processes and any chemical changes to the developing processes .
.C Samples .Ca General Reseved .Cb Test Samples Submit service splice and ultimate butt splice test samples to METS .
Include copies of the certificates of compliance with the test samples for mechanical splices and resistancebuttwelded splices .
.C Test Reports .Ca General Reserved .Cb Splicing Quality Control Test Report Submit a QC test report for each lot of service splices and ultimate butt splices .
Each QC test report must include .
Lot number and location .
Bar size .
Splice type .
Mechanical splice length .
Test specimen length .
Physical condition of splice test sample SECTION REINFORCEMENT .
Notable defects .
Total measured slip .
Ultimate tensile strength of each splice .
The following for ultimate butt splices ..
Location of visible necking area .. Largest measured strain Allow business days for the Engineers review .
.Cc Splice Rejection Mitigation Report For a rejected lot of service splices or ultimate butt splices submit a splice rejection mitigation report .
Allow business days for the Engineers review .
.C Certificates Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of service splice or ultimate butt splice material .
Include with the submittal .
Type or series identification of the splice material including tracking information for traceability .
Grade and size number of reinforcement to be spliced .
Statement that the splice material complies with the type of mechanical splice on the Authorized Material List for steel reinforcing couplers .
For resistancebuttwelded material .. Heat number ..
Lot number .. Mill certificates .C Qualification Statements .Ca General Reserved .Cb Welder and Welding Procedures Qualifications Submit welder and welding procedure qualifications as an informational submittal .
.Cc Splice Prequalification Report For each bar size of each coupler model of service splice or ultimate butt splice to be used in the work submit a splice prequalification report that includes .
Copy of the manufacturers product literature giving complete data on the splice material and installation procedures .
Names of the operators who will be performing the splicing .
Descriptions of the positions locations equipment and procedures that will be used in the work Certified test results from the authorized laboratory for the prequalification splice test samples .
Certifications from the fabricator for operator and procedure prequalification .
Manufacturers QC Process Control Manual .Cd Weld Flash Removal Process If specified submit a proposed weld flash removal process .
The submittal must show that the process produces a smooth profile that can be successfully epoxy coated under section .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Section .D applies to service and ultimate butt splices .
Assign a splicing QC manager .
Before testing resistancebuttwelded splice test samples of reinforcement to be epoxy coated remove the weld flash using the authorized process for flash removal .
Section .
does not apply to resistancebuttwelded splices .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT .D Qualifications .Da General Reserved .Db Operator and Procedure Prequalification Before performing any service or ultimate butt splicing obtain certifications from the fabricator for prequalification of the operators and the procedures to be used in the work .
For each bar size of each splice coupler model type to be used each operator must prepare .
prequalification splice test samples .
additional prequalification splice test samples if using splices dependent on bar deformations Splice test samples must have been prepared and tested no more than years before the submittal of the splice prequalification report .
Splice test samples and testing must comply with the QC testing requirements specified in section .Db for the type of splice to be used in the work .
.Dc Welder and Welding Procedure Qualifications Before performing any CJP butt welds qualify welders and welding procedures under AWS D .. Qualify welders and welding procedures on splice test samples of the type to be used in the work .
.D Test Samples .Da General Splice test samples must comply with California Test .
For splicing new reinforcement to existing reinforcement make splice test samples using only reinforcement having the deformation pattern of the new reinforcement .
Before transporting splice test samples to an authorized laboratory and METS .
Securely bundle and package the test samples for each test in a way that preserves their condition during transportation .
Identify each splice test sample by location lot number and Contract number using weatherproof markings .
Attach a completed Sample Identification Card to each bundle When preparing or removing splice test samples for QC testing concurrently prepare or remove Department acceptance splice test samples during .
The st QC test .
of every subsequent QC tests or fraction thereof randomly selected by the Engineer .Db Ultimate Butt Splice After completing the ultimate butt splices in a lot including any required epoxy coating notify the Engineer that the splices are ready for testing .
Except for hoops the Engineer selects splice test samples at the job site or PC plant .
The Engineer selects splice test samples for hoops at the job site PC plant or fabrication plant .
After being notified the Engineer randomly selects the splice test samples to be removed and places tamperproof markings or seals on the test samples .
A test sample is rejected if the tamperproof marking or seal is disturbed before testing .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved SECTION REINFORCEMENT .Db Quality Control Testing .Dbi General QC testing includes total slip testing service splice testing and ultimate butt splice testing .
Test QC splice test samples .
In the condition received .
Under California Test .
At a laboratory on the Authorized Laboratory List Before performing service splice or ultimate butt splice testing perform total slip testing on the service splice or ultimate butt splice test samples as specified in section .Dbii .
Do not perform tests on splice test samples from bundles containing fewer than test samples .
At least business days before performing any testing at the authorized laboratory notify the Engineer of .
Date of the testing .
Location of the authorized laboratory where the tests will be conducted .
Number of lots to be tested If a QC test for a lot is rejected repair or replace reinforcing bars from which test samples were removed before the Engineer selects additional splices from this lot for more testing .
If a lot of splices is rejected do not use the rejected lot or any subsequent lots until .
QC manager has performed a complete review of your QC process for these splices .
You have prepared a splice rejection mitigation report describing ..
Cause of the failure ..
Method used to identify the cause of failure ..
Identification of affected lots ..
Provisions for preventing similar failures in future lots .. Procedure for repairing or replacing the splices in the rejected lot .
Engineer has notified you that the splice rejection mitigation report is authorized .Dbii Total Slip Testing Except for mechanical lap welded or hoop splices test of the splice test samples for total slip .
If the splice test sample exceeds the total slip value specified in section .B test the remaining test samples for total slip .
If any of the remaining test samples exceed the specified total slip value the Department rejects all splices in the lot .
.Dbiii Service Splice Testing A service splice test consists of preparing and testing splice test samples for each lot of completed splices .
Prepare the test samples using the same splice material position operators location equipment and procedures to be used in the work .
Splice test samples must comply with the requirements specified in section .B as follows .
If only splice test sample complies with the requirements the Department rejects all splices in the lot . .
If only splice test samples comply with the requirements perform additional test on the same lot of splices .
This additional test must consist of tensile testing splice test samples randomly selected by the Engineer and removed by you from the lot of completed splices .
If any of the splice test samples from this additional test do not attain the specified minimum tensile strength the Department rejects all splices in the lot . .
If or more splice test samples comply with the requirements the Department accepts all splices in the lot .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT .Dbiv Ultimate Butt Splice Testing An ultimate butt splice test consists of removing and testing splice test samples from each lot of completed splices .
At fracture splice test samples must comply with the requirements specified in section .B as follows .
If only splice test sample complies with the requirements the Department rejects all splices in the lot . .
If only splice test samples comply with the requirements perform additional ultimate butt splice test on the same lot of splices .
If any of these splice test samples do not comply with the specified requirements the Department rejects all splices in the lot . .
If or more splice test samples comply with the requirements the Department accepts all splices in the lot .
The Department does not require ultimate butt splice testing on repaired splices from a lot unless an additional ultimate butt splice test is required on the same lot of splices .
If this additional test is required the Engineer may select any repaired splice for the additional test .
If splices are made vertically at the job site in or above their final positions for bar reinforcement of columns or CIP concrete piles instead of removing the splice test samples from the completed lot you may prepare the samples as specified for service splice test samples in section .Dbiii .
Test the splice test samples as specified for ultimate butt splice test samples .
If test samples for CJP buttwelded splices are not removed from a lot of completed splices perform RT as follows .
Perform RT of CJP buttwelded splices under AWS D. .. Before tensile testing the splice test samples .. On percent of CJP buttwelded splices from a production lot .
Radiographic procedures must comply with AWS D. and D .. . For fieldproduced CJP butt welds do not radiograph more than weld during exposure. . Make radiographs by either Xray or gamma ray .
Each radiograph must have a density of from .
to .
in the area of interest .
The Department allows a density tolerance of .
for densitometer variations .
Gamma rays must be from the iridium isotope and the emitting specimen must not exceed .
inch in the greatest diagonal dimension. . You may add an allowable weld buildup of .
inch to the total material thickness when determining the proper penetrameter selection .
The Department does not accept image quality indicator equivalency . .
Sufficiently shim penetrameters using a radiographically identical material .
Penetrameter image densities must be from .
to .. .
Regardless of the reinforcing bar size radiographic film must be Class . . Record the results of radiographic interpretations on a signed certification and keep a copy with the film packet .
For RT .
The Department does not allow sight development of film . .
Technique sheets prepared under ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code section V article section T must include the developer temperature developing time fixing duration and all rinse times .
Notify the Engineer hours before performing any RT .
The Engineer selects the splices that compose the production lot and the splices within each lot to receive RT .
If more than percent of the splices radiographically tested in a production lot are defective perform RT on an additional percent of the splices selected by the Engineer from the same production lot .
If more than percent of the cumulative total of splices tested from the same production lot are defective perform RT on all remaining splices in the lot .
The Department does not pay for additional RT performed due to the identification of defective splices .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT Repair defects under AWS D .. .Dc Weld Flash Removal Process Removal of the weld flash must produce a smooth profile free of any sharp edges that would prevent proper coating of the reinforcement such that .
Ultimate tensile strength and elongation properties of the bar are not reduced .
Outside radius of the flash at any point along the circumference of the bar is not .. Less than the nominal radius of the bar ..
Greater than inch beyond the nominal radius of the bar .Dd Splicing Quality Control Test Report The splicing quality control test report must be prepared by the laboratory performing the testing and signed by an engineer representing the laboratory .
The Engineer must be registered as a civil engineer in the State .
.D Department Acceptance The Department tests service splices and ultimate butt splices as specified for QC testing in section .D .
The Department will notify you of the Department acceptance test results for each bundle of test samples of splices within business days after METS receives the bundle unless more than bundle is received on the same day in which case allow additional business days for each additional bundle received. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Service Splices and Ultimate Butt Splices .B General Section .B applies if service splices or ultimate butt splices are used in the work .
The total slip must not exceed the values shown in the following table when tested under California Test Total Slip Reinforcing bar no .
Total slip inch . . . . . . . . . .
The following must be on the Authorized Material List for steel reinforcing couplers .
Mechanical couplers .
Fabricators of resistancebuttwelded splices .B Service Splices Service splices must develop a minimum tensile strength of psi .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT .B Ultimate Butt Splices Ultimate butt splice test samples must demonstrate necking as either of the following .
For Necking Option I as specified in California Test the test sample must fracture in the reinforcing bar outside of the affected zone and show visible necking. . For Necking Option II as specified in California Test the largest measured strain must be at least .. percent for no .
and larger bars .. percent for no .
and smaller bars .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Buttwelded or mechanical splices not shown as requiring a service splice or an ultimate butt splice must comply with the specifications for service splices .
Do not place splices at a location shown as a nosplice zone .
Reinforcing bars may be continuous where splices are shown .
If splice locations are not shown determine splice locations using commercial lengths where practicable .
Unless another option is shown stagger splices in adjacent reinforcing steel .
The minimum distance between staggered lap splices or staggered mechanical lap splices must be the same as the length specified for a lap splice in the largest bar .
The minimum distance between staggered butt splices must be feet measured between the splice midpoints along a line centered between the axis of the adjacent bars .
For reinforcing bars where splice test samples were removed replace either of the following .
Removed portion of the bar or hoop using mechanical ultimate butt splices .
Bar or hoop in kind .B Lap Splicing Splices made by lapping must consist of placing reinforcing bars in contact and wiring them together while maintaining the alignment of the bars and the minimum clearances .
Do not splice the following by lapping .
No .
bars .
No .
bars .
Hoops .
Reinforcing bars where you can not provide a minimum clear distance of inches between the splice and the nearest adjacent bar For reinforcing bars complying with ASTM AAM Grade or ASTM AAM the length of lap splices must be at least .
diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars no .
or smaller .
diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars nos .
and For reinforcing bars complying with ASTM AAM Grade the length of lap splices must be at least .
diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars no .
or smaller .
diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars nos .
and For splices in bundled bars the length of the lap splices must be .
Equal to the length of a single bar lap splice for bundles of bars . . times the length of a single bar lap splice for bundles of bars SECTION REINFORCEMENT Lap welded wire reinforcement such that the overlap between the outermost cross wires is at least the larger of the following .
inches .
Spacing of the cross wires plus inches .
Numerical value of the longitudinal wire size Wsize number times .
divided by the spacing of the longitudinal wires in inches .C Service Splices and Ultimate Butt Splices .C General Service splices and ultimate butt splices must be one of the following .
Mechanical splices .
Resistancebuttwelded splices .
CJP buttwelded splices .C Mechanical Splices Perform service splicing and ultimate butt splicing of mechanical splices .
Under the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified .
Using the manufacturers standard equipment jigs clamps and other required accessories Splice devices must have a clear cover of at least inches measured from the surface of the concrete to the outside of the splice device .
To provide the specified clear cover to reinforcement .
Adjust or relocate stirrups ties and other reinforcement .
Place additional reinforcement if needed .C ResistanceButtWelded Splices If resistancebuttwelded bar reinforcement is to be epoxy coated remove the weld flash using the authorized process for flash removal .
.C CompleteJointPenetration ButtWelded Splices CJP buttwelded splices must comply with AWS D .. Use only the joint details and dimensions shown in Figure .
of AWS D. except do not use the Single VGroove Weld with Split Pipe Backing detail .
Make butt welds with multiple weld passes without an appreciable weaving motion using a stringer bead having a width at most .
times the diameter of the electrode .
Perform slagging between each weld pass .
Weld reinforcement must not exceed .
inch in convexity .
Electrodes for welding must have a minimum CVN impact value of J at degrees F. For welding of bars complying with ASTM A A M Grade or the requirements of Table .
of AWS D. are superseded by the following The minimum preheat and interpass temperatures must be degrees F for Grade bars and degrees F for Grade bars .
Immediately after completing the welding cover at least inches of the bar on each side of the splice with insulated wrapping to control the rate of cooling .
The insulated wrapping must remain in place until the bar has cooled below degrees F. If welding different grades of reinforcing bars .
Electrode must comply with the specifications for Grade bar .
Preheat must comply with the specifications for Grade bar If any of the specified preheat interpass and postweld cooling temperatures are not met remove the weld and heataffectedzone metal and reweld the splice .
Protect welding from air currents drafts and precipitation to prevent loss of heat or loss of arc shielding .
Do not direct butt splice reinforcing bars by thermite welding .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT .
PAYMENT Not Used STRAY CURRENT PROTECTION .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for installing stray current protection .
Stray current protection consists of one or a combination of the following .
Prestressing tendon connections .
Bar reinforcing steel connections .
Copper cable to bar reinforcing steel connections .
Pile and concrete epoxy insulation .
Concrete insulation course .
Neoprene sheet insulation .
Joint sealant insulation .
Membrane insulation .
Mortar block insulation .
Epoxycoated reinforcing steel insulation .
Plastic end cover insulators .
Pipe wrapping tape insulation .
Epoxy for insulation of embedded metal materials .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Prestressing Tendon Connection Welding operators must be prequalified by satisfactorily completing a field qualification test weld .
The operator must make qualification test welds in the presence of the Engineer using .
Materials similar to those in the work The same position and under the same conditions of welding that will be encountered in the work Visual inspection of completed welds must show no evidence of cracks lack of fusion or undercutting .
.D.D Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Prestressing Tendon Connection For prestressing tendon connections the no .
steel wire must comply with ASTM A A or AM .
.C Bar Reinforcing Steel Connection Reserved .D Copper Cable to Bar Reinforcing Steel Connection Materials for exothermic welding the copper cable to bar reinforcing steel connections must comply with the manufacturers instructions for the following SECTION REINFORCEMENT .
Mold size and shape .
Powder charge size and alloy mixture Copper cable must comply with section .
Tape must be commercially available vinyl electrical tape with a thickness of at least mils .
Test box cover and anchorage devices must comply with section .
The gasket must be made of commercially available neoprene .
.E Pile and Concrete Epoxy Insulation For pile and concrete epoxy insulation epoxy must be .
Commercial quality .
Nonconductive .
Suitable for adherence to concrete and steel surfaces .F Concrete Insulation Course Concrete insulation course must comply with section and contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete .
.G Neoprene Sheet Insulation Fabricate neoprene sheet insulation from sheet neoprene complying with the specifications for neoprene in section ..
The sheet must be at least inch thick .
.H Joint Sealant Insulation The joint sealant insulation must be a singlecomponent nonsag polyurethane sealant complying with ASTM C . The primer and backing rod must comply with the joint sealant manufacturers instructions .
.I Membrane Insulation Membrane insulation must comply with the specifications for dampproofing or preformed membrane waterproofing in section .
.J Mortar Block Insulation Mortar block insulation must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
The blocks must be dense homogeneous and watertight .
.K EpoxyCoated Reinforcing Steel Insulation Epoxycoated reinforcing steel insulation must comply with section .
If a coupling nut is used at an attachment between an approach slab and an abutment the nut must be epoxy coated either before or after fabrication .
.L Plastic End Cover Insulators The plastic end cover insulators must be of the type commercially available to protect workers from protruding reinforcing bars .
Bond the covers to the reinforcing bars with commercially available epoxy that is compatible with the plastic covers .
.M Pipe Wrapping Tape Insulation For pipe wrapping tape insulation the tape must be pressuresensitive PVC or polyethylene tape with a nominal thickness of mils .
Use a primer as instructed by the manufacturer of the tape .
.N Epoxy for Insulation of Embedded Metal Materials For insulation of embedded metal materials epoxy must be .
Commercial quality .
Nonconductive SECTION REINFORCEMENT .
Suitable for adhering to metal surfaces Instead of epoxy coating the hanger rods you may use commercial quality neoprene bushings around the pipe at strap supports .
Instead of epoxy coating the metal parts of joint seal assemblies in contact with concrete you may apply a heavy coat of bituminous paint. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Prestressing Tendon Connection Do not perform welding on the prestressing anchorage devices .
Do not perform arc welding on the prestressing strand .
Connect the collector wire to the prestressing strand by gas welding .
Do not gas weld until the tendons are grouted and have cured for at least hours .
You may join wire pigtail ends by gas welding at any stage of the work .
Oxyacetylene welding must comply with the best standards of the industry .
Use gas welding rods complying with Class RG steel rods .
.C Bar Reinforcing Steel Connection Weld bars and splices by the manual shielded metalarc process before installing any prestressing strands .
Use lowhydrogen electrodes complying with the specifications for E electrodes in AWS A.A.M .
.D Copper Cable to Bar Reinforcing Steel Connection Fusion weld the copper cable to the bar reinforcing steel by an exothermic type welding process .
Apply commercially available rubber splicing compound to the welded connection .
Apply layers of tape each half lapped .
.E Pile and Concrete Epoxy Insulation Abrasive blast clean concrete surfaces on which epoxy insulation is to be applied to the extent that clean aggregate is exposed .
Apply the epoxy by brush or other means that will completely and uniformly cover the surfaces .
Remove lifting anchors as specified for their removal in a corrosive environment in section .B .
.F Concrete Insulation Course Excavate and backfill for concrete insulation course under section .
The joint between the concrete insulation course and the footing must comply with the specifications for horizontal construction joints in section .D except abrasive blast cleaning is not required .
.G Neoprene Sheet Insulation For neoprene sheet insulation lap each successive sheet securely to the preceding sheet by at least inches .
.H Joint Sealant Insulation Abrasive blast clean and prime concrete surfaces to receive joint sealant insulation .
.I Membrane Insulation The exposed surfaces of membrane insulation must be of uniform height above ground without unsightly bulges depressions or other imperfections .
Membrane insulation must comply with the specifications for dampproofing or preformed membrane waterproofing in section .
SECTION REINFORCEMENT .J Mortar Block Insulation Reserved .K EpoxyCoated Reinforcing Steel Insulation For a coupling nut which is epoxy coated after fabrication apply the epoxy by brush or other means that will completely and uniformly cover the surfaces in contact with concrete .
.L Plastic End Cover Insulators Use enough epoxy to ensure that no voids exist between the plastic end cover insulators and the reinforcing bars .
.M Pipe Wrapping Tape Insulation For pipe wrapping tape insulation apply layer of tape half lapped .
.N Epoxy for Insulation of Embedded Metal Materials For embedded metals insulated with epoxy .
Prepare galvanized surfaces under section .. .
Apply the epoxy by brush or other means to completely and uniformly cover the surfaces in contact with concrete. . PAYMENT Not Used SHOTCRETE GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for placing shotcrete .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
.B Definitions drymix process Deliver mixed aggregate and cementitious material pneumatically or mechanically to the nozzle body and add water and mix the materials in the nozzle body .
wetmix process Deliver mixed aggregate cementitious material and water pneumatically to the nozzle and add any admixture at the nozzle .
rebound Shotcrete material that ricochets off the receiving surface is recovered and is clean and free of foreign material .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Shotcrete must consist of cementitious material fine aggregate and water .
Cementitious material fine aggregate and water must comply with section .
For the drymix process .
Thoroughly mix part cementitious material to not more than .
parts fine aggregate in a dry state before charging into the machine .
Measurement must be either by volume or weight. . Fine aggregate must contain not more than percent moisture by weight .
For the wetmix process .
Shotcrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard. . You may substitute a maximum of percent pea gravel for the fine aggregate .
The maximum size of pea gravel must be such that percent passes the inch screen and at least percent passes the inch screen. . You may add admixtures complying with section .E .
If colored shotcrete is described color shotcrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the shotcrete .
The synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring shotcrete .
The coloring agent must be uniformly and homogeneously mixed with the shotcrete. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Preparing Foundations Evenly grade foundations before applying shotcrete .
No point on the graded slope may be above the slope plane shown .
Thoroughly compact foundations .
Foundations must contain enough moisture to provide a firm foundation and to prevent absorption of water from the shotcrete .
Foundations must be free of surface water .
Use ground or gauging wires if necessary to establish thickness surface planes and finish lines .
SECTION SHOTCRETE .C Placing Shotcrete Apply shotcrete by either the drymix or wetmix process .
Direct the nozzle in a way that minimizes rebound of the shotcrete .
Maintain a uniform velocity of the material as it leaves the nozzle and at a rate determined for the job site conditions .
For drymix shotcrete .
Maintain a constant pressure of at least psi in the placing machine if the hose length is feet or less .
Increase the pressure at least psi for each additional feet of hose or fraction thereof . .
Maintain uniform water pressure at the nozzle of at least psi greater than the air pressure at the machine. . Do not use aggregate and cementitious materials that have been mixed for more than minutes .
For wetmix shotcrete .
Transport shotcrete under section .G .
Limit placing to foot lifts measured along the slope .
Place gauging wires at approximately foot centers .
Do not use materials that have been mixed for more than minutes You may reuse rebound as fine aggregate in quantities not to exceed percent of the total fine aggregate requirements .
.D Finishing Shotcrete Place shotcrete to the depth shown and check the surface with a straightedge .
Bring to grade any low spots or depressions by placing additional shotcrete .
The finished surface must be smooth and uniform for the type of work involved .
Remove and replace loose areas of shotcrete .
Cure shotcrete for at least hours by spraying with water by a moist earth blanket or by any of the methods specified in section .B .
If you add a coloring agent to the shotcrete and you use the curing compound method for curing the shotcrete use curing compound no . .
Protect shotcrete under section .C. . PAYMENT Shotcrete is measured along the slope of areas placed and the thickness shown .
The Department does not pay for shotcrete placed outside the dimensions shown or to fill low areas of foundations .
STRUCTURAL SHOTCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing structural shotcrete .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit .
QC plan that includes ..
Number and qualifications of nozzlemen available to place shotcrete number of nozzlemen on the job site at any time during shotcrete placement description of their work schedule and procedures for avoiding fatigue of any nozzleman SECTION SHOTCRETE ..
Proposed method of placing shotcrete including application rates details of proposed construction joints and their locations and methods for achieving the required thickness and surface finish ..
Procedures for curing shotcrete surfaces ..
Description of any required debris containment system .
Preconstruction test panels and test results .
Production test cores and test results .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Qualifications Each nozzleman must have at least hours of experience as a nozzleman on projects with a similar application .
.D Preconstruction Test Panels Obtain authorization of the QC plan before constructing test panels .
Construct unreinforced test panel and reinforced test panel for each proposed mix design .
Use nozzlemen application crew equipment materials mix designs and procedures proposed for the work .
Cure the test panels under conditions similar to those in the work .
For the unreinforced test panel .
Determine the size of the test panel .
Obtain inchdiameter cores from the test panel .
Discard cores that show evidence of improper coring .
Identify each core that is to be tested .
Test cores for compressive strength .
Label and submit the test panel and a copy of the test results within days of testing .
Include the mix design and ambient temperature in the submittal For the reinforced test panel .
Construct a square test panel that has the same thickness bar size and quantity of bar reinforcement or other obstructions and positioning of bar reinforcement or obstructions as the most heavily reinforced section of shotcrete to be placed .
Minimum length of each side must equal times the thickness of the most heavily reinforced section of shotcrete to be placed but not less than inches .
Break the test panel in the presence of the Engineer after a minimum day cure into pieces no larger than inches in the greatest dimension .
Surfaces of the broken pieces must be dense and free of laminations and sand pockets and must show that the bar reinforcement or other obstructions are completely encased Obtain and test cores for compressive strength under section .Da .
Instead of constructing a separate unreinforced test panel you may obtain cores from the reinforced test panel to determine the compressive strength .
If you choose this option do not break the test panel until it has cured for at least days .
Dispose of test panels .
.D Quality Control .Da General Obtain cores for compressive strength testing under ASTM CCM .
Discard cores that contain bar reinforcement or other obstructions or show evidence of improper coring .
Test cores for compressive strength at days under ASTM CCM at an authorized laboratory .
The compressive strength is the average strength of at least cores that are free from bar reinforcement or other obstructions .
SECTION SHOTCRETE Notify the Engineer at least hours before performing any coring or testing .
.Db Field Quality Control Obtain at least four inchdiameter test cores from each cu yd or portion thereof of shotcrete placed each day .
Three cores must be free from reinforcement or obstructions .
One core must include reinforcement .
The Engineer determines each core location .
Cores must be both visually inspected and tested for compressive strength .
The Engineer performs the visual inspection and you must perform compressive strength testing .
Identify each core including a description of the core location and mix design and submit the cores immediately after coring .
The Engineer will perform the visual inspection and return the cores to you for compressive strength testing within hours .
.D Department Acceptance .Da General The Department accepts shotcrete based on test cores for visual inspection and compressive strength .
.Db Visual Inspection Each test core must be dense and be free of laminations and sand pockets .
Any core with reinforcement must show reinforcement or other obstructions are completely encased .
Shotcrete represented by an unacceptable core will be rejected unless you submit evidence that the quality of the shotcrete placed in the work is acceptable .
.Dc Compressive Strength If the compressive strength of the shotcrete is below the specified compressive strength .
Make corrections to the mix design or fabrication procedures and obtain authorization before you place additional shotcrete. . Shotcrete represented by the cores is subject to one of the following .
If the compressive strength is at least percent of the specified strength cu yd is deducted from the payment for structural shotcrete . .
If the compressive strength is below percent of the specified strength but is at least percent of the specified strength cu yd is deducted from the payment for structural shotcrete . .
If the compressive strength is below percent of the specified strength the shotcrete must be removed .
If the compressive strength is below the specified strength but is at least percent of the specified strength the deductions specified above apply unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is greater than or equal to the specified strength and this evidence is accepted by the Engineer .
If the compressive strength is below percent of the specified compressive strength the noncompliant concrete represented by the test must be removed unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is at least percent of the specified compressive strength and this evidence is accepted by the Engineer .
If the evidence consists of tests made on cores taken from the work obtain and test the cores under ASTM CCM. . MATERIALS Shotcrete must have a minimum compressive strength of psi unless otherwise described .
The shotcrete must attain the minimum compressive strength at days except days are allowed for shotcrete with a described minimum compressive strength greater than psi .
Mortar must comply with section .F .
SECTION SHOTCRETE .
CONSTRUCTION For ground anchor and soil nail walls backfill voids due to the removal of cobbles boulders portions of boulders debris or other obstructions with shotcrete .
Forms must comply with section .C .
Splicing of reinforcing bars no .
or larger must be made using a service butt splice .
Apply shotcrete by the wetmix process .
Shotcrete must completely encase reinforcement and other obstructions .
Rebound must not be used in structural shotcrete .
Taper construction joints .
Construction joints must comply with section .D .
Before final set use air blowpipes to remove rebound overspray and other debris from the areas to receive shotcrete .
If a finish coat is used remove loose material uneven or excess material and glaze .
Scarify the remaining surface .
Remove surface deposits that take a final set by abrasive blasting .
Before placing the finish coat wash receiving surface with an airwater blast .
You may apply finish coats by the drymix process if authorized .
Remove shotcrete that extends into the space shown for CIP concrete .
Cure shotcrete under section .H .
The surface finish of the shotcrete must comply with section .F .
Shotcrete must be maintained at a temperature of at least degrees F for hours after placing and at least degrees F for an additional days .
After removing field QC test cores fill the holes with mortar under section .E. . PAYMENT Payment for bar reinforcing steel is not included in the payment for structural shotcrete .
SCULPTED SHOTCRETE Reserved RESERVED WATERPROOFING GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for waterproofing. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used ASPHALT MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING AND DAMPPROOFING .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for applying asphalt membrane waterproofing and dampproofing .
Asphalt membrane waterproofing consists of a coating of primer and a firmly bonded membrane composed of layers of saturated glass fabric and moppings of waterproofing asphalt .
Dampproofing consists of a coating of primer and moppings of waterproofing asphalt. . MATERIALS Waterproofing asphalt must comply with ASTM D Type I for below ground and Type II for above ground .
The primer must comply with ASTM DDM .
Treated glass fabric must comply with ASTM D Type I. . CONSTRUCTION .A General The surface to be waterproofed must be smooth and free from holes and projections that could puncture or damage the membrane .
The surface to be waterproofed or dampproofed must be dry and thoroughly cleaned of dust and loose materials .
Do not apply the primer or asphalt in wet weather or at ambient temperatures below degrees F. Apply the primer to the surface and allow it to dry before applying the st coat of asphalt .
Apply the waterproofing asphalt at a temperature of degrees F. For waterproofing on steel column casings apply the asphalt membrane waterproofing to the painted undercoat of the casings .
For a backfilled surface you may use preformed membrane waterproofing as an alternative to asphalt membrane waterproofing .
.B Waterproofing After priming the surface apply the waterproofing as follows .
Starting at the lowest point mop the waterproofing asphalt thoroughly onto the primed surface . .
Roll a strip of fabric the width of the fabric roll onto the hot asphalt immediately and press into place eliminating all air bubbles and obtaining close conformity with the surface. . Mop hot asphalt onto this strip and an adjacent section of the surface of a width equal to slightly greater than the width of the fabric being used .
Roll a full width of the fabric into this hot asphalt completely covering the first strip .
Press into place in the same way as for the st strip .
SECTION WATERPROOFING .
Mop the nd strip and an adjacent section of the surface with hot asphalt .
Shingle a rd strip of fabric on such that it laps the st strip by at least inches. . Continue this process until the entire surface is covered with each strip of fabric lapping at least inches over the second to last strip. . Mop the entire surface with hot asphalt .
Ensure a thorough seal and firm bond at all fabric laps .
Regulate the work such that at the end of the work day the final mopping of asphalt has been applied to all the fabric in place .
The exposed surfaces of the membrane waterproofing applied to steel column casings must be of uniform height above ground without unsightly bulges depressions or other imperfections .
Do not apply the asphalt membrane waterproofing to a surface until you are prepared to place the backfill within a short enough time such that the waterproofing is not damaged as a result of exposure .
Remove and replace waterproofing membrane that loses bond with the surface .
.C Dampproofing Apply dampproofing using the following procedure .
Prime the surface to be dampproofed . .
Thoroughly mop the surface with waterproofing asphalt. . After the st mopping of asphalt has set sufficiently mop the entire surface with a nd coat of hot asphalt . .
Ensure that there are no skips in the coatings and that all surfaces are thoroughly covered. . PAYMENT Reserved PREFORMED MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying preformed membrane waterproofing to surfaces that are to be backfilled .
.B Definitions Not Used .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for the preformed membrane sheet .
Include the following .
Type of preformed membrane sheet .
Conditioner or primer application rates .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Preformed membrane waterproofing must consist of .
Adhesive .
Conditioner or primer applied to a prepared surface .
Preformed membrane sheet of rubberized asphalt or polymermodified bitumen .
Mastic or tape for sealing the edges of the sheet .
Protective covering over the sheet held by an adhesive The preformed membrane sheet must be permanently applied to a polyethylene film or reinforced with one of the following .
Polypropylene mesh fabric .
Polyesterpolypropylene fabric SECTION WATERPROOFING .
Fiberglass mesh fabric The total thickness of the membrane sheet and polyethylene film or fabric reinforcement must be at least mils .
The membrane sheet must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Membrane Sheet Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Polyethylene film Fabric reinforced Breaking strengtha min lbin ASTM Db c c Percent elongation at breakd min ASTM Db c c Pliability ASTM DDMe No cracks No cracks Rubberized asphalt softening point F min AASHTO T Polymermodified bitumen softening point F min AASHTO T aBreaking factor in machine direction bMethod A average samples cAt . . degrees F dMachine direction edegree bend over a inch mandrel at degrees F Adhesive conditioner primer mastic and sealing tape must be manufactured for use with the membrane sheet material used .
The protective covering must be hardboard at least inch thick or another material that furnishes equivalent protection. . CONSTRUCTION Apply adhesive conditioner primer mastic and sealing tape under the manufacturers instructions .
Backfill material and equipment must not cut scratch depress or cause any other damage to the preformed membrane .
Thoroughly clean dirt dust loose or unsound concrete and other extraneous material from the surface to receive the waterproofing .
The surface must be free from fins sharp edges and protrusions that could puncture or damage the membrane .
Round outside corners and chamfer inside corners to be covered .
The surface must be dry when applying components of the waterproofing .
Do not apply the preformed membrane waterproofing to a surface until you are prepared to place the protective covering and backfill within a short enough time such that the membrane is not damaged by workers equipment exposure to weathering or any other cause .
Repair or replace damaged membrane or protective covering .
Flash all projections such as pipes conduits and sleeves passing through the preformed membrane waterproofing with prefabricated or fieldfabricated boots fitted coverings or other devices as necessary to provide watertight construction .
Thoroughly mix and continuously agitate the conditioner or primer during application .
Allow the conditioner primer or adhesive to dry to a tackfree condition before placing membrane sheets .
Recoat the surface if the membrane sheet is not placed over the primer conditioner or adhesive within the time recommended by the manufacturer .
Do not apply preformed membrane sheets in wet or foggy weather or when the ambient temperature is below degrees F. Place the preformed membrane material starting at the bottom and lap by a minimum of inches at splices and at repairs to holes or tears .
SECTION WATERPROOFING After placing the membrane apply a trowelled bead of manufacturerrecommended mastic or sealing tape to the exposed edges of the membrane sheets .
The surface of the preformed membrane must be free from dirt and other extraneous material before placing the protective covering .
Place the protective covering on a coating of adhesive .
Apply the adhesive at a rate sufficient to hold the protective covering in position until backfilled. . PAYMENT Not Used WATERPROOFING AND COVER .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for applying membrane waterproofing and protective cover to deck surfaces of railroad underpasses .
Furnish and apply the waterproofing and cover under the AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Membrane The waterproofing membrane must consist of butyl rubber secured with an authorized adhesive .
You may substitute ethylene propylene diene monomer EPDM for the butyl rubber if it complies with the specifications for butyl rubber .
Comply with the AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering chapter part for .
Butyl rubber membrane .
Adhesive .
Splicing cement .
Butyl gum splicing tape .
Antibonding paper .
Fibered aluminum roof coating The butyl rubber membrane must be at least .
inch thick .
.C Protective Cover The protective cover must comply with the AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering chapter part and must consist of layers of asphaltic panels applied with adhesive and sealing compound to a total thickness of at least inch .
Sealing compound for joints and edges must be compatible with .
Membrane .
Adhesive used to fasten the membrane to the deck .
Splicing cement .
Protective cover panels The individual panels must be at least inch thick .
The installed panels must be at least by feet except as cut for closures .
Ship and store the panels on smooth flat surfaces .
If the panels are shipped with an inert material between the sheets to prevent sticking remove the inert material before installation .
SECTION WATERPROOFING .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not apply the membrane waterproofing until you are prepared to place the protective cover within a short enough time such that the membrane is not damaged by workers equipment exposure to weathering or any other cause .
Repair or replace damaged membrane .
Sweep or air blow the concrete surfaces to receive the seal to clean them of dirt dust gravel loose concrete particles and other extraneous materials .
Remove projections and fill depressions that could damage the membrane .
The horizontal surfaces of the finished waterproofing must be free from depressions and pockets .
The membrane must be carefully turned into drainage fittings .
Take special care to make the waterproofing effective at the following locations .
Along the sides and ends of girders .
At stiffeners gussets expansion joints offsets in ballast retainers and other discontinuities For retainerbuffers and headers use no .
structural grade Douglas fir timbers pressure treated under AWPA U Use Category UCB Commodity Specification A except do not use chromated copper arsenate .
For the anchor bolt assemblies associated with retainerbuffers and headers use commercial quality hotdip galvanized steel bolts plates and sheet metal .
.B Butyl Membrane Waterproofing The surface to be waterproofed must be dry when the membrane is applied .
Do not apply the membrane when the atmospheric temperature is below degrees F. Apply the membrane using the following procedure .
Position and draw the membrane sheets tight without stretching . .
Roll of the membrane uniformly in a direction away from the starting edge or subsequent splice . .
Apply the adhesive to the exposed deck area with a squeegee at a rate of at least gallon per square feet of deck surface . .
Allow the adhesive to dry to a tackfree condition. . Unroll and press the membrane firmly and uniformly in place avoiding trapping of air. . Repeat the same procedure for the remaining of the membrane sheet avoiding wrinkles and buckles .
Position each succeeding sheet to fit the previously installed sheet and splice the sheets .
Membrane splices must be tongueandgroove type as shown in figure no .
of the AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering chapter part .
Splice the membrane sheets using the following procedure .
Clean all seam lap and splice areas with heptane hexane toluene trichloroethylene or white gasoline using a clean cloth mop or similar synthetic cleaning device . .
Spread splicing cement continuously on the seam lap and splice areas at a uniform rate of at least gallon per square feet based on both mating surfaces. . After the cement has dried to a tackfree condition apply the butyl gum splicing tape to the cemented area of the membrane extending the tape to at least inch beyond the edges of the splice and lap areas . .
Roll or press the tape firmly into place to obtain full contact avoiding bridging and wrinkles . .
Reinforce corner splices with continuous layers of rubber membrane over layer of butyl tape .
Flash all projections such as pipes conduits and sleeves passing through the membrane waterproofing with prefabricated or fieldfabricated boots fitted coverings or other devices as necessary to provide watertight construction .
Use butyl gum tape between layers of rubber membrane .
Patch holes in the membrane sheeting under the manufacturers instructions with a minimum overlap of inches .
Before laying the membrane across a transverse expansion joint in the bridge deck lay and center on the joint a inchwide galvanized gage steel sheet covered by an inchwide strip of antibond paper .
SECTION WATERPROOFING .C Asphaltic Protective Cover Before placing the protective cover .
Thoroughly clean the surface of the applied membrane of dirt dust loose or unsound concrete and other extraneous material .
At transverse expansion joints in the bridge deck lay and center on the joint above the membrane a inchwide galvanized gage steel sheet covered by an inchwide strip of antibond paper Lay the panels with superimposed layers .
Offset the joints in the nd layer from the joints in the st layer by approximately the width of the panel .
Lay the panels in an adhesive coating using the following procedure .
Apply the adhesive with a squeegee at a rate of at least gallon per square feet of deck surface. . As you lay successive panels thoroughly coat the edges and ends of adjacent panels already laid with a sealing compound. . Lay the panels tightly against those previously laid such that the sealing compound completely fills the joints and squeezes out at the top. . After all of the panels have been laid fill any voids between the panels with sealing compound .
Where an edge or protrusion of asphaltic panels is exposed to prolonged sunlight coat the area with fibered aluminum roof coating. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for waterproofing and cover is the area determined from the dimensions shown along the slope including the area of timber retainers and headers .
DECK SEAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying a deck seal .
The deck seal must consist of a preformed membrane seal system .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for the preformed membrane sheet .
Include the type of sheet and the conditioner or primer application rates .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS The preformed membrane seal system must consist of .
Primer or conditioner applied to a prepared concrete surface .
Preformed membrane sheet of rubberized asphalt or polymermodified bitumen .
Mastic for binding and sealing the edges of the sheet to the barrier or curb face The preformed membrane sheet must be reinforced with one of the following .
Polypropylene mesh .
Polyesterpolypropylene fabric .
Fiberglass mesh The total thickness of the membrane sheet and polyethylene film or fabric reinforcement must be at least mils .
The membrane sheet must comply with the values shown in the following table SECTION WATERPROOFING Deck Seal Membrane Sheet Quality Characteristic Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Breaking strengtha min lbin ASTM Db c Percent elongation at breakd min ASTM Db c Pliability ASTM DDMe No cracks Rubberized asphalt softening point min F AASHTO T Polymermodified bitumen softening point min F AASHTO T aBreaking factor in machine direction bMethod A average samples cAt . . degrees F dMachine direction edegree bend over a inch mandrel at degrees F Primer conditioner and mastic must be manufactured for use with the preformed membrane sheet material used. . CONSTRUCTION Before applying the deck seal .
Where a slurry leveling course is shown apply the slurry leveling course . .
Sweep or air blow the concrete surfaces to receive the seal to clean them of dirt dust gravel loose concrete particles and other extraneous materials .
You may leave concrete curing compound on the surface . .
Remove sharp protrusions from the surface that could puncture the membrane . .
Round or chamfer sharp corners to be covered .
Use portland cement concrete or mortar to make chamfers or to fill the void beneath railing bumper rails .
Before applying the primer or conditioner tape or adhere oilresistant construction paper mask to deck areas that are to be covered by expansion dams .
Place the membrane seal continuously across the paper masks except cut the mask and the preformed sheet at or near the expansion joint if requested .
The surfaces must be dry and the temperature of the deck and of the materials must be at least degrees F when the membrane seal is applied except the rubberized asphalt material may be applied when the temperature is at least degrees F. Apply primer conditioner and mastic under the manufacturers instructions .
Apply the primer or conditioner to the entire area to be sealed except where a slurry leveling course has been applied .
Where a slurry leveling course has been applied apply a prime coat consisting of an RS grade asphaltic emulsion spread at a rate of gallon per sq yd of surface covered .
Thoroughly mix and continuously agitate the primer and conditioner during application .
Allow the primer to dry to a tackfree condition before placing membrane sheets .
Recoat the surface if the membrane sheet is not placed over the primer or conditioner within the time recommended by the manufacturer .
Apply the preformed membrane sheet to the primed or conditioned surface either by hand methods or by mechanical applicators .
Place the membrane sheets using the following procedure to achieve a shingling effect in the direction that water will drain .
Place a minimum inchwide membrane strip along the juncture of the deck and the base of the barrier curb face at the low side of the deck with the sheet extending up the face inches . .
Starting at the gutter line lay sheets longitudinally side lapped with adjacent sheets by at least inches and end lapped by at least inches . .
If the deck has a reversing superelevation place a minimum inchwide strip at the juncture of the deck and the base of the barrier or curb at the high side of the deck extending up the face inches .
SECTION WATERPROOFING .
Roll the membrane sheets with hand rollers or other apparatus as necessary to develop a firm and uniform bond with the primed or conditioned concrete surface minimizing wrinkles and air bubbles. . Patch tears cuts or narrow overlaps using an adhesive as follows .. Place sections of a membrane sheet over the defective area such that the patch extends at least inches beyond the defect .
.. For modified bitumen sheets with a permanent polyester film use a propane torch to melt the polyester film on the section to be patched .
Place the patch over the heated surface and roll or press it firmly onto the surface .
At open joints and deck bleeder pipes cut and turn the membrane sheet into the joint or bleeder while laying the membrane sheet .
If the membrane sheet is manufactured with a release film remove the film from the contact area of the lap joint or splice before making the joint or splice .
Do not remove the film from the remainder of the membrane sheet until immediately before placing the HMA .
Apply a bead of mastic at the following locations .
Along the exposed edge of the membrane sheet that extends up the barrier or curb face .
If the deck has a reversing superelevation along the edge in the high side gutter after installing the sheets Do not allow traffic on the seal until HMA is placed over it. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for deck seal is the area covered determined from the dimensions shown with no deduction for masked areas .
SLURRY LEVELING COURSE .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for applying a slurry leveling course on roughsurfaced deteriorated bridge decks. . MATERIALS The slurry leveling course must consist of a mixture of parts of undiluted asphaltic emulsion mixed with parts by volume of aggregate .
The asphaltic emulsion must be commercialquality Grade QSh or CQSh .
The aggregate must be a commercialquality sand that passes a no .
sieve. . CONSTRUCTION Mix the slurry seal in a continuous pugmill mixer .
The mixer must produce a uniform and homogeneous mixture .
You may blend additional water into the slurry to improve mixing and spreading properties if the added water plus the surface moisture on the aggregate does not exceed percent by volume of the undiluted emulsion .
Protect surfaces of the bridge and other improvements that are not to receive slurry leveling course from spatter and stains .
Spread the slurry on waterdampened but puddlefree concrete surfaces with a squeegee or broom of suitable stiffness .
Apply the slurry at a rate sufficient to fill local depressions in the deck without filling over high deck areas .
Mask or cover open joints drains access openings and sliding surfaces during the application of slurry. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for slurry leveling course is the volume of undiluted asphaltic emulsion used to produce the slurry not including any additional water blended into the slurry .
SECTION WATERPROOFING SILANE WATERPROOFING TREATMENT Reserved RESERVED STEEL STRUCTURES GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for furnishing and erecting structural steel or metalwork .
Structural steel bridge includes furnishing and erecting structural steel .
Furnish structural steel bridge includes fabricating and delivering structural steel to the job site ready to incorporate into the work .
Erect structural steel bridge includes erecting structural steel at the job site into final position in the work .
.B Definitions thread stickout The threaded end of a bolt projecting past the outer nut face .
unidentified stock material Material that can not be identified with certified mill test reports .
.C Submittals .C General Submit copies of mill orders when orders are placed .
Submit certified mill test reports before fabrication .
Include CVN impact test results if impact testing is specified .
Include grain size if fine grain steel is specified .
Except for unidentified stock material submit certificates of compliance for materials used in the work .
Submit a calibration certificate for each bolt tension measuring device and calibrated wrench before use .
Submit reports from testing performed on fastener components and assemblies before shipment to the job site .
Test reports must include the rotational capacity lot numbers and the reports listed in the Certification Report Number of Tests and Retests and Certification and Test Report sections of the referenced ASTM standards .
For ASTM F anchor bolts include chemical composition and carbon equivalence for each heat of steel .
For HS connections submit a record of which lots are used in each joint as an informational submittal .
.C Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings for steel structures to OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of the submittal .
Include the submittal date and contents in the notification .
Allow days for the Departments review for highway bridges and days for railway bridges .
Submit copies for highway bridges and copies for railway bridges .
Submit to copies as requested by the Engineer to OSD Documents Unit after review for final authorization .
The shop drawings must include .
Sequence of shop and field assembly and erection .
For continuous members include proposed steel erection procedures with calculations that show girder capacity and geometry will be correct. . Welding sequences and procedures . .
Layout drawing of the entire structure with locations of butt welded splices . .
Locations of temporary supports and welds. . Vertical alignment of girders at each stage of erection. . Matchmarking diagrams . .
Details for connections not shown or dimensioned on the plans . .
Details of allowed options incorporated into the work . .
Direction of rolling of plates where orientation is specified. . Distortion control plan. . Dimensional tolerances .
Include measures for controlling accumulated error to meet overall tolerances. . Material specification and grade listed on the bill of materials . .
Identification of tension members and fracture critical members .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES .
Proposed deviations from plans specifications or previously submitted shop drawings. . Contract plan sheet references for details .
Submit camber calculations with the shop drawings .
.C Check Testing Submit test samples for check testing to METS .
Submit test samples for each heat of maximum thickness of .
Tension flanges and webs of fracture critical members .
Tension flanges and webs of horizontally curved girders .
Hanger plates Furnish plates shapes or bars with extra length to provide for removal of check samples .
Take samples from any location within the plate .
Mark donor plates with the same identifying numbers as the test samples .
Remove material for test samples in the Engineers presence .
Test samples for plates over inches wide must be by inches with the long dimension transverse to the direction of rolling .
Test samples for other products must be inches long taken in the direction of rolling with a width equal to the product width .
Submit test samples before fabricating into components .
Mark samples with the direction of rolling heat numbers and plate numbers using paint or indelible marking material .
You may steel stamp samples in one corner of the plate instead of marking .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Qualifications Welder qualification must comply with AWS D .. Each manual torque wrench must have a dial gauge or digital read out .
Any electric pneumatic or hydraulic calibrated wrench used to tension fasteners must have an adjustable control unit to shut off the wrench at the desired torque .
Bolt tension measuring devices and calibrated wrenches must be calibrated not more than year before use and at least yearly during the project .
The calibration must be performed by an authorized repair and calibration center approved by the tool manufacturer .
Certification equipment and calibration standards must be traceable to NIST .
Calibrate bolt tension measuring devices to be accurate to within percent of actual tension .
Calibration must consist of at least evenly spaced verification readings performed over a range of to percent of full scale .
Calibrate calibrated wrenches to be accurate to within percent of actual torque .
Calibration must consist of at least evenly spaced verification readings performed over a range of to percent of full scale .
If a torque multiplier is used calibrate the torque multiplier and calibrated wrench as a unit .
Include sockets and extensions of the same length to be used in the work during calibration .
Adjust the manufacturers torque multiplier during calibration so that the product of the torque multiplier and the input calibrated wrench reading is within percent of actual torque value .
Use this system only as calibrated .
.D Quality Control .Da General Welder inspection must comply with AWS D ..
The Engineer determines the location of all NDT testing for welding .
In addition to NDT requirements in AWS D. ultrasonically test percent of all main member CJP groove welds in butt joints subject to calculated tension in material over inch thick .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Perform NDT on percent of each pin as follows .
MT under ASTM A S with no linear indication allowed exceeding mm .
UT under ASTM A S level S and level DA in two perpendicular directions For bolts installed as snug tight rotational capacity testing and installation tension testing are not required .
.Db Source Quality Control .Dbi General Reserved .Dbii Charpy Vnotch Requirements Determine CVN values under ASTM E. Sampling procedures must comply with ASTM A .
Use the Frequency H Heat testing for steels complying with ASTM AAM Grades W and HPS W. Use the Frequency P Piece testing for steels complying with ASTM AAM Grades HPS W and W. .Dbiii Rotational Capacity Testing .Dbiii General Perform rotational capacity testing on HS fastener assemblies before shipment to the job site .
Test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
Assign a rotational capacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
Mark each shipping unit of fastener assemblies with the rotational capacity lot number .
Test fastener assemblies from each lot .
Both fastener assemblies tested from a rotational capacity lot must pass for the lot to be acceptable .
Use hardened washer under the nut for testing .
Test zinccoated assemblies after lubrication .
You do not need to test cap screws or bolts used for slip base plates .
.Dbiii Long Bolt Test Use the following equipment .
Calibrated bolt tension measuring device. . Hand wrench or suitable tool for turning bolt. . Calibrated dial or digital torque wrench with socket. . Spacer washers or bushings .
Spacer washers or bushings must have the same inside diameter and an equal or larger outside diameter as the appropriate hardened washers complying with ASTM F. . Steel beam or member to which the tension measuring device will be attached .
The member must be accessible from the ground .
Use the following procedure .
Measure and record the bolt length from the bolt washer face to the end of the shank . .
Install the nut on the bolt such that the first to full threads closest to the bolt head are between the nut face and bolt head. . Measure and record the length of bolt thread protruding beyond the outer nut face .
If the nut can not be fully threaded onto the bolt test the assembly under section .Dbiii. . Insert the bolt into the tension measuring device .
Install the hardened washer and any required spacers under the nut to produce the thread length recorded in step above . .
Tighten the nut using a hand wrench to the minimum snug tension shown in the following table SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Table A SnugTight Tension Values Bolt diameter inches Minimum snug tensiona kips aThe tension may exceed the table value by at most kips. . Matchmark the assembly as follows .. Place a mark on corner of the nut .
.. Place a heavy reference line on the face plate of the tension measuring device that aligns with the mark on the nut .
.. Place a line that aligns with the mark on the nut across the flat end of the bolt shank or on the exposed portions of the threads of tension control bolts .
.. Place a mark on the outside of the turning socket .
The mark must be aligned with the mark on the nut corner and be visible when the nut is being turned .
.. Make an additional mark on the face plate at the required rotation shown in the following table clockwise from the heavy reference line Table Required Nut Rotation for Rotational Capacity Tests ab Bolt lengthc Required rotation turn bolt diameters or less More than and at most bolt diameters More than and at most bolt diametersd aNut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element being turned .
For bolts installed by turn or less the tolerance is degrees for bolts installed by turn or more the tolerance is degrees .
bApplicable only to connections in which all material within the grip of the bolt is steel .
cAs measured in step above .
dIf the bolt length exceeds diameters the required rotation must be determined by actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating site conditions . .
Turn the nut to attain the minimum tension for the applicable bolt diameter shown the following table Table A Minimum Tension Values Bolt diameter inches Minimum tension kips SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES .
After attaining the tension shown in table record in ftlb the moving torque required to turn the nut and the corresponding bolt tension .
Measure the torque with the nut in motion .
Use this corresponding bolt tension to determine T using the following formula T b x d where b corresponding bolt tension in pounds d bolt diameter in inches .
Turn the nut until the rotation shown in table is attained .
Measure the rotation from the heavy reference line on the face plate .
Record the bolt tension . .
Remove the nut and examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
Acceptance criteria are as follows .
Moving torque recorded in step must be less than or equal to the calculated value T. . Bolt tension recorded in step must be at least the turntest tension value shown in table . . Nut is removed from the bolt with no signs of thread stripping or galling on the bolt or nut. . Bolt must not shear or fail during the test . .
Assembly must not seize before the final rotation in step is attained .
Table A Turn Test Tension Values Bolt diameter inches Turn test tension kips .Dbiii Short Bolt Test Use the following equipment .
Calibrated dial or digital torque wrench with socket. . Hand wrench. . Spacer washers or bushings .
Spacer washers or bushings must have the same inside diameter and an equal or larger outside diameter as the appropriate hardened washers complying with ASTM F. . Steel plate or girder .
This member must have a thickness that provides the required number of threads within the bolt grip as specified in procedure step of section .Dbiii .
Use the following procedure .
Measure and record the bolt length from the bolt washer face to the end of the shank . .
Install the nut on the bolt .
The first to full threads must be located between the nut washer face and the bolt washer face .
Measure and record the length of bolt thread protruding beyond the outer nut face . .
Install the bolt into the hole in the plate or girder .
The hole must be inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
Install the hardened washer and any required spacers to produce the thread length recorded in step . .
Tighten the nut snug tight using a hand wrench .
Do not exceed percent of the maximum allowable torque value shown in the following table .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Table A Maximum Allowable Torque Bolt diameter inches Torque ftlb .
Matchmark the assembly as follows .. Place a mark on corner of the nut .
.. Place a heavy reference line on the steel plate or girder that aligns with the mark on the nut .
.. Place a line that aligns with the mark on the nut across the flat end of the bolt shank or on the exposed portions of the threads of tension control bolts .
.. Place a mark on the outside of the turning socket that aligns with the mark on the nut .
This mark must be visible when the nut is being turned .
.. Make additional small marks on the steel plate or girder one at of a turn and one at of a turn clockwise from the heavy reference line on the steel plate or girder . .
Tighten the nut to the rotation value shown in table .
Measure the rotation from the heavy reference line on the steel girder or plate .
Do not allow the bolt head to turn during tightening .
Table Nut Rotation Required for TurnofNut Installation ab Bolt lengthc Required rotation turn bolt diameters or less aNut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element being turned .
For bolts installed by turn or less the tolerance is degrees .
bApplicable only to connections in which all material within the grip of the bolt is steel .
cMeasured in step . . Record in ftlb the moving torque required to turn the nut when the rotation value shown in table is attained . .
Tighten the nut further to the rotation value shown in table .
Measure the rotation from the heavy reference line on the steel girder or plate .
The line on the end of the bolt shank or on the exposed threads of tension control bolts must remain in alignment with the start line .
Table Required Nut Rotation for Rotational Capacity Test Bolt lengtha Required rotation turn bolt diameters or less aMeasured in step . .
Remove the nut and examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
Acceptance criteria are as follows .
Moving torque recorded from step must be less than or equal to the maximum allowable torque shown in table . . Nut is removed from the bolt with no signs of thread stripping or galling on the bolt or nut after the rotation in step has been attained. . Bolt must not shear or fail during the test . .
Assembly must not seize before the final rotation in step is attained .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES .Dc Field Quality Control .Dci General Perform job site HS fastener testing in the Engineers presence .
If the bolt head is the turned element during installation perform installation tension testing and verification tension testing including determining inspection torque by turning the bolt head .
The Engineer rejects uninstalled fasteners in the same rotational capacity lot as fasteners that fail a job site installation tension test or rotational capacity test .
Perform additional rotational capacity tests installation tension tests and tests to determine new inspection torques on rotational capacity lots if any of the following occur .
Any fastener is not used within months after arrival on the job site . .
Fasteners are improperly handled stored or subjected to inclement weather before final tightening. . Changes are noted in the original surface condition of threads washers or nut lubricant . .
Required inspections are not performed within hours after all fasteners in a joint have been tensioned .
.Dcii Rotational Capacity Testing Perform rotational capacity testing on each rotational capacity lot under section .Dbiii at the job site before installation .
.Dciii Installation Tension Testing Perform installation tension testing on each rotational capacity lot before installation .
Test representative HS fastener assemblies under section of Specification for Structural Joints Using HighStrength Bolts of the RCSC .
For short bolts test representative HS fastener assemblies under PreInstallation Verification Procedures of Structural Bolting Handbook of the Steel Structures Technology Center .
If using direct tension indicators perform installation verification tests under appendix X of ASTM F except that bolts must be initially tensioned to a value percent greater than the minimum required bolt tension .
.Dciv Verification Tension Testing Perform fastener tension testing to verify minimum tension in HS bolted connections no later than hours after all fasteners in a connection have been tensioned .
The Engineer selects fasteners to be tested .
Perform testing such that the Engineer can read the torque wrench or access direct tension indicator gaps during testing .
Test percent of each type of fastener assembly in each HS bolted connection for minimum tension using the procedure described in section of Specification for Structural Joints Using HighStrength Bolts of the RCSC .
Check at least assemblies per connection .
For short bolts determine the inspection torque using steps through of Arbitration of Disputes Torque MethodShort Bolts in Structural Bolting Handbook of the Steel Structures Technology Center .
Determine and use a separate inspecting torque for each different rotational capacity lot of fasteners .
.D Department Acceptance The Department inspects structural steel at the fabrication site .
Notify the Engineer when materials are delivered to the fabrication site .
Allow at least days between giving notice and starting fabrication .
Results of check testing are delivered to you within days of receipt of samples at METS .
For multiple samples submitted on the same day an additional day is added for every samples submitted and the test report is made for the group of samples .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Delivery Storage and Handling Mark the weight of any member weighing over lb on the member .
Do not bend scrape or overstress members during handling and shipping .
The Engineer rejects bent or damaged members .
Keep structural material clean during loading transporting and unloading .
Store structural material above ground on supports .
Keep material clean drained and protected from corrosion .
Store girders upright and shored .
Support long members on skids placed to prevent deflection .
.C Design Requirements Connection details for highway bridges must comply with AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications with California Amendments .
Design details fabrication and workmanship for railway bridges must comply with chapter of AREMA Manual for Railway Engineering .
.D Materials .D General Materials must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables Structural Steel Material Specification Carbon steel ASTM AAM Grade or ASTM AAMa HS low alloy columbium vanadium steel ASTM AAM Grade or ASTM AAM or ASTM AAM Grade a HS low alloy structural steel ASTM AAM Grade W or Grade HPS W or ASTM AAMa HS low alloy structural steel plate ASTM AAM Grade HPS W Highyield strength quenched and tempered alloy steel plate suitable for welding ASTM AAM Grade Grade W or Grade HPS W or ASTM AAMa aGrades you may substitute for the equivalent ASTM A steel subject to the modifications and additions specified and to the requirements of ASTM A .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Fasteners Material Specification Steel fastener components for general applications Bolts and studs ASTM A Anchor bolts ASTM F a HS bolts and studs ASTM A Type a HS threaded rods ASTM A Type a HS nonheaded anchor bolts ASTM F Grade Class A a Nuts ASTM A including appendix Xb Washers ASTM F Hardened washers ASTM F Type including S supplementary requirements Components of HS steel fastener assemblies for use in structural steel joints Bolts ASTM A Type Tension control bolts ASTM F Type Nuts ASTM A including appendix Xb Hardened washers ASTM F Type Circular including S supplementary requirements Direct tension indicators ASTM F Type zinccoated aUse hardened washers .
bZinccoated nuts tightened beyond snug or wrench tight must be furnished with a dry lubricant complying with supplementary requirement S in ASTM A .
Other Materials Material Specification Carbon steel for forgings pins and rollers ASTM AAM Class D Alloy steel for forgings ASTM AAM Class G Pin nuts ASTM AAM or ASTM A including appendix Xa Carbonsteel castings ASTM AAM Grade Class Malleable iron castings ASTM AAM Grade Gray iron castings ASTM A Class B Carbon steel structural tubing ASTM AAM Grade B ASTM A ASTM AAM or ASTM A Steel pipeb ASTM A Type E or S Grade B ASTM A Grade B or ASTM A Grade B Stud connectors ASTM A aZinccoated nuts tightened beyond snug or wrench tight must be furnished with a dry lubricant complying with supplementary requirement S in ASTM A. bHydrostatic testing will not apply .
.D Charpy Vnotch Requirements Structural steel plate used for the following components must comply with longitudinal CVN impact values shown in the following table .
Tension members tension flanges eyebars and hanger plates .
Splice plates of tension members tension flanges and eyebars SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Material complying with ASTM AAM CVN impact value ftlb at temperature Grade at F Grade a Thickness up to inches at F Grade Wa Thickness up to inches at F Grade a Thickness over inches up to inches at F Grade Wa Thickness over inches up to inches at F Grade HPS Wa Thickness up to inches at F Grade HPS W Thickness up to inches at F Grade Thickness of inches or less at F Grade W Thickness over inches up to inches at F Grade HPS W Thickness of inches or less at F Grade HPS W Thickness over inches up to inches at F aIf the material yield strength is more than psi reduce the temperature for the CVN impact value F for each increment of psi above psi .
For fracture critical members minimum CVN impact values are specified in the special provisions .
.D Structural Steel Unless otherwise described structural steel plates shapes and bars must comply with ASTM AAM Grade .
You may increase girder flange plate thickness and length if the change does not decrease any portion of the plates in detailed thickness .
For continuous girders increases in the length of girder flange plates that change locations of butt welds between different thicknesses of flange plates must be authorized before fabrication .
Studtype shear connectors longer than inches may consist of multiple shorter studs connected with complete joint penetration welds .
All structural steel that is precut before arrival at the fabrication site must be cut so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the main tensile or compressive stress in the member .
Do not use coiled steel plate for .
Flanges or eyebars .
Hanger plates .
Splice plates for flanges or eyebars You may substitute rolled shapes for the welded sections and welded sections for the rolled shapes shown if the substituted members comply with the following .
Depth width and average thicknesses are at least equal to the replaced shape or section. . For welded sections the flanges are welded to the web with continuous fillet welds on each side of the web . .
Strength classification of the material is not reduced .
.D Bearing Pads Elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section .. .D Castings Steel gray iron and malleable iron castings must have continuous fillets cast in place in reentrant angles .
The radius of curvature of the exposed surface of a fillet will define the fillet size .
The size of fillets must be at least onehalf the thickness of the thinnest adjoined member but not less than inch .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Finished casting dimensions must be at least equal to the dimensions shown .
Castings must not be more than .
percent overweight .
.D Unidentified Stock Material You may use unidentified stock material on nonfracture critical members if .
No more than pounds is used .
Unidentified stock material is segregated from all other materials used in the work .
Material is authorized before fabrication The Engineer may select samples for testing from each piece of unidentified stock material proposed for use .
Testing of samples must be performed by an authorized laboratory under the applicable ASTM .
.D Miscellaneous Materials Caulking must be polysulfide or polyurethane caulking complying with ASTM C Type S Grade NS .
.E Fabrication .E General Section .E applies to work performed at the source and at the job site .
Cut and fabricate steel plates for flanges eyebars hanger plates and splice plates for flanges and eyebars such that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the main tensile or compressive stress in the member .
Mechanically cut edges must be clean cut without torn or ragged edges .
Ends of girder stiffeners shown as tightfit must bear on the girder flange with at least point bearing .
Local clearances between the end of the stiffener and the girder flange must be at most inch .
Fabricate floor beams stringers and girders having end connection angles to exact length back to back of connection angles .
If end connections are faced the finished angle thickness must be at least that shown on the shop drawings .
Finished members must be true to line and free from twists bends and open joints .
Matchmark connecting parts that are preassembled for setting up for welding or for drilling or reaming holes for field connections .
Use lowstress stamps for fracture critical members and tension members .
Where galvanizing is described galvanize structural steel under section .B .
Neatly finish exposed parts of the work .
Slightly round edges and sharp corners including edges marred cut or roughened during handling or erection .
Clean and paint iron and steel surfaces under section .
.E Flatness of Faying and Bearing Surfaces Surfaces of bearing and base plates and other metal surfaces that contact each other or ground concrete surfaces must be flat to within inch in inches and inch overall .
Surfaces of bearing and base plates and other metal bearing surfaces that contact mortar preformed fabric pads or elastomeric bearing pads must be flat to within inch in inches and inch overall .
Instead of machining you may heat straighten steel slabs not in contact with other metal bearing surfaces if the above tolerances are met .
.E Bent Plates Coldbent loadcarrying rolled steel plates must comply with the following .
Direction of bending must be at right angles to the direction of rolling. . Radius of bend measured to the concave face must comply with Manual of Steel Construction of the AISC. . Before bending the corners of the plate must be rounded to a inch radius throughout that portion of the plate where bending is to occur .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Plates to be bent to a smaller radius than specified in Manual of Steel Construction of the AISC must be bent hot .
Hot bent plates must have the direction of bending at right angles to the direction of rolling .
.E Fastener Threads Fastener threads for general applications must comply with the following .
External threads must comply with the Unified Coarse Thread Series requirements in ANSI B. with Class A tolerances before coating with zinc .
Internal threads must comply with ASTM A Threads for pin ends and pin nuts inches or more in diameter must comply with the following .
External threads must be Unified Inch Screw Threads UN Series with threads per inch complying with ANSI B. with Class A tolerances .
Internal threads must be Unified Inch Screw Threads UN Series with threads per inch complying with ANSI B. with Class B tolerances .E Pin Connections Pins must .
Be turned to the dimensions shown .
Be straight smooth and free from flaws .
Have the final surface produced by a finishing cut In pins more than inches in diameter bore a full length hole at least inches in diameter along the pin axis after cooling and before annealing .
Holes for pins must be .
True to the diameter specified. . At right angles to the member axis . .
Parallel with each other except for pins where nonparallel holes are required . .
Smooth and straight with the final surface produced by a finishing cut .
Coat machined surfaces of pins and holes with an easily removed rust inhibitor .
The distance between holes for pins must not vary by more than inch from that shown when measured outsidetooutside for tension members and insidetoinside for compression members .
The diameter of holes for pins must not exceed the pin diameter by more than inch for pins inches or less in diameter or inch for larger pins .
Bore holes for pins in builtup members after assembly .
If authorized you may bore holes before assembly if the same degree of accuracy is achieved as boring after assembly .
Bore pinconnected hanger plates in pairs or in stacks bolted or clamped together such that each pair of hanger plates is matched .
Use pilot and driving nuts for driving pins .
Drive pins such that the members will bear fully on them .
For field assembly use a positive locking device to tighten and secure pin nuts .
.E Bolted Connections .Ea General Bolted connections in structural steel joints must be made with HS steel fastener assemblies consisting of one of the following .
HS steel bolt nut and hardened washer .
You may use a direct tension indicator with the bolt nut and hardened washer . .
Tension control bolt nut and hardened washer .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Each length and diameter of fastener assembly used in any single joint of a HS bolted connection must be from the same rotational capacity lot .
Keep a record of which lots are used in each joint .
.Eb Bolt Holes .Ebi General Bolt holes must be one of the following .
Punched full size .
Drilled full size .
Subpunched and reamed .
Subdrilled and reamed Finished holes for bolts must be .
Cylindrical and perpendicular to the plane of the connection .
At most inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
Clean cut without torn or ragged edges .
Without irregularities that prevent solid seating Holes punched full size subpunched or subdrilled must pass a pin inch smaller than the nominal hole size without drifting in at least percent of the holes for each connection after assembling and before any reaming .
All holes must pass a pin inch smaller in diameter than the nominal hole size .
Do not correct mispunched or misdrilled holes by welding unless authorized .
.Ebii Punching Do not punch or subpunch ASTM AAM structural steel thicker than inch .
Do not punch or subpunch HS structural steel thicker than inch .
The diameter of the punching die must not exceed the punch diameter by more than inch .
Subpunch holes to be reamed to a diameter inch smaller than the finished hole .
.Ebiii Drilling Drill fullsized holes with the parts assembled or to a steel template with hardened bushings .
If authorized you may drill fullsized holes with gang drill equipment .
The Engineer may request a proof assembly to check the fit of major field connections .
Subdrill holes to be reamed to a diameter inch smaller than the finished hole .
Drill through templates after the templates have been firmly clamped or bolted .
If members are drilled while assembled hold the parts together securely during drilling .
You may stack drill plates using gang drills if .
Parts are firmly clamped during drilling .
Drill bits remain perpendicular to the work during drilling .Ebiv Reaming Perform reaming after builtup members are assembled and firmly bolted together or after templates are securely located over the member .
Remove shavings after reaming .
Mark pieces reamed together so that they may be reassembled in the same position .
Do not interchange reamed parts .
Reaming templates must .
Have hardened steel bushings .
Have accurately dimensioned holes .
Have reference lines for locating templates on members .
Be firmly clamped or bolted in position SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Templates used for reaming of matching members or the opposite faces of one member must be exact duplicates .
For reaming holes in assembled material do not mix fullsized holes with subpunched or subdrilled holes .
.Ec Installation Bolted connections using HS fastener assemblies must comply with Specification for Structural Joints Using HighStrength Bolts of the RCSC .
Tension HS bolted connections as slip critical .
Use the same bolt head orientation within a single HS bolted connection .
Install the hardened washer under the element turned in tightening .
Locate nuts on the side of the member not visible from the traveled way .
Locate nuts for bolts partially embedded in concrete on the side of the member to be encased in concrete .
If surface moisture is present at a HS bolted connection .
Do not install HS fastener assemblies having components furnished with water soluble lubricants . .
The Engineer may require you to perform additional fastener testing if fastener assemblies are furnished with lubricants not soluble in water .
Seal the sheared ends of tension control bolts with caulking .
Caulking must be gray and at least mils thick .
Apply caulk to a clean surface the same day the splined end is sheared off .
For all bolts thread stickout after tensioning must be at least flush with the outer nut face .
At least full threads must be located within the grip of the connection .
You may use additional hardened washer under the nonturning element to correct excessive thread stickout .
Thread stickout of studs rods and anchor bolts must be at least flush with the outer nut face and at most inch .
You may use bolts with diameters up to inch larger than the specified bolt diameter if .
Authorized .
You comply with the spacing and edge distance requirements for the larger bolt .
Net section is adequate If using direct tension indicators .
Install indicator under each bolt head .
The protrusions must contact the bolt head . .
Hold the bolt head stationary and turn the nut . .
Follow the manufacturers installation procedures . .
Tension bolts in not less than stages until at least percent of the gaps on each indicator are between .
and .
inch .
Indicators with all protrusions completely crushed are rejected .
Do not torque the splined end of tension control bolts before final tensioning .
.E Welding .Ea General Welding must comply with AWS D ..
Replace Table .
of AWS D. with the following table SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Base metal thickness of the thicker part joined inches Minimum effective partial joint penetration groove weld sizea inches Over to inclusive Over to inclusive Over to inclusive Over to inclusive Over to inclusive Over aWeld size need not exceed the thickness of the thinner part joined .
Dimensional details and workmanship for welded joints in tubular and pipe connections must comply with part A Common Requirements for Design of Welded Connections and part D Specific Requirements for Design of Tubular Connections in section of AWS D ..
The flat side of buttwelded joints must not deviate from flatness by more than .
inch in a foot length centered over the weld .
Do not weld or tack brackets clips shipping devices or other material not described to any part of the girders unless shown on the shop drawings .
Grind weld surfaces smooth and flush when NDT is required .
For welds indicated to be subject to tensile forces that are to receive RT grind smooth and flush on both sides of welds before testing .
For groove weld surface profiles that interfere with NDT procedures grind welds smooth and blend with the adjacent material .
For fillet weld surface profiles that interfere with NDT procedures grind welds and blend the toes smoothly with the adjacent base metal .
.Eb Backing for Welds Reserved .Ec Steel Pedestrian Bridges Reserved .E Curved Girders Reserved .E Shop Assembly Prepare and paint contact surfaces of HS bolted connections before assembly .
Thoroughly clean all other surfaces of metal in contact to bare metal before assembly .
Remove all rust mill scale and foreign material .
Preassemble completed subassemblies for structures or units of structures before erection to verify geometry and to verify or prepare field connections .
Bolted trusses skew portals skew connections rigid frames bents and towers must be completely preassembled adjusted to line and camber and prepared for welding or checked for bolt fit before erection .
Preassemble truss work in lengths of at least abutting panels and adjust members for line and camber .
Prepare joints for welding or drill or ream holes for field connections during preassembly .
For holes previously drilled full size check holes for bolt fit .
Preassemble bolted splice joints for plate girders in lengths of at least abutting sections and adjust abutting sections for line and camber .
Drill or ream holes for field connections during preassembly .
Preassemble prepared splice joints for welded girders with abutting members and adjust for line and camber .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES Preassembly methods must be compatible with the erection methods used .
Preassemble all machinery completely .
Fit bearings to the clearances and alignments specified .
Gear reductions and line gears must have gear center distances set and the gears matchmarked. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Field welding must comply with section .E .
Assemble parts into final positions without damage .
Follow all matchmarks .
Do not damage or distort members when hammering .
Drifting done during assembly must not enlarge bolt holes or distort the metal .
.B Falsework Falsework must comply with section except that dead loads consist of the weight of the structural steel and portions of the structure supported by the falsework .
Construct falsework and concrete forms on steel structures such that loads applied to girder webs are applied within inches of a flange or stiffener and do not produce local distortion of the web .
Provide temporary struts and ties to resist lateral loads applied to girder flanges and prevent appreciable vertical movement between the edge of deck form and the adjacent steel girder .
.C Erection .C General Reserved .C Continuous Members Unless otherwise shown structural steel girders are designed for continuity in supporting girder dead load .
If erection procedures provide girder continuity for dead load preassemble members with field joints in a noload condition in a horizontal or an upright condition .
You may erect structural steel girders such that deadload girder continuity is not provided .
If erection procedures do not provide girder continuity for dead load .
You may increase crosssectional areas or change grades of steel to provide the specified capacity if authorized . .
The erected structure must have a loadcarrying capacity at least equal to the structure shown .
.C Bearings and Anchorages Set bearing assemblies level .
The Engineer provides adjustments to horizontal positions of bearing assemblies due to temperature .
Attain full bearing on the concrete under bearing assemblies .
Immediately before setting bearing assemblies or masonry plates on ground concrete surfaces thoroughly clean and apply caulking to all contact surfaces .
During welding protect bearings and bearing surfaces using authorized methods .
The embedded end of each anchor bolt must terminate with a head or a nut and washer .
Anchor bolts must allow true positioning of bearing assemblies .
Mortar placed under masonry plates or bearing assemblies or in anchor bolt sleeves or canisters must comply with section .F except the cement to sand ratio must be to .
Mortaring and constructing mortar pads under masonry plates must be done after girder erection and before placing deck concrete .
If anchor bolts are installed in pipe sleeves or metal canisters fill the pipes or canisters completely with mortar .
SECTION STEEL STRUCTURES .C.C Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for structural steel is the weight determined from the dimensions shown using the following rules and assumptions .
Density of structural and cast steel is .
lbcu in .
The density of cast iron is .
lbcu in . .
Weight of rolled shapes and structural plate is computed using nominal weight and dimensions with no deduction for copes cuts and holes . .
Weight of fillet welds is as shown in the following table Size of fillet weld inches Weight lblf . . . . . . . . . .
Weight of galvanizing is added to the calculated base metal weight using the table of weights of zinc coatings in ASTM AAM . .
Weight of bolts nuts and washers is added to obtain the weight of completed members .
The weight of oversize bolts and nuts is not included . .
Weight of nuts bolts washers cap screws anchor bolts and anchor pipe sleeves in the finished structure is based on nominal weight and dimensions . .
Weight of paint is not included .
RESERVED OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing overhead sign structures standards and poles. . MATERIALS Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Welding of steel members must comply with AWS D ..
Dispose of surplus excavated material .
Backfill under section . . PAYMENT Not Used OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing overhead sign structures .
Furnishing sign structures includes furnishing anchor bolt assemblies removable sign panel frames sign structure hardware and fabricated sign structures at the job site ready for installation including welding and painting or galvanizing as required .
Installing sign structures includes installing anchor bolt assemblies removable sign panel frames and sign panels and performing any welding and painting or galvanizing required during installation .
Types of overhead sign structures include .
Truss .
Bridge mounted .
Tubular .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Allow days for the Departments review .
.C Shop Drawings Submit copies of shop drawings for sign structures .
Include .
Sign panel dimensions .
Span lengths .
Post heights .
Anchorage layouts .
Proposed splice locations .
Snugging and tensioning pattern for anchor bolts and HS bolted connections .
Details for permanent steel anchor bolt templates .
Details of clips eyes or removable devices for preventing damage to the finished galvanized or painted surfaces used for .
Securing the sign during shipping .
Lifting and moving during erection SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .C Quality Control Program Submit a QC program for sign structures .
Include methods equipment and personnel to be used during fabrication and installation .
Submit the QC program with the shop drawing submittal .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Nondestructive Testing .Dbi General Perform NDT of steel members under AWS D. and the requirements shown in the following table Nondestructive Testing for Overhead Sign Structures Weld location Weld type Minimum required NDT Circumferential splices around the perimeter of tubular sections poles and arms .
CJP groove weld with backing ring UT or RT Longitudinal seam CJP or PJP groove weld Random MT Longitudinal seam within inches of a circumferential splice .
CJP groove weld UT or RT Welds attaching base plates flange plates or pole or mast arm plates to poles or arm tubes CJP groove weld with backing ring and reinforcing fillet t inch UT and MT t inch MT after root weld pass and final weld pass External top fillet weld for socket type connections MT NOTE t pole or arm thickness .Dbii Ultrasonic Testing For UT of welded joints with any members less than inch thick or tubular sections less than inches in diameter the acceptance and repair criteria must comply with Clause of AWS D .. For UT of other welded joints the acceptance and repair criteria must comply with Table .
of AWS D. for cyclically loaded nontubular connections .
When performing UT use an authorized procedure under AWS D. Annex S. .Dbiii Radiographic Testing The acceptance criteria for radiographic or real time image testing must comply with AWS D. for tensile stress welds .
.Dbiv Longitudinal Seam Welds The Engineer selects the random locations for NDT .
Grind the cover pass smooth at the locations to be tested .
If repairs are required in a portion of a tested weld perform NDT on the repaired portion and on percent of the untested portions of the weld .
If more repairs are required perform NDT on the entire weld .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .Dc Walkway Safety Railing The assembled and raised walkway safety railing must have less than inch of wobble when a lb horizontal load is applied alternating each way at the top center of each railing section .
.D Department Acceptance The Department inspects structural materials for sign structures at the fabrication site .
You must .
Notify the Engineer when the materials are delivered to the fabrication site .
Allow at least days after delivery of the material for inspection before starting fabrication .
MATERIALS .A General Materials must comply with section .
Do not use weathering steel .
.B Bars Plates Shapes and Structural Tubing .B General Bars and plates must be structural steel complying with one or more of the following .
ASTM AAM .
ASTM AAM Grade or .
ASTM AAM Grade Other open shapes must be structural steel complying with one or more of the following .
ASTM AAM .
ASTM AAM Grade or .
ASTM AAM Light fixture mounting channel must be continuous slot channel made from one of the following .
Steel complying with ASTM AAM Designation SS Grade .
Extruded aluminum of alloy T complying with ASTM B or BM Structural tubing and hollow structural sections must be structural steel complying with ASTM AAM Grade B or ASTM A .
Surface flatness after galvanizing must comply with ASTM AAM for the following .
Base plates that are to come in contact with concrete grout or washers and leveling nuts .
Plates in highstrength bolted connections .B Charpy Vnotch Impact Reserved .C Sheets Sheets must be carbon steel complying with ASTM AAM Designation SS Grade .
.D Bolted Connections Bolts nuts and washers must comply with section .D .
Components of HS bolts must comply with section for high strength steel fastener assemblies unless the bolts are shown to be snug tight .
Bolts nuts and washers for HS bolts shown to be snug tight must comply only with section .D .
Anchor bolts must comply with ASTM F Grade weldable steel .
Use a permanent steel template to maintain the proper anchor bolt spacing .
Provide top nut leveling nut and washers for the upper threaded portion of each anchor bolt .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .E Anchorages Anchorages for bridge mounted sign structures must comply with the specifications for concrete anchorage devices in section .
.F Pipe Posts Pipe posts must be welded or seamless steel pipes .
Pipe posts must comply with one of the following .
ASTM AAM Grade B . ASTM AAM Grade B . API Specification L PSL Grade B Grade XR or Grade XM using nominal pipe sizes for threaded end pipe You may fabricate posts from structural steel complying with ASTM AAM .
Spiral seam welds are not allowed .
.G Steel Walkway Gratings Steel walkway gratings must comply with the following .
Gratings must be the standard product of an established grating manufacturer .
Material for gratings must be structural steel complying with ASTM AAM as specified for Designation CS Type B or Designation SS Grade Type .
For welded type gratings each joint must be full resistance welded under pressure to provide a sound completely beaded joint .
For mechanically locked gratings ..
Method of fabrication and interlocking of the members must be authorized ..
Fabricated grating must be equal in strength to the welded type .
Gratings must be accurately fabricated and free from warps twists or defects affecting their appearance or serviceability including .. Ends of all rectangular panels must be square ..
Tops of the bearing bars and cross members must be in the same plane .. Gratings distorted by the galvanizing process must be straightened .H Elastomeric Bearing Pads Elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section .. .I Safety Chain at Walkways Safety chain at walkways must comply with ASTM AAM Grade .
The nominal chain size must be inch .
Use the minimum length that allows lockup of safety railing .
.J Safety Cable at Walkways Safety cable at walkways must .
Be constructed of Type or stainless steel by wire strand core cable .
Have a cable breaking strength of at least lb .
Not be prestretched .K Fabrication .K General Sign structures must be .
Free from kinks twists or bends .
Uniform in appearance Fabricate sign structures into the largest practical sections before galvanizing .
Assemble the completed sections in the shop .
Check sections for straightness alignment and dimension .
Correct any variation .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES Affix clips eyes and removable brackets to all signs and all posts for securing the sign during shipping lifting moving and erection .
Secure the sign as necessary to prevent damage to the finished galvanized or painted surfaces .
Do not make any holes in members unless the holes are shown or authorized .
Form the posts for tubular sign structures to the radii shown by heat treatment or by fabrication methods that will not .
Crimp or buckle the interior radius of the pipe bend .
Change the physical characteristics of the material .K Welding PJP longitudinal seam welds for tapered tubular members must have at least the minimum penetration shown but not less than percent penetration .
Within inches of circumferential welds longitudinal seam welds must be CJP groove welds .
Longitudinal seam welds on structures with telescopic splices connecting pole segments must be CJP groove welds on the female end with a length equal to the designated slipfit splice length plus inches .
Except for welds at posts shown as PJP welds longitudinal seam welds of fabricated pipe posts must be CJP groove welds .
The length of telescopic slipfit splices must be at least .
times the inside diameter of the exposed end of the female section .
Without authorization you may make repair to circumferential welds and to base platetopost welds .
Obtain authorization before making any additional repairs .
.K Bolted Connections Except for HS bolts shown to be snugtight HS bolted connections must be HS assemblies complying with section .E except assemblies must consist of .
HS steel bolts .
Nuts .
Hardened washers .
Direct tension indicators HS fastener assemblies and any other bolts nuts and washers attached to sign structures must be zinc coated by the mechanical deposition process .
Nuts for HS bolts at joints designated as snugtight must not be lubricated .
Use an alternating snugging and tensioning pattern for anchor bolts and HS bolted splices .
Once tensioned do not reuse HS fastener components .
For bolt diameters less than inch the diameter of the bolt hole must be not more than inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
For bolt diameters greater than or equal to inch the diameter of the bolt hole must be not more than inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
.K Walkway Safety cable at walkways must be continuous between lugs .
Before tightening cable clips at the end anchorage remove the slack in the cable .
Safety cable at walkways must not be kinked knotted deformed or spliced .
Install clips at safety cables under the manufacturers instructions .
.K Handholes The edges of handholes and other large pole openings must be ground smooth .
The roughness of edges must be less than .
inch .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .K Identification Plate Permanently attach an aluminum identification plate near the base using either stainless steel rivets or stainless steel screws .
Attach the plate adjacent to the traffic side on of the vertical posts .
The information on the plate must include .
Name of the manufacturer .
Date of manufacture .
Contract number .L Surface Finish .L General Galvanize all ferrous metal parts of the following sign structure types .
Truss .
Bridge mounted .
Tubular Except for tubular type sign structures do not paint sign structures .
Clean and paint all ferrous metal parts of tubular sign structures after galvanizing including the areas to be covered by sign panels .
Do not treat galvanized surfaces with chemicals before cleaning and painting .
Galvanize and do not paint walkway gratings walkway brackets gutters safety railings steel mountings for light fixtures and all nuts bolts and washers for sign structures after fabrication .
.L Galvanizing Galvanizing must comply with section .B except surfaces may be coated with zinc by the thermal spray coating process if authorized .
If authorized to use thermal spray coating apply the coating under section .
The thickness of the sprayed zinc coat must be at least mils .
Do not use zinc solders or zinc alloys that contain tin to repair a damaged galvanized surface .
.L Cleaning and Painting Where specified clean and paint sign structures under section . . CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not fasten any bridgemounted sign to concrete elements of bridges or railings before the concrete attains a compressive strength of psi .
After erection remove the brackets used to secure tubular sign structures during shipping and lifting .
Install sign panels as shown .
Install laminated and formed sign panels on sign structures using fastening hardware of the type and sizes shown .
Complete the CIDH concrete pile foundation at least days before erecting the sign structure .
.B Existing Sign Structures .B General Work involving existing sign structures must comply with section .
.B Remove Sign Structure Reserved .B Reconstruct Sign Structure Reserved SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .B Modify Sign Structure Reserved .B Relocate Sign Structure Reserved .B Salvage Sign Structure Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for install sign structure does not include the weight of sign panels .
For determining the payment quantity for furnish sign structure and install sign structure the weight of extruded aluminum used for steel slot channel for the light fixture mounting channel is the computed weight of the steel channel .
STANDARDS AND POLES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes general specifications for fabricating and installing standards and poles .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Fabrication .Ba General Configure each mast arm as a smooth curving arm .
You may change the mast arm configuration if the mounting height and stability are maintained .
.Bb Bonding Jumper For standards with handholes a ULlisted lug and inch or larger brass or bronze bolt must be included for attaching the bonding jumper .
For slip base standards a ULlisted lug must be attached to the bottom slip base plate with a inch or larger brass or bronze bolt if a ULlisted ground clamp on each anchor bolt is not used for attaching the bonding jumper .
.C Construction .C General Holes left in the shaft of an existing standard due to the removal of equipment or mast arm must be sealed by fastening a galvanized steel disk to cover the hole .
Fasten using a single central galvanized steel fastener .
Seal edges of the disk and hole with a polysulfide or polyurethane sealing compound complying with ASTM C Type S Grade NS Class Use O .
If an existing standard is ordered to be relocated or reused remove large dents straighten shafts and replace parts that are in poor condition .
Furnish anchor bolts or bars and nuts required for relocating or reusing standard .
Repair and replacement work is change order work .
If a standard or mast arm is relocated or the Department furnishes a used standard or mast arm furnish .
New bolts nuts cap screws and washers .
New keeper plate if the standard has a slip base .C Foundations .Ca General Except for concrete for CIDH concrete pile foundations concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES Construct concrete foundations on firm ground .
After each post standard and pedestal is properly positioned place mortar under the base plate .
Finish the exposed portion to present a neat appearance .
Mortar must comply with the specifications for mortar in section except mortar must have .
part by volume of cement .
parts by volume of clean sand Form exposed portions of the foundation to present a neat appearance and true to line and grade .
The top of the foundation for posts and standards must be finished to curb or sidewalk grade .
Forms must be rigid and braced securely in place .
Conduit ends and anchor bolts must be placed at the proper height and position .
Anchor bolts must be installed a maximum of from vertical and held in place by rigid top and bottom templates .
Use a steel bottom template at least inch thick that provides proper spacing and alignment of anchor bolts near the embedded bottom end .
Install the bottom template before placing footing concrete .
For relocated standards construct new foundations and furnish anchor bolts of the proper type and size .
Galvanize steel parts under section .B .
Provide nuts and washers for the upper threaded part of each anchor bolt .
Provide nuts and washers for each anchor bar or stud .
Do not weld HS steel used for anchor bolts anchor bars or studs .
Before placing concrete moisten the forms and ground .
Keep the forms in place until the concrete sets for at least hours and is strong enough to prevent damage to the surface .
Except when located on a structure construct foundations for posts standards and pedestals monolithically .
Apply ordinary surface finish under section .F .
If a foundation must be extended for additional depth the extension work is change order work .
Do not erect posts poles standards pedestals or cabinets until the concrete foundation has cured for at least days .
The Engineer selects either the plumbing or raking technique for posts poles standards and pedestals .
Plumb or rake by adjusting the leveling nuts before tightening nuts .
Do not use shims or similar devices .
After final adjustments of both top nuts and leveling nuts on anchorage assemblies have been made and each post standard and pedestal on the structure is properly positioned tighten nuts as follows .
Tighten leveling nuts and top nuts following a crisscross pattern until bearing surfaces of all nuts washers and base plates are in firm contact. . Use an indelible marker to mark the top nuts and base plate with lines showing relative alignment of the nut to the base plate . .
Tighten top nuts following a crisscross pattern an additional th of a turn .
In unpaved areas construct a raised concrete pad in front of each controller cabinet pedestal .
If a foundation is shown to be abandoned remove the top of the foundation anchor bolts and conduits to a minimum depth of .
foot below the sidewalk surface or original ground .
Backfill the resulting hole with material equivalent to the surrounding material .
A foundation must be completely removed if not shown to be reused or abandoned .
Dispose of foundations that are removed .
.Cb CastInDrilledHole Concrete Pile Foundations Reinforced CIDH concrete pile foundation must comply with section except .
Dispose of material resulting from drilling holes SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .
Concrete for CIDH concrete piles will not be considered as designated by compressive strength Concrete must contain not less than pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
For standards and poles located in sidewalk areas the pile foundation must be placed to final sidewalk grade before the sidewalk is placed .
The top inches must be square shaped .
If shown use sleeve nuts on Type A and B standards .
The bottom of the base plate must be flush with the finished grade .
.C Identification Tags Except for Type standards and wood poles attach rectangular corrosionresistant metal identification tags on all standards and poles using stainless steel rivets as follows .
For standards and poles attach a tag above the handhole near the base of the standard or pole. . For signal standards attach tag above the handhole near the base of the pole and tag on the underside of the signal mast arm near the arm plate .
The lettering on each identification tag must be .
Either depressed or raised .
inch tall .
Legible .
Readable after the support structure is coated and installed Include the following information on the tag .
Name of the manufacturer .
Date of manufacture .
Identification number .
Contract number .
Unique identification code ..
Assigned by the manufacturer .. Traceable to a particular Contract and the welds on that component .D Payment Not Used .
STEEL STANDARDS POLES PEDESTALS AND POSTS .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and installing steel standards poles pedestals and posts .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General The Engineer selects random samples of fastener components from each production lot .
The Engineer determines sample sizes for each fastener component .
Submit selected sample fasteners to METS for QA testing .
Include test reports specified in ASTM with the test sample submittal .
.Ab Test Reports For standards and poles with shaft lengths of feet or more submit certified test reports verifying compliance with minimum yield strength requirements .
Test reports may be the mill test report for the as received steel .
If the asreceived steel has a lower yield strength than required provide test data assuring that your method of cold forming will consistently increase the steel tensile properties to meet the specified minimum yield strength .
Test data must include tensile properties of the steel after cold forming for specific heats and thicknesses .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Quality Control For cast slip bases for standards and poles with shaft lengths over feet perform RT on casting from each lot of a maximum of castings under ASTM E. Castings must comply with the acceptance criteria for severity level or better for the types and categories of discontinuities specified in ASTM E and E. If the casting fails testing additional castings must be radiographed .
If the additional castings fail the inspection the lot is rejected .
.Ac Department Acceptance Reserved .B Materials .B General Type standards and steel pedestals for controller cabinets must be manufactured of one of the following .
At least .inchthick galvanized steel .
inch standard weight galvanized steel pipe complying with ASTM AAM .
inch Type conduit with the top designed for posttop slip fitter Material for push button posts pedestrian barricades and guard posts must comply with ASTM AAM .
Handhole reinforcement rings must be continuous around the handholes .
Galvanize standards poles pedestals posts fasteners and other ferrous materials under section .B .
.B Bolted Connections Anchor bolts must comply with ASTM F Grade for weldable steel .
HS anchor bolts nuts and washers must comply with section .D .
Bolts nuts and washers for general applications must comply with section .D .
HS bolts shown to be snug tight must comply with section .D for general applications .
HS bolts nuts and flat washers used to connect slip base plates must comply with the requirements for HS fastener assemblies for use in structural steel joints in section .D except rotational capacity testing and tension testing are not required .
Zinccoated nuts used on fastener assemblies having a specified preload obtained by specifying a prescribed tension torque value or degree of turn must be provided with a colored lubricant that is clean and dry to the touch .
The lubricant color must contrast the zinc coating color on the nut such that the presence of the lubricant is visually obvious .
The lubricant must be insoluble in water or the fastener components must be shipped to the job site in a sealed container .
Plate washers must be manufactured by saw cutting and drilling steel plate .
Steel plate must comply with AISI .
Before galvanizing remove burrs and sharp edges and chamfer both sides of holes to allow the bolt head to make full contact with the washer without tension .
HS cap screws for attaching arms to standards must comply with ASTM A or A and the mechanical requirements in ASTM A after galvanizing .
Coat threads of cap screws with a colored lubricant that is clean and dry to the touch .
The lubricant color must contrast the zinc coating color on the cap screw such that the presence of the lubricant is visually obvious .
The lubricant must be insoluble in water or the fastener components must be shipped to the job site in a sealed container .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES Before manufacturing details must be adjusted to ensure that cap screw heads can be turned using conventional installation tools .
During manufacturing properly locate the position of the luminaire on the arm plate to avoid interference with the cap screw heads .
.B Standards and Poles .Ba General Standards and poles with shaft lengths of feet or more must comply with sections .
and .B .
Tapered tubes must be manufactured from sheet steel of a weldable grade having a minimum yield strength of psi after manufacturing .
.Bb Fabrication When a singleply inchthick pole is specified a ply pole with equivalent section modulus may be substituted .
Standards may be manufactured of fulllength sheets or shorter sections .
Each section must be manufactured from or pieces of sheet steel .
If pieces are used the longitudinal welded seams must be directly opposite from one another .
If the sections are buttwelded together the longitudinal welded seams of adjacent sections must be placed to form continuous straight seams from the base to the top of the standard .
Standards with an outside diameter of inches or less must be round .
Standards with an outside diameter greater than inches may be round or multisided .
Multisided standards must .
Be convex .
Have a minimum of sides .
Have a minimum bend radius of inches Manufacture mast arms from material specified for the standard .
Standards and poles must be straight with a maximum variation of .
inch measured at the midpoint of a to foot standard .
inch measured at the midpoint of a to foot standard Exposed edges of the plates that make up the base assembly must be finished smooth .
Exposed corners of the plates must be broken .
Provide shafts with slipfitter shaft caps .
Surface flatness requirements specified in ASTM AAM apply to plates meeting one or more of the following .
In contact with concrete grout or washers and leveling nuts .
In HS bolted connections .
In joints where cap screws are used to secure luminaire and signal arms .
Used for breakaway slip base assemblies Do not make additional holes in structural members .
Manufacture the cast steel option for slip bases from material of Grade complying with ASTM AAM .
You may use other comparable material if authorized .
Casting tolerances must comply with the Steel Founders Society of Americas recommendations for green sand molding .
.Bc Welding Buttwelded circumferential joints of tubular sections requiring CJP groove welds must be made using a metal sleeve backing ring inside each joint .
The sleeve must have at least a inch nominal thickness and be manufactured from steel having the same chemical composition as the steel in the tubular sections to be joined .
If the sections to be joined have different specified minimum yield strengths the sleeve must have the same chemical composition as the tubular section having the higher minimum yield strength .
The width of the metal sleeve must be consistent with the type of NDT selected and must be a minimum width of inch .
At fitting time the sleeve must be centered at the joint and in contact with the tubular section at the point of the weld .
SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES Welds must be continuous .
Weld metal at the transverse joints must extend to the sleeve making the sleeve an integral part of the joint .
During manufacturing longitudinal seams on vertical tubular members of cantilevered support structures must be within degrees circumferentially of the center of the longest mast arm connection .
Longitudinal seams on horizontal tubular members including signal and luminaire arms must be within degrees of the bottom of the arm .
Longitudinal seam welds in steel tubular sections may be made by the electric resistance welding process .
Longitudinal seam welds must have a percent minimum penetration except .
Within inches of a circumferential weld the longitudinal seam weld must be a CJP groove weld. . Longitudinal seam welds on lighting support structures having a telescopic pole segment splice must be CJP groove welds on the female end for a length on each end equal to the designated slipfit splice length plus inches .
Except for fillet and fatigueresistant welds exposed circumferential welds must be ground flush with the base metal before galvanizing or painting .
Ground flush is specified as .inch .
Circumferential welds and base platetopole welds may be repaired only time .
.C Construction Assemble and tighten the slip base when the pole is on the ground .
Threads of heavy hex nuts for each slip base bolt must be coated with additional lubricant that is clean and dry to the touch .
Tighten HS slip base bolts to within ftlb of torque shown in the following table Slip Base Bolt Tightening Requirements Standard type Torque ftlb SB Bolted connections attaching signal or luminaire arms to poles are considered slip critical .
Galvanized faying surfaces of plates on luminaire arms signal arms and poles must be roughened by hand using a wire brush before assembly and comply with requirements for Class C surface conditions for slip critical connections in Specification for Structural Joints Using HighStrength Bolts of the RCSC .
Coatings for faying surfaces must comply with the RCSC specification for Class B coatings .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED .
HIGH MAST LIGHTING ASSEMBLY POLES Reserved .
WOOD POLES .A General Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and installing wood poles .
.B Materials Each wood pole must .
Be class or larger as specified in ANSI O . . Have not more than degree twist in grain over the full length .
Have a sweep of not more than inches .
Have a beveled top SECTION OVERHEAD SIGN STRUCTURES STANDARDS AND POLES .
Be placed in the ground at least feet .
Unless otherwise specified have a length of .. feet for a service pole .. feet for other poles After fabrication pressuretreat poles under section .B and AWPA U Use Category UCB Commodity Specification D. If poles are specified to be painted use a waterborne wood preservative .
.C Construction After each pole is set in ground backfill the space around the pole with selected earth or sand free of rocks and other deleterious material placed in inchthick layers .
Moisten each layer and thoroughly compact .
Manufacture the mast arm from standard pipe free from burrs .
Each mast arm must have an insulated wire inlet and wood pole mounting brackets for the mast arm and tierod cross arm .
Manufacture tie rod from structural steel and pipe .
Mount the mast arm for luminaires to provide a foot mounting height for a W highpressure sodium luminaire and a foot mounting height for a W highpressure sodium luminaire .
Traffic signals and flashing beacons on the mast arm must provide a minimum vertical clearance of feet from bottom of equipment to pavement .
.D Payment Not Used RESERVED WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing wood and plastic lumber structures .
.B Definitions hardware Bolts with necessary nuts and washers timber connectors drift pins dowels nails screws spikes wire rope for wrapping lag screws and other metal fastenings .
structural metal Structural shapes eyebars castings rods with necessary nuts and washers metal shoes and plates but not including hardware .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Deliver store and handle timber and lumber as follows .
Store in piles at the job site unless it is to be placed in the structure immediately .
Stack neatly on dunnage above ground so that it can be readily inspected .
Store and handle such that injury and breakage are avoided .
Protect from the sun to prevent warping .B Structural Metal Structural metal must comply with section .
Hotdip galvanize structural metal under section .B .
.C Hardware Hardware must comply with section .
Except for malleable iron washers hotdip galvanize hardware under section .B .
Bolts and nuts must comply with ASTM A .
Machine bolt heads and nuts must be regular square series and threads must be coarse thread series Class tolerance all complying with ANSI Standard .
Washers must be cast iron ogee malleable iron plate or cut washers .
Nails must be common wire nails .
Wire rope must be commercialquality galvanized steel wire rope .
Splices and end connections of wire rope must be made with metal clips. . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT For a bid item with a MFBM measurement unit the payment quantity is the volume determined from nominal widths and thicknesses and lengths shown .
SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES WOOD STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing wood structures .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for timber and lumber stating the species of the material to be shipped and including a certified grading report .
If timber is treated include a certified treating report .
Submit a certificate of compliance for glued laminated timbers and glued laminated decking .
.A Quality Assurance Treated and untreated timber and lumber must comply with the grading specifications when delivered to the job site .
.B Materials .B General Grease used to fill bolt holes must be recommended by the manufacturer for corrosion protection and must not melt or run at a temperature of degrees F. .B Structural Timber and Lumber Structural timber and lumber must be one of the species shown in the following table Type Species Douglas fir Pseudotsuga menziesii HemFir Abies magnifica Abies grandis Abies procera Abies amabillis Abies concolor Tsuga heterophylla Redwood Sequoia sempervirens Southern yellow pine One of the species recognized by the Southern Pine Inspection Bureau Structural timber and lumber must be inspected and grade marked under the rules and specifications shown in the following table Timber and Lumber Grading Type Rulesspecifications and publisher Douglas fir and HemFir Standard No .
Grading Rules for West Coast Lumber published by West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau or Western Lumber Grading Rules published by Western Wood Products Association Redwood Standard Specifications for Grades of California Redwood Lumber published by Redwood Inspection Service Southern yellow pine Standard Grading Rules for Southern Pine Lumber published by Southern Pine Inspection Bureau Stressgraded lumber must comply with the following .
Wood must be sound and free from decay. . Green timber must be protected from uneven seasoning during transit. . Douglas fir must be end coated with a protective coating during manufacturing to retard checking .
For all stress grades the sizes described for timber and lumber are nominal sizes under American Softwood Lumber Standard PS published by NIST .
SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES Plywood must be inchthick Grade BC Douglas fir plywood manufactured with adhesives for wet use and must be preservative treated .
Each glued laminated timber or decking unit must bear the American Institute of Timber Construction quality mark .
Glued laminated timbers must be architectural grade with glue for wet use and sawtextured exposed surfaces .
Glued laminated timbers must comply with ANSIAITC A. and AITC published by the American Institute of Timber Construction .
Glued laminated decking units must be .
Douglas fir white pine or HemFir .
Kilndried solid stock lumber .
Factory laminated using adhesive for wet use .
At least plies thick with tongue and groove edges .
At least .
inches in width and thickness The surface of glued laminated decking units at exposed faces must be saw textured .
.B Preservative Treatment Where preservative treatment is specified treat timber lumber and piling after millwork is completed .
Preservatives treatment and treatment results must comply with AWPA Standards U and T and the specified AWPA Use Category .
If a Use Category is not specified the preservative treatment must comply with AWPA U Use Category UCB .
The treating plant must imprint legible symbols in the ends of all treated timber and lumber .
The symbols must indicate the name of the treating company and the type and year of treatment under AWPA Standards M and M. Where timber is specified to be kiln dried before treatment the moisture content after drying and immediately before treating must not exceed percent .
Measure the moisture content under ASTM D at the midpoint of the piece in the outer inch .
Use an authorized type of moisture meter .
Timber and lumber treated with waterborne preservatives must be dried after treatment and have a moisture content of no more than percent when shipped to the job site .
For treated wood that is to be painted use a waterborne wood preservative .
Manually applied wood preservative must be creosote or copper naphthenate complying with AWPA Standard M. .C Construction .C General Reserved .C Framing Timber and lumber must be accurately cut and framed to a close fit and must have even bearing over the entire contact surface .
Do not use shimming in making joints .
Bore fastener holes as shown in the following table SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES Fastener Bore Holes Fastener type Member type Boring requirement Drift pin or dowel Untreated timber Hole diameter a minimum of inch less than the pin or dowel diameter Treated timber Hole diameter the same as the pin or dowel diameter Bolt All cases Hole diameter a maximum of inch larger than the bolt diameter Lag screw All cases Bit diameter a maximum of the root diameter of the lag screw thread Boat or wire spike Small member if necessary to prevent splitting Bit diameter the same as the spike diameter or the smallest dimension of the spike Fit each bolt inch or less in diameter with a cut washer .
Fit each bolt or lag screw over inch in diameter with a cast or malleable iron washer .
Framed bents must comply with the following .
Mud sills must be firmly and evenly bedded in solid material. . Sills must have full even bearing on the pedestals mud sills or piles. . Posts must be framed true and must have full bearing on pedestals sills and caps .
Align bents before placing bracing .
Provide a minimum of inches between the outside bolt and the end of the brace .
For bridge deck stringers place the better edge down .
After placing stringers the tops of the stringers must not vary from a plane more than will allow bearing of the floor on all the stringers .
Wheel guards and railings must be accurately framed and aligned .
.C Treated Timber .Ca General Section .C applies to treated timber .
Preservativetreated timber must be Douglas fir or HemFir .
Chromated copper arsenate must not be used for preservative treatment .
Do not remove bolts and hardware using flametype or airarc cutting equipment .
Predrill for bridge spikes within foot of the ends of existing timbers and new planking .
Predrill elsewhere if necessary to avoid splitting the timber or bending the spikes .
If authorized you may relocate holes for new bolts and drift pins to avoid conflicts with existing hardware embedded in existing wood .
For lumber treated with ammoniacal copper arsenate ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate ammoniacal copper quat or copper azole .
Fill bolt holes with grease before inserting bolts .
Use nylon spacers polyethylene tape or other authorized corrosionresistant barrier on surfaces of hardware that will be in contact with treated wood .Cb Manual Treatment Do not manually apply preservative to unprotected wood in wet or damp weather or to wood with a moisture content exceeding percent or with free surface moisture .
If manually applying preservative use suitable brushes for exposed surfaces use swabs for holes or use other means that result in adequate coverage .
SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES If treated timber is framed cut or bored after treatment thoroughly swab each cut dap or hole with applications of the same preservative specified for the timber treatment or of copper naphthenate .
Manually treat the following items with applications of wood preservative .
Portions of rail posts to be embedded in earth or concrete .
Faces of timber bulkheads to be in contact with earth except those of treated Douglas fir .Cc Handling Handle and care for pressuretreated wood materials under AWPA Standard M. Handle treated timber with rope slings .
Do not use cant hooks peaveys or other sharp instruments to handle treated timber .
.C Painting For painted timber and lumber comply with section ..
Paint the following items with application of latexbase wood primer and applications of white exterior latexbased paint .
Rails .
Portions of rail posts not embedded in earth or concrete .
Wheel guards or timber curbs except the bottom faces over an earth surface .
Exposed faces of posts .D Payment Not Used .
TIMBER LAGGING .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing timber lagging .
.B Materials Timber members must be preservativetreated Douglas fir and full sawn to the dimensions shown .
Chromated copper arsenate must not be used for preservative treatment .
.C Construction If no concrete facing is shown .
Install lagging members inches thick or less with a inch gap between members .
Install lagging members greater than inches thick with a inch gap between members If a concrete facing is shown install lagging members with mortartight joints .
.D Payment Not Used .
TIMBER CATWALK .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing timber catwalks .
A timber catwalk consists of a walkway of two by inch planks bolted to steel supports and a cable handrail if shown .
.B Materials .B General Reserved SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES .B Timber Planks The timber planks must be untreated Douglas fir Dense no .
rough sawn on top optional surfaced on bottom .
.B Cable Handrail The cable for the cable handrail must be wire rope with a minimum diameter of inch and a minimum breaking strength of lb .
The wire rope must be furnished with Class A weight zinccoated wire under ASTM A .
The turnbuckles Ubolts and thimbles must be commercial quality .
The turnbuckles must be steel pipe type or drop forged steel and must have jaw or eye ends .
The turnbuckles and Ubolts must have a minimum breaking strength of lb .
The cable clamps and other required fittings must be commercialquality steel malleable iron or wrought iron .
Galvanize hardware turnbuckles Ubolts cable clamps and other fittings under section .B .
.C Construction Tension the handrail cables to provide taut railings between supports .
Steel surfaces to be covered by timber must be painted the full number of applications specified before placing timber .
Painting of timber planks is not required .
.D Payment Not Used .
ABUTMENT LUMBER BLOCKING Reserved .
TIMBER RETAINING WALLS Reserved ..
RESERVED PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing plastic lumber structures .
.B Definitions postconsumer waste Finished material not including manufacturing waste that has completed its life cycle as a consumer item and would have been disposed of as a solid waste .
production lot of plastic lumber Quantity of cu yd or less that is ready for shipment to the job site and is of the same type manufactured by the same method and made of the same material .
recycled product Material good or supply of which at least percent of its total mass consists of secondary waste and at least percent of its total mass consists of postconsumer waste .
secondary waste Finished products or fragments of finished products of a manufacturing process including postconsumer waste but not including excess virgin resources of the manufacturing process .
.C Submittals .C General Submit the following product data .
Manufacturers material test reports .
Manufacturers performance data .
SDSs SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES .
copies of the printed literature for the product Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of plastic lumber .
The certificate must be accompanied by a laboratory test report .
Submit test samples for void testing .
Submit results of stiffness tests .
.C Shop Drawings Submit copies of shop drawings for the plastic lumber for initial review .
After review submit from to copies as requested for authorization and use during construction .
Shop drawings must show .
Details for component layout and connections .
Sequence of shop and field assembly .
Installation procedures .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Start a new production lot if any production parameter changes before the maximum production lot size is reached .
.Db Stiffness Test Before shipment to the job site perform stiffness tests for the plastic lumber in the presence of the Engineer at an authorized laboratory .
Notify the Engineer at least days before conducting the tests .
The Engineer randomly selects test samples from each production lot for stiffness testing .
Determine the stiffness and the yield stress in bending under ASTM D except the test samples must have a minimum length of feet and tests must be performed on a foot span length at a crosshead motion of .
inch per minute .
Calculate the stiffness using the secant modulus at the flexural strain of .
inch per inch .
If the stiffness or the yield stress in bending of either of the test samples does not comply with section .A perform a retest on additional test samples selected by the Engineer .
If the stiffness or the yield stress in bending of either of the additional test samples does not comply with section .A in the retest the entire production lot of plastic lumber represented by the test samples is rejected .
.D Department Acceptance .Da General The Engineer selects test samples of each size from each production lot of plastic lumber delivered to the job site for void testing .
.Db Void Testing .Dbi General Before use in the work the plastic lumber must be tested for both exterior and interior voids .
Allow days for void testing .
.Dbii Exterior Void Test The Engineer examines the test samples for exterior voids .
If the exterior voids of either of the test samples do not comply with section .A the Engineer selects additional test samples and performs a retest .
If the exterior voids of either of the additional SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES test samples do not comply with section .A in the retest the entire production lot of plastic lumber represented by the test samples is rejected .
.Dbiii Interior Void Test After acceptance under the exterior void test cut the test samples into footlong segments .
The Engineer examines the cut sections for interior voids .
If the interior voids of a cut section of either of the test samples do not comply with section .A the Engineer selects additional test samples and performs a retest .
If the interior voids of a cut section of either of the additional test samples do not comply with section .A in the retest the entire production lot of plastic lumber represented by the test samples is rejected. . MATERIALS .A General Plastic lumber must .
Be produced continuously and homogeneously without joints .
Be straight and true and free from twist curvature bulging or other deformations .
Have a smooth outer layer with no visible voids .
Not vary from the dimensions shown by more than inch for crosssectional dimensions or inch for the length .
Have total resistance to marine borers and dry rot .
Not swell shrink or crack .
Comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Density kgm min ASTM D Test Method A Skin Core Water absorption weight increase percent max ASTM D . at hours .
at hours Brittleness at C ASTM D Skin No break Hardness ASTM D Type D Skin UV deterioration hardness change percent after hours of exposure max ASTM Da ASTM D Type D Skin Abrasion ASTM D Cycles Wheel CS Load kg Skin Weight loss mg Wear index .. Chemical resistance weight increase percent ASTM D Practice A Procedure Sea water .
Gasoline .
No .
diesel .
Coefficient of thermal expansion per degree C max ASTM D . Ignition temperature C ASTM D aASTM D using UVA bulbs operating at a UV intensity of .
Wmnm measured at nm .
The exposure cycle must be hours of ultraviolet UV exposure at C and hours of condensate CON exposure at C. Stiffness and yield stress in bending of plastic lumber must have at least the values shown in the following table SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES Cross section size inches Stiffness EI kipsq ft Yield stress in bending psi x x x x x NOTE These values are for the weak axis of rectangular sections .
For the exterior voids at each exposed end of plastic lumber .
Maximum dimension of any void must not exceed inch. . Total number of voids with a maximum dimension greater than inch must not exceed .
For the interior voids in the cut sections of each segment of plastic lumber .
Maximum dimension of any void in a cut section must not exceed inch. . Total area of voids in a cut section must not exceed percent of the total crosssectional area .
Permanently mark each piece of plastic lumber with the manufacturers name .
Ship and store plastic lumber in a way that minimizes scratching or damage to the outer surfaces .
.B Reinforced Recycled Plastic Lumber Reinforced RPL must consist of recycled plastic reinforced with fiberglass reinforcing bar elements fiberglass filaments or a combination of both .
Reinforced RPL must be a recycled product .
Fabricate reinforced RPL from one or more of the following thermoplastics .
Highdensity polyethylene .
Mediumdensity polyethylene .
Lowdensity polyethylene .
Highdensity polypropylene Reinforced RPL must have a dense outer skin at least inch thick surrounding a less dense core .
The plastic for the outer skin must be mixed with colorants to match color no .
or of FEDSTD and must contain a UV inhibitor and antioxidants .
Fiberglass reinforcing bar elements must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Flexural strength psi min ASTM D Compression modulus psi min ASTM D Tensile strength psi min ASTM D Fiberglass filaments must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Density kgm ASTM D Mechanical single filament tensile strength MPa ASTM D Tensile modulus of elasticity MPa ASTM D All reinforced RPL must contain the same type of reinforcement .
.C Composite Plastic Lumber CPL may be substituted for reinforced RPL .
SECTION WOOD AND PLASTIC LUMBER STRUCTURES Fabricate the shell for CPL from polyester or epoxy resin reinforced with Eglass and mixed with colorants UV inhibitors and antioxidants .
The CPL coating must match color no .
or of FED STD .
The core material for CPL must be lightweight aggregate polymer concrete .
CPL must comply with the physical quality characteristics specified for reinforced RPL and the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Density of concrete core kgm min ASTM D day compressive strength of concrete core psi min ASTM C Structural strength of shell Tensile strength tensile modulus percent loss Flexural strength flexural modulus percent loss ASTM D ASTM D Less than after UV deterioration test specified for plastic lumber Dry film thickness of coating mils min Color change of coating ASTM D Test Cycle No visible color change when tested for hours Initial adhesion of coating psi min ASTM D Decrease in initial adhesion of coating decrease percent ASTM D ASTM D Test Condition Da No more than following exposure cycles aUse a low temperature phase at F and high temperature phase at F. Seal the cut ends of CPL with a cap securely held in place with an adhesive recommended by the manufacturer .
The adhesive must show no more than a percent decrease in strength when tested under ASTM D following cycles of exposure under ASTM D Test Condition D with a low temperature phase of degrees C and a high temperature phase of degrees C. .D Unreinforced Recycled Plastic Lumber Unreinforced RPL may be substituted for reinforced RPL for chocks filler blocks and other nonstructural members shown .
Unreinforced RPL must comply with the specifications for reinforced RPL except fiberglass reinforcement is not required and stiffness tests do not apply. . CONSTRUCTION Install plastic lumber under the manufacturers instructions .
Cut bevel drill counterbore and otherwise fabricate plastic lumber under the manufacturers instructions .
Fabricate lumber in the manufacturers plant to the greatest extent possible .
Holes for bolts in plastic lumber must be bored inch larger in diameter than the bolt to be placed .
Holes for lag screws must be bored to a diameter under the manufacturers instructions .
Recess bolts and lag screw heads inch from the surface of the face of plastic lumber fenders .
Coat holes drilled through CPL members with a concrete sealant approved by the CPL manufacturer .
Plastic lumber elements that are split broken warped or otherwise damaged are rejected. . PAYMENT Not Used ..
RESERVED SOUND WALLS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing sound walls .
Reinforcement must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Sound walls are measured by the area of wall projected on a vertical plane between the elevation lines and wall length .
MASONRY BLOCK .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing masonry block sound walls .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Test Data Submit test data for .
Prepackaged mortar materials .
Compressive strength of masonry for preconstruction testing and field QC testing .
Grout compressive strength .C Product Data Submit manufacturers descriptive data for each type of CMU accessory and manufactured material as an informational submittal .
.C Mix Design Submit a mix design for each grout mix proposed for use .
Admixtures are not allowed unless authorized .
Submit a mix design for the mortar cap .
.C Samples Submit samples of the CMUs for each color and texture as specified in ASTM C. .C Qualification Data Submit qualification data for the authorized laboratory as an informational submittal .
.C Certificates of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance for CMUs aggregate for grout and grout .
.C Daily Field Report and Final Report Submit a copy of the daily field report on the business day following the preparation of the report .
Upon completion of the work requiring special inspection submit a copy of the final report .
SECTION SOUND WALLS .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Preconstruction Testing Perform masonry preconstruction testing at an authorized laboratory .
The authorized laboratory must comply with ASTM E. Determine the compressive strength of masonry for each grout mix to be used under one of the following CBC test methods .
Unit strength method in section except grout must comply with item .. in the st paragraph of section .
Prism test method in section If the prism test method is used to determine the compressive strength you must also test the grout compressive strength under ASTM C. If prepackaged mortar materials are used perform the following preconstruction tests at an authorized laboratory .
California Test .
Test data must be from samples having a moist cure except that the samples must not be immersed in lime water .
The average day compressive strength of mortar must be not less than psi. . California Test or .
Mortar must not contain more than .
percent soluble chlorides when tested under California Test or more than .
percent soluble sulfates as SO when tested under California Test .
.Dc Field Quality Control .Dci General You must employ a special inspector and an authorized laboratory to perform Level inspections and structural tests of masonry to verify the masonry construction complies with section and section of the CBC .
Masonry special inspection personnel used in the work must not be employed or compensated by any subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who will provide other services or materials for the project .
.Dcii Special Inspector The special inspector must be an ICC certified Structural Masonry Special Inspector .
The special inspector must perform the inspections required in section .
of the CBC .
The special inspector must prepare a daily field report providing information regarding the specific activities witnessed including placing of CMUs and bar reinforcing grouting fabrication of test specimens and other observations of importance to the work .
A daily field report is required for each day that the special inspector is on the job site .
The special inspector must prepare a signed final report stating whether the work requiring special inspection was to the best of the inspectors knowledge in compliance with the plans specifications and the applicable workmanship requirements of these specifications and the CBC .
.Dciii Masonry Compressive Strength Testing Test the compressive strength of masonry for each sq ft of sound wall area or portion thereof .
Determine the compressive strength as specified for masonry preconstruction testing in section .Db .
SECTION SOUND WALLS .D Department Acceptance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Concrete Masonry Units Obtain CMUs of a uniform color and texture from a single source and from a single manufacturer .
CMUs must comply with ASTM C for hollow load bearing lightweight or medium weight class units .
You may use standard or openend units .
If you use openended units do not reduce the spacing of the bar reinforcement shown .
The weight of a CMU for a sound wall on a bridge must not exceed lb .
Identify each HS CMU with a groove in an interior corner .
The groove must extend from a mortar surface for a length of about inches and must have a depth of about inch .
.C Mortar Mortar must comply with ASTM C except the cement must comply with section .B .
Aggregate must comply with ASTM C. Hydrated lime must comply with ASTM C Type S. Obtain mortar ingredients of a uniform quality including color from a single manufacturer for cement and lime and from a single source or producer for each aggregate .
Mortar for laying CMUs must consist by volume of part cement .
to .
part hydrated lime and .
to parts mortar sand .
Add enough water to make a workable mortar .
Accurately measure and thoroughly mix each batch of mortar .
Do not retemper mortar more than hour after mixing .
Mortar color must match the CMU .
Color pigments must be iron oxides complying with ASTM C. The dosage must not exceed percent by weight of cement in the mortar .
If authorized you may use prepackaged mortar materials and mortar containing admixtures complying with ASTM C. Packages of mortar materials must bear the manufacturers name brand contents weight and color identification .
.D Grout The minimum compressive strength of the grout at days must be percent of the greater of the masonry compressive strength shown or psi .
Cementitious material must comply with section .B .
Grout must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Grout for HS CMUs must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Aggregate must comply with section .C except section .C does not apply .
Aggregate for grout must be a mixture of fine and coarse aggregate .
At least percent of the aggregate must be coarse aggregate .
One hundred percent of the combined grading must pass the inch sieve .
Mix the grout with enough water to produce a mix consistency suitable for pumping without segregation .
The grout must have a slump from to inches .
.E Lightweight Aggregate Reserved SECTION SOUND WALLS .F Reinforcement Ladder type joint reinforcement must comply with ASTM A hotdip galvanized .
.G Expansion Joint Filler Expansion joint filler must comply with ASTM D or ASTM D MAA .
.H Access Gates Timber members must be tongue and groove Douglas fir subflooring free of knotholes .
Timber members steel frames channels anchorage devices mounting hardware gate rollers corrugated steel pipe nylon washers and neoprene tubing must be commercial quality .
The ladder rungs must be no .
deformed bar reinforcing steel with a nonskid surface .
Gate rollers must be rigid casters with selflubricating bearings and hard rubber wheels .
Metal parts and hardware must be hotdip galvanized under section .B .
Primer and stain must be top grade primer and stain from a manufacturer who has manufactured industrial paints and stains complying with custom specifications for at least years .
If the back side of the masonry wall is constructed of splitfaced or roughsurface blocks the bond beam above the gate opening where the upper gate guide is to be mounted must have smoothsided blocks .
Aggregate filling the inside of corrugated steel pipe landings must be a coarse concrete aggregate of commercial quality .
Compaction of the aggregate is not required. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Construct sound wall with hand laid CMUs .
Vertical lines and surfaces must not vary from plumb by more than inch in feet .
Provide bond beam units or recesses for horizontal reinforcement .
Construct walls in footmaximumheight lifts .
Complete grouting of each lift before starting construction of the next lift .
The top course of each lift must be a bond beam .
Bond beams must be continuous .
Cover the top of unfilled cells under horizontal bond beams with metal or plastic lath .
Roughen clean and lightly wet contact surfaces where fresh masonry joins masonry that is partially or totally set .
The roughened surface must be at least as rough as a wood troweled surface .
Remove laitance curing compounds debris dirt and any substance that decreases bond to the fresh masonry .
Roughen and clean concrete surfaces on which masonry walls are to be constructed exposing the aggregate .
Immediately before laying the CMUs flush the surface with water and allow to dry to a surface dry condition .
Use a masonry saw to cut CMUs to neat and true lines .
Protect masonry as specified for protecting concrete in section .I .
During erection in inclement weather keep cells dry by covering partially completed walls .
The covering must be waterproof fabric plastic or paper sheeting or other authorized material .
Do not use wooden boards or planks as covering materials .
Extend the covering down each side of masonry walls approximately feet .
Remove splashes stains and spots from exposed faces of the wall .
.B Mortar Bedding and Jointing Mortar joints must be approximately inch thick .
SECTION SOUND WALLS Walls and cross webs forming cells to be filled with grout must be full bedded in mortar to prevent leakage of grout .
All head and bed joints must be solidly filled with mortar for a distance in from the face of the wall or unit not less than the thickness of the longitudinal face shells .
Shove head joints tight .
.C Reinforcement Before placing grout securely hold the reinforcement in position at the top and bottom and at intervals not exceeding bar diameters with wire ties or spacing devices .
Wire must be gauge or heavier .
Wooden aluminum or plastic spacing devices must not be used .
Splice vertical reinforcement only at the locations shown .
.D Grouting Preserve the unobstructed vertical continuity of the grout during mortar placement in joints .
Any overhanging mortar projecting more than inch or other obstruction or debris must be removed from the inside of cells .
Only fill cells containing reinforcement with grout .
Consolidate grout in the cells by vibrating and reconsolidating after excess moisture has been absorbed and before plasticity is lost .
Do not slice grout with a trowel .
If placing of grout in grout filled cells is stopped for more than hour a construction joint must be made .
The construction joint must be approximately inches below the top of the last course filled with grout .
.E Access Gates Construct access gates with the tongue in the up position .
Remove the tongue of the top board and the groove of the bottom board .
Stagger knot locations of adjoining boards .
Prime and stain timber surfaces of access gates with coats of stain to match the adjacent sound wall .
For backfill outside of pipe landings you may use material from excavation. . PAYMENT Not Used PRECAST CONCRETE PANELS Reserved ALTERNATIVE SOUND WALL SYSTEMS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing alternative sound wall systems .
You may only use an alternative sound wall system where specified in the special provisions .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Shop Drawings Submit project specific shop drawings to the OSD Documents Unit .
Notify the Engineer of your submittal .
For initial review submit copies of shop drawings .
Allow days for the Departments review .
After review and correction submit from to copies as requested to the OSD Documents Unit for authorization and use during construction .
The shop drawings must include SECTION SOUND WALLS .
Design firms name address and telephone and fax numbers .
Information required for the proper construction of the system at each location .
Design parameters material notes and wall construction procedures .
Calculations for each installation of the system Submit asbuilt drawings at the completion of each sound wall .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Construct the alternative sound wall system to the lines and grades shown except that the alternative sound wall system may have a height greater than that shown .
The construction must comply with the details shown on the authorized shop drawings and proprietary system details. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for coating structural steel .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance and SDS for each shipment of blast cleaning material .
.D Quality Assurance Measure coating dry film thickness with a calibrated Type magnetic film thickness gauge under SSPC PA except there is no limit to the number or location of spot measurements that may be requested by the Engineer to verify coating thickness .
Measure coating adhesion strength with a selfaligning adhesion tester under ASTM D. Measure levels of soluble salts on surfaces using a retrieval method specified in SSPCGuide . . MATERIALS .A General Water for pressure rinsing and pressure washing must be fresh potable water with a chloride content of not more than ppm and a sulfate content of not more than ppm .
Continuous recycling of rinse water is not allowed .
You may collect rinse water in a tank for reuse if test samples meet specified requirements and no water is added to the tank after sampling .
Sealing compound must be a polysulfide or polyurethane type complying with ASTM C Type S Grade NS Class Use M. .B Abrasives Abrasives for blast cleaning must be of a grading suitable to produce satisfactory results .
Unless other abrasives are authorized use only .
Clean dry sand .
Do not use unwashed beach sand containing salt or excessive silt . .
Mineral grit. . Steel shot. . Steel grit .
Mineral and slag abrasives must comply with the requirements for Class A Grade to abrasives in SSPCAB and must not contain hazardous material .
Steel abrasive must comply with SSPCAB .
Recycled steel abrasive must comply with SSPCAB .
.C Coatings Coatings must comply with section .
Coatings selected for use must comply with the volatile organic compound concentration limits specified for the air quality district where the project is located. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Notify the Engineer at least business days before starting work .
Provide protective devices to prevent damage to the work property or persons .
.B Weather Conditions Apply paint only to thoroughly dry surfaces during periods of favorable weather .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS Do not perform blast cleaning or apply solventborne paint if any of the following atmospheric conditions exist .
Atmospheric or surface temperature is below degrees F . Atmospheric or surface temperature is above degrees F . Relative humidity is more than percent Do not apply waterborne paint if any of the following atmospheric conditions exist .
Atmospheric or surface temperature is below degrees F . Atmospheric or surface temperature is above degrees F . Relative humidity is more than percent Except for work within enclosures do not apply paint if any of the following applies .
Freshly painted surfaces may become damaged by rain fog or condensation .
Atmospheric temperature or relative humidity will not remain within the specified application conditions during the drying period .
Steel surface temperature is less than degrees F above the dew point Repair or replace uncured paint damaged by weather .
If authorized you may use enclosures to allow painting during inclement weather .
Enclosures must provide atmospheric conditions within the specified limits .
.C Cleaning .C General Prepare and clean surfaces before painting .
.C Pressure Rinsing Pressure rinsing includes cleaning surfaces using a pressure wash system with a minimum nozzle pressure of psi .
Keep the nozzle tip from to inches from the surface .
The nozzle must have a maximum fan tip angle of degrees .
.C Pressure Washing Pressure washing includes cleaning surfaces using a pressure wash system with a nozzle pressure from to psi and a maximum fan tip angle of degrees .
.C Steam Cleaning Steam cleaning includes cleaning dirt grease loose chalky paint and other foreign material from surfaces using steam .
Steam temperature at the nozzle must be from to degrees F. Use a biodegradable detergent during steam cleaning .
After steam cleaning pressure rinse cleaned surfaces with water .
Do not perform steam cleaning more than weeks before painting or other phases of cleaning .
Do not paint steamcleaned surfaces until they are thoroughly dry and at least hours have elapsed .
.C Blast Cleaning Blast cleaning includes abrasive blasting surfaces to be painted .
Surfaces to be blast cleaned must be dry .
Prime or treat blastcleaned surfaces on the same day blast cleaning is performed unless otherwise authorized .
.D Painting Each spray pot must have an authorized water trap installed .
Do not thin paint unless authorized .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS Before applying mix paint using mechanical mixers to thoroughly blend pigment and vehicle together .
Apply paint to clean dry surfaces in a neat and workmanlike manner .
Apply by brush spray or roller in any combination .
Gun extensions and aerosol cans are not allowed .
Brushes must have sufficient bristle body and length to spread paint in a uniform film .
Paint must be evenly spread and thoroughly brushed out .
Rollers must not leave a stippled texture in the paint film .
Apply paint to areas not accessible by regular means using daubers bottle brushes or other authorized methods .
Thoroughly cure each application of paint and correct skips holidays thin areas or other deficiencies before the next application .
Painted surfaces being covered must be free from moisture dust grease and deleterious material that would prevent bonding of succeeding coats .
In spot painting remove old paint that lifts after the first paint application by scraping and repaint the area before the next application .
Pressure rinse painted surfaces before applying additional paint if days or more elapse between paint applications unless otherwise authorized .
The Engineer may require you to blast clean and reapply paint to areas with runs sags thin and excessively thick areas in the paint film skips holidays or areas of nonuniform appearance .
Repair painted surfaces damaged during work activities with materials and to a condition equal to that of the specified coating .
Remove paint or paint stains on surfaces not designated to be painted .
Thoroughly clean painted surfaces after completing painting activities and other work that would deposit foreign material on the painted surfaces .
Stencil the month and year of painting on structures at locations selected by the Engineer .
Use block letters inches high .
The paint used must contrast with the background. . PAYMENT Not Used PAINTING STRUCTURAL STEEL .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for preparing and painting structural steel except galvanized or thermal spray coated surfaces .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Submit certification showing the maximum allowable dry film thickness for inorganic zincrich coatings to be used on faying surfaces of HS bolted connections as determined under appendix A of Specification for Structural Joints Using HighStrength Bolts of the RCSC .
.Ab Mandatory SSPCQP Certifications Reserved .Ac Painting Quality Work Plan Submit copies of a painting quality work plan for each work item requiring structural steel painting or paint removal .
Allow days for the Departments review .
Submit the work plan after attending the prepainting meeting and include SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS .
Names of the painting contractor and any subcontractors to be used. . copy of each applicable ASTM and SSPC specification and qualification procedure . .
Coating manufacturers guidelines and instructions for surface preparation painting drying curing handling shipping and storage of painted structural steel .
Include testing methods and maximum allowable levels for soluble salts. . Materials methods and equipment to be used . .
Proof of required SSPCQP certifications or qualification statements showing compliance with SSPC QP certification. . Methods to control environmental conditions. . Methods to protect the coating during curing shipping handling and storage. . Rinsewater collection plan . .
Detailed paint repair plan for damaged areas . .
Procedures for containing blast media and water . .
Examples of proposed daily reports for testing to be performed including type of testing location lot size time weather conditions test personnel and results .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Certifications You must hold SSPC certifications in good standing throughout the Contract to perform painting activities as shown in the following table SSPC Certifications Painting activity SSPC certification Cleaning and painting structural steel in the field SSPCQP Removing hazardous coatings from structural steel SSPCQP Cleaning and painting structural steel in a permanent painting facility AISCSSPCQP enclosed shop .Ac Prepainting Meeting Before starting painting activities conduct a prepainting meeting to discuss painting quality work plan requirements .
Meeting attendees must include the Engineer and all painting subcontractors .
.Ad Quality Control .Adi General You must determine the sequence of testing .
The Engineer selects test locations .
If repairs are required retest rejected areas after completing repairs .
Test blastcleaned steel for soluble salts using a Class A or B retrieval method before applying the undercoat .
Levels of soluble salts must not exceed the lesser of the coating manufacturers recommendations or gsq cm .
Perform tests for the first sq ft prepared per shift and test for each additional sq ft or portion thereof .
Perform at least tests when less than sq ft is prepared in a shift .
Clean and retest areas represented by soluble salt tests exceeding specified limits .
.Adii Inorganic Zinc Coatings Test the inorganic zinc undercoat before applying final or finish coats .
Perform adhesion and hardness testing at least hours after application .
Test the inorganic zinc undercoat as follows .
Perform adhesion tests per girder or sq ft of painted surface whichever is less .
If less than sq ft is painted in a work shift perform tests .
The coating must have an adhesion to steel of at least psi .
If or more locations fail adhesion requirements the area represented by the tests is rejected .
If of the locations fails adhesion requirements test additional locations .
If any of the additional locations fail the area represented by the tests is rejected .
Repair rejected areas by blast SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS cleaning and repainting .
Repair test locations meeting adhesion requirements by applying organic zincrich primer to the specified dry film thickness. . Test surfaces where finish coats are to be applied for soluble salts .
Soluble salt levels must not exceed the lesser of the coating manufacturers recommendations or gsq cm .
Perform tests for the first sq ft prepared per day and test for each additional sq ft or portion thereof .
Perform at least tests when less than sq ft is prepared in a shift .
Clean and retest areas represented by soluble salt tests exceeding specified limits . .
The inorganic zinc coating must exhibit a solid hard and polished metal surface when firmly scraped with the knurled edge of a quarter before final or finish coats are applied .
Repair areas that are powdery soft or do not exhibit a polished metal surface by blast cleaning and repainting .
Perform the following additional testing for AASHTO M Type II inorganic zinc primers .
Determine the drytosolvent insolubility under ASTM D except use water as the solvent .
The resistance rating must be at least .
The test rate is test per sq ft or portion thereof .
Repair inorganic zinc coating represented by tested areas that fail to meet solvent insolubility requirements by blast cleaning and repainting. . Before applying finish coats test the surface pH .
Wet the surface with deionized water for to minutes .
Apply pH paper with measuring increments of .
pH units .
Take at least pH readings for every sq ft or portion thereof .
If less than sq ft is coated in a single shift take at least pH readings .
Do not apply finish coats until the surface pH is or less .
Perform the following additional testing for AASHTO M Type I inorganic zinc primers .
Determine the drytosolvent insolubility under ASTM D. The resistance rating must be at least .
The test rate is test per sq ft or portion thereof .
Repair inorganic zinc coating represented by tested areas that fail to meet solvent insolubility requirements by blast cleaning and repainting . .
Determine surface hardness under ASTM D. Hardness must be H or harder .
The test rate is test per sq ft or portion thereof .
Repair inorganic zinc coating represented by tests that fail to meet surface hardness requirements by blast cleaning and repainting .
.B Materials .B General Inorganic zincrich primer used on faying surfaces must comply with the slip coefficient specifications for Class B coatings on blastcleaned steel in appendix A of Specification for Structural Joints Using High Strength Bolts of the RCSC .
.B Design Criteria .Ba General Reserved .Bb Ventilated Containment Systems Ventilated containment systems must comply with the specifications for scaffolding in section .Ke .
The minimum total design load for the ventilated containment system must consist of the sum of the dead and live vertical loads .
Dead and live loads are as follows .
Dead load must consist of the actual load of the ventilated containment system .
Live loads for bridges with only spot blast cleaning work must consist of ..
Uniform load of at least psf applied over the supported area .. Moving concentrated load of lb to produce maximum stress in the main supporting elements of the ventilated containment system .
Live loads for bridges with percent blast cleaning to bare metal must consist of ..
Uniform load of at least psf which includes psf of sand load applied over the supported area .. Moving concentrated load of lb to produce maximum stress in the main supporting elements of the ventilated containment system SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS Assumed horizontal loads do not need to be included in the design of the ventilated containment system .
Maximum allowable stresses must comply with section .B .
.C Construction .C General Clean and paint all exposed structural steel and other metal surfaces .
You must provide enclosures for cleaning and painting structural steel .
Maintain atmospheric conditions inside enclosures within specified limits .
Cleaning and painting of new structural steel must be performed in an enclosed shop as defined in AISC SSPCQP .
Except for blast cleaning within closed buildings perform blast cleaning and painting during daylight hours .
.C Containment Systems .Ca General Construct containment systems when disturbing existing paint systems during bridge rehabilitation .
The containment system must be one of the following .
Ventilated containment system .
Vacuumshrouded surface preparation equipment and drapes and ground covers .
Equivalent containment system if authorized The containment system must contain all water resulting debris and visible dust produced when the existing paint system is disturbed .
Properly maintain the containment system while work is in progress and do not change the containment system unless authorized .
Containment systems over railroad property must provide the minimum clearances for the passage of railroad traffic specified in the Information Handout in the document titled Railroad Relations and Insurance Requirements .
.Cb Ventilated Containment Systems .Cbi General If flexible framing is used support and fasten it to prevent the escape of abrasive and blast materials due to whipping from traffic or wind and maintain clearances .
If the wind speed reaches mph or greater relieve the wind pressure on the containment system using an authorized method .
Scaffolding or supports for the ventilated containment system must not extend below the vertical clearance level nor to the ground line at locations within the roadbed .
For trusstype bridges all connections of the ventilated containment system to the existing structure must be made through the deck girder stringer or floor beam system .
No connections are allowed that will cause bending stresses in a truss member .
.Cbii Ventilation The ventilation system in the ventilated containment system must be of the forced input airflow type with fans or blowers .
Negative air pressure must be employed within the ventilated containment system and will be verified by visual methods by observing the concave nature of the ventilated containment system while taking into account wind effects or by using smoke or other visible means to observe airflow .
The input airflow must be properly balanced with the exhaust capacity throughout the range of operations .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS The exhaust airflow of the ventilation system in the ventilated containment system must be forced into wet or dry dust collectors or bag houses .
.C Surface Preparation .Ca General Corners must be chamfered and without sharp edges .
Condition thermalcut edges before blast cleaning by shallow grinding or other authorized method to remove the thin hardened layer resulting from resolidification during cooling .
Remove visuallyevident base metal surface irregularities and defects under ASTM A before blast cleaning new structural steel .
After removing material defects exposed by blast cleaning restore the blast profile by blast cleaning or using mechanical tools under SSPCSP .
.Cb Cleaning .Cbi General Clean previously painted surfaces by pressure washing or steam cleaning before performing other cleaning or painting activities .
Remove gloss from existing paint without removing sound paint .
Lightly roughen remaining areas of gloss using to grit sandpaper .
Paint that becomes loose curled lifted or that loses its bond after cleaning must be removed to sound paint or metal .
After pressure washing or steam cleaning spot blast clean painted surfaces having rust or foreign material remaining that would hinder bonding of new paint .
If there is no bid item for spot blast cleaning this is change order work .
Spot blast clean surfaces under SSPCSP NACE no. . For small areas the Engineer may allow cleaning under SSPCSP .
Remove dirt loose rust mill scale or paint not firmly bonded to surfaces under SSPCSP .
Feather edges of remaining paint .
Do not use pneumatic chipping hammers unless authorized .
.Cbii Blast Cleaning Blast clean steel surfaces to be coated with inorganic zinc under SSPCSP NACE no. . After blast cleaning surfaces must have a dense uniform angular anchor pattern of .
to .
mils when measured under ASTM D. Where shown spot blast clean existing painted steel surfaces under SSPCSP NACE no. . After blast cleaning surfaces must have a dense uniform angular anchor pattern of at least .
mils when measured under ASTM D. Seal journals bearings motors and moving parts before blast cleaning near machinery .
Reblast cleaned surfaces that rust or become contaminated before paint is applied .
Do not expose blastcleaned steel to relative humidity exceeding percent before painting .
.C Painting .Ca General Paint new structural steel as follows .
Apply the total thickness of undercoats before erection .
Apply finish and final coats after erection .
If a concrete deck is placed on steel members apply finish and final coats after deck placement. . After erection and deck placement clean and spot paint areas of damaged or deteriorated coating and exposed unpainted surfaces with undercoats to the specified thickness before applying subsequent coatings. . Clean and paint surfaces exposed to the atmosphere and inaccessible for painting after erection with the full number of coats before erection .
Paint existing structural steel as follows .
Apply a stripe coat of undercoat paint on all edges corners seams crevices interior angles junctions of joining members weld lines and similar surface irregularities .
The stripe coat must SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS completely hide the surface being covered .
If spot blast cleaning portions of the bridge apply the stripe coat of undercoat paint before each undercoat and follow with the undercoat as soon as practical .
If removing all existing paint from the bridge apply the undercoat first as soon as practical and follow with the stripe coat of undercoat paint for each undercoat . .
Apply the finish coats after the total dry film thickness of undercoat has been applied . .
Apply all undercoats and the st finish coat within days of initial cleaning activities .
Caulk contact surfaces of stiffeners railings builtup members or open seams more than mils wide with sealing compound or other authorized material .
Apply the sealing compound at least hours after the last application of undercoat unless otherwise authorized .
Cure the sealing compound under the manufacturers instructions before performing subsequent painting activities .
If no finish coats are applied the sealing compound color must be gray .
Limit the thickness of each paint application to allow uniform drying throughout the paint film .
Paint ungalvanized anchor bolt assemblies with applications of organic zincrich primer before installation .
You do not need to paint other metal surfaces to be embedded in concrete .
Prepare and paint the bottom surfaces of masonry plates and structural steel surfaces contacting elastomeric bearing pads or preformed fabric pads with the full number of applications before erection .
Except for abutting chord and column splices and column and truss shoe bases coat machine finished surfaces with an easily removed rust inhibitor .
Paint machinefinished surfaces of iron and steel castings with coat of shop paint .
Where bridge deck drains are located over steel girders paint the top and edges of top flanges beneath drains and for inches on each side of drains before installing the drains .
Paint surfaces of machinery exposed to air with coats of organic zincrich primer before installation .
Paint exposed surfaces after installation with finish coats of commercialquality gray gloss enamel .
.Cb Zinc Coating System .Cbi General Coatings for new structural steel and connections between new and existing structural steel must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS Zinc Coating System Requirements Description Coating Dry film thickness mils All new surfaces Undercoat Inorganic zinc primer AASHTO M Type I or II Finish coata Exterior grade latexb coats minimum each coat total Total thickness all coats Connections to existing structural steelc Undercoat Inorganic zinc primer AASHTO M Type I or II Finish coata Exterior grade latexb coats minimum each coat total Total thickness all coats aIf no finish coats are described .
A final coat of inorganic zinc primer is required .
Total thickness of undercoats and final coat must be from to mils bExterior grade latex must comply with section .B unless otherwise specified .
cIncludes the following locations .
New and existing contact surfaces .
Existing member surfaces under new HS bolt heads nuts or washers .
Bare surfaces of existing steel after trimming cutting drilling or reaming .
Areas within a inch radius from the point of application of heat for welding or flame cutting Strain inorganic zinc primer after mixing through a to mesh screen immediately before or when pouring into the spray pot .
Use an agitating spray pot .
The agitator or stirring rod must reach to within inches of the bottom of the spray pot and be moving at all times during painting .
The agitator must keep the coating well mixed .
Apply inorganic zinc primer by spray .
On areas inaccessible to spray application you may make limited applications if authorized by brush dauber or roller .
Zinc coatings must be free from dust dirt salt and other deleterious deposits and thoroughly cured before applying subsequent coats .
.Cbii Undercoat Use inorganic zinc primer within hours of initial mixing of components .
Apply the undercoat in or more applications within hours of starting blast cleaning .
Blast clean and repaint areas where mudcracking of the undercoat occurs .
Protect surfaces coated with Type II inorganic zinc from conditions that may cause the coating film to dissolve .
Blast clean and repaint areas of dissolved coating .
Remove dry spray by screening or other methods that minimize surface polishing before applying additional coats or final acceptance .
Dry film thickness after dry spray removal must comply with the specified thickness .
If damaged areas of the undercoat is .
More than percent of the total undercoated surface blast clean and repaint damaged areas with inorganic zinc .
percent or less of the total undercoated surface you may wire brush the damaged surfaces to remove loose or cracked coating and apply coats of organic zincrich primer SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS At faying surfaces the total undercoat dry film thickness must be from mil to the maximum allowable for Class B coatings as determined by certified testing under appendix A of Specification for Structural Joints Using HighStrength Bolts of the RCSC .
Complete the field testing of the undercoat and correct deficiencies before applying subsequent coats .
.Cbiii Final Coat Apply a final coat of inorganic zinc primer to undercoated surfaces that do not receive finish coats .
Use the same coating as used for the undercoat .
Lightly roughen areas to receive a final coat by abrasive blasting .
Use an abrasive no larger than mesh .
Protect undersurfaces of girder flanges from abrasive blasting .
Apply the final coat in application within hours of roughening .
The final coat dry film thickness must be from to mils .
.Cbiv Finish Coats Pressure rinse undercoated surfaces to receive finish coats .
Perform pressure rinsing at least hours after the final application of the undercoat .
Apply the st finish coat within hours of pressure rinsing .
Apply the st finish coat in applications .
The st application consists of a sprayapplied mist application .
Apply the nd application after the mist application has dried to a settotouch condition as determined using the procedure in section of ASTM D. Apply the nd finish coat after the st finish coat has dried hours unless authorized .
You may apply the nd finish coat in a single application .
The st finish coat color must match color no .
of FEDSTD .
The nd finish coat color must match color no .
of FEDSTD .
.Cc State Specification Paint Waterborne Coating System The State Specification paint waterborne coating system for existing structural steel must comply with the requirements shown in the following table State Specification Paint Waterborne Coating System Requirements Surface Description State specification PWB coating Dry film thickness mils Surfaces cleaned to bare metala st undercoat nd undercoat st finish coat .
nd finish coat .
Total thickness all coats Existing painted surfaces to be topcoated Undercoat st finish coat .
nd finish coat .
Total thickness new coats aIncludes locations of spot blast cleaning Allow at least hours of drying time before applying the subsequent undercoat or finish coats unless otherwise authorized .
.Cd MoistureCured Polyurethane Coating System Reserved .D Payment Not Used SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS .
PAINTING STEEL SOLDIER PILES .A General Section .
includes specifications for preparing and painting steel soldier piles .
Where shown prepare and paint steel soldier piles under the specifications for painting new structural steel in section .. .B Materials Not Used .C Construction Repair damaged areas of the undercoat before installing piles .
Protect the exposed exterior flange and flange edges of undercoated piles from lean concrete backfill to minimize undercoating repairs .
After removing lean concrete backfill repair damaged or deteriorated undercoat by blast cleaning and repainting with the same inorganic zinc coating as used for the undercoat .
Apply final or finish coats after installation and excavation are complete .
Caulk open joints between concrete and steel soldier piles with sealing compound or other authorized material .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED PAINTING GALVANIZED SURFACES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for preparing and painting galvanized metal surfaces. . MATERIALS Coatings must comply with either State Specification PWBA or with section .. . CONSTRUCTION Clean galvanized surfaces by pressure washing or steam cleaning .
Roughen galvanized areas after cleaning by abrasive blasting .
Use an abrasive no larger than mesh .
Do not remove galvanizing .
Apply finish coats in at least applications .
Apply the st finish coat the same day abrasive blasting is performed unless otherwise authorized .
Apply the nd finish coat after the st finish coat has dried at least hours unless otherwise authorized .
The dry film thickness of each finish coat must be at least mils .
The dry film thickness of all coats must be from to mils .
The nd finish coat color must match color no .
of FEDSTD. . PAYMENT Not Used PAINTING SIGN STRUCTURES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for preparing and painting sign structures .
Preparing and painting of sign structures must comply with sections and .
Instead of submitting proof of the certification complying with SSPCQP you may submit documentation with the painting quality work plan showing compliance with the requirements in section of SSPCQP .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS Instead of submitting proof of the certification complying with SSPCQP you may submit documentation with the painting quality work plan showing compliance with the requirements in sections .
through .
of SSPCQP Category A .
Instead of submitting proof of the certification complying with AISCSSPCQP enclosed shop you may submit documentation with the painting quality work plan showing compliance with the requirements in sections through of AISCSSPCQP . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General You may prepare and paint sign structures before or after erection .
After erection repair any damaged paint .
The total dry film thickness of finish coats on contact surfaces of galvanized HS bolted connections must be from to mils and may be applied in application .
.B Undercoating of Ungalvanized Surfaces Blastcleaned surfaces must receive a single undercoat consisting of an inorganic zinc coating as specified in AASHTO M Type I or Type II except .
The first sentences of section .
do not apply . .
Section .. does not apply .
If you propose to use a coating that is not on the Authorized Material List for inorganic zincrich primer submit the required documentation specified in section .
of AASHTO M . Allow days for the Engineers review .
.C Testing of Inorganic Zinc Coating Perform adhesion and hardness testing at least hours after application of the single undercoat of inorganic zinc coating .
.D Finish Coats The exposed area of inorganic zinc coating must receive at least finish coats of exterior grade latex paint .
The st finish coat color must match no .
of FEDSTD .
The nd finish coat color must match no .
of FEDSTD. . PAYMENT Not Used THERMAL SPRAY COAT STRUCTURAL STEEL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for coating steel surfaces with a thermal spray coating .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of wire feedstock .
.C Coating Quality Work Plan Submit copies of a coating quality work plan for thermal spray coating activities .
Allow days for the Departments review .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS Submit the work plan after attending the precoating meeting and include .
Names of the coating contractor and any subcontractors to be used .
copy each of applicable ASTM and SSPC specifications or qualification procedures .
Materials methods and equipment to be used .
Proof of certification for each thermal spray coating operator .
Methods to control environmental conditions .
Methods to protect the coating during shipping handling and storage .
Procedures for containing blast media .
Examples of proposed daily reports for testing to be performed including type of testing location time weather conditions test personnel and results .D Quality Assurance .D General Each thermal spray coating operator must be certified under AWS C.C.M .
.D Precoating Meeting Before starting coating activities conduct a precoating meeting to discuss coating quality work plan requirements .
Meeting attendees must include the Engineer and all coating subcontractors .
.D Test Coupons Thermal spray coating operators must prepare test coupons for bend testing before each work shift .
Test coupons must .
Be by inches by inch thick .
Be of the same material as the surface to be coated .
Pass bend test requirements before the operator starts production work Bend test coupons under section .
of SSPCCS .AWS C .MNACE no. . Coupons must exhibit no cracking with lifting from substrate .
.D Quality Control The Engineer selects the test locations .
If repairs are required retest rejected areas after completing repairs .
Test the surface profile of blastcleaned steel under ASTM D Method C. Perform tests for the first sq ft of blastcleaned steel and test for every sq ft thereafter .
Test blastcleaned steel for soluble salts before coating .
Levels of soluble salts must not exceed gsq cm .
Perform tests for the first sq ft placed during a shift and test for every sq ft thereafter .
Inspect surfaces for visual cleanliness under SSPCSP NACE no .
before applying coating .
Test coating thickness under section .
of SSPCCS .AWS C .MNACE no . .
Perform test for every sq ft of coating and test for each faying surface .
Perform cut testing under SSPCCS .AWS C .MNACE no . .
Perform tests of cuts for every sq ft of coating .
Surfaces must exhibit no peeling or delamination .
Test coating adhesion to steel before applying seal coating .
Thermal spray coating must have an adhesion to substrate of at least psi .
Perform tests for every sq ft of coating .
Repair areas represented by tests failing adhesion or cut testing by removing and reapplying coating. . MATERIALS Abrasives must be slag or mineral abrasive or steel or recycled steel .
Wire feedstock must be ZnAl complying with ASTM B. Seal coat paint must be authorized before use .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL COATINGS .
CONSTRUCTION Do not apply coating when the steel surface temperature is less than degrees F. Prepare the surfaces under section .Ca .
Blast clean surfaces under SSPCSP NACE no . .
Surfaces must have a sharp angular anchor pattern of from .
to .
mils .
Reblast surfaces that rust or become contaminated before coating is applied .
Apply coating using arcspray equipment within hours of starting blast cleaning .
Coating thickness must be mils .
Coating thickness on faying surfaces must be not more than mils .
Apply a seal coating to thermal spraycoated surfaces .
Apply the seal coat within hours of applying the thermal spray coating .
Dry film thickness must be from .
to .
mils .
Do not apply the seal coating to faying surfaces .
You may field weld thermal spraycoated surfaces if authorized in advance .
Remove thermal spray coating from weld locations by blast cleaning under SSPCSP NACE no .
or with power tools under SSPCSP immediately before welding .
Recoat welded connections after fabrication .
Repair test areas of thermal spray coating that meet adhesion and cut test requirements with coats of organic zincrich primer. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED EXISTING STRUCTURES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for performing work on existing structures .
Work performed on existing structures must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used STRUCTURE REMOVAL .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for removing structures or portions of structures .
Design and construct temporary support shoring temporary bracing and protective covers under section .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Before removing portions of monolithic concrete elements make a inchdeep saw cut to a true line along the limits of removal on faces of the element that will be visible in the completed work .
Remove piling piers abutments footings and pedestals to foot below the ground line or feet below finished grade whichever is lower .
Protect existing reinforcement to be incorporated into the new work from damage .
Thoroughly remove all material adhering to the existing reinforcement before embedding the existing reinforcement in new concrete .
Do not use explosives .
Do not use the following for breaking or removing concrete attached to or supported by bridges .
Tools with a manufacturersrated striking energy of more than ftlb per blow .
Freely falling mass .
Falling mass attached to a cable rope or chain Do not use a freely falling mass or a falling mass attached to a cable rope or chain above any public space .
Do not use falling masses within feet horizontally of any public space without protective covers .
Design and construct protective covers shoring and falsework with sufficient strength and rigidity to support all imposed loads .
Covers must be at least equal to inch Douglasfir planking on posts spaced at foot centers The Engineer may require you to remove existing footing concrete that is below ground and outside of the footing limits .
This work is change order work .
.D Payment Not Used SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .
BRIDGE REMOVAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for removing bridges or portions of bridges .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals If a daily inspection report is required submit the daily inspection report as an informational submittal .
Submit a bridge removal work plan for each bridge .
Include details for the following .
Removal sequence including staging of removal activities and equipment locations .
Temporary support shoring or bracing .
Locations where work is performed over traffic utilities or railroad property .
Locations and types of protective covers .
Protection of people property utilities and improvements .
Methods for preventing material equipment and debris from falling onto traffic or railroad property If protective covers are required or superstructure removal work is performed bridge removal work plans must be accompanied by substantiating calculations and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Calculations for bridge removal work plans must demonstrate the stability of the structure during each stage of removal and must include dead and live loads used in the design of the protective covers .
A stage is removal of the deck soffit or girders in any span or walls bent caps or columns at support locations .
If an unplanned event occurs or the removal activities deviate from the authorized work plan immediately submit procedures proposed to correct or remedy this occurrence .
The procedures must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the State .
Allow days for review of the bridge removal work plan .
.A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Quality Control For bridge removal work plans signed by a registered engineer the engineer signing the work plan must .
Be present at all times during bridge removal activities . .
Prepare a daily inspection report for removal activities .
The daily inspection report must describe work activities for each day and the condition of the remaining structure .
A copy of the report must be available at the job site at all times .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Design Criteria for Temporary Support Shoring and Temporary Bracing The horizontal load to be resisted in any direction for temporary support shoring and temporary bracing must be the sum of actual horizontal loads due to equipment construction sequence or other causes plus an allowance for wind and not less than percent of the total dead load of the structure being removed .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .C Construction .C General The Engineer may require you to perform additional exploratory work of bridge members for unforeseen damage .
This work is change order work .
You may use flame and saw cutting for removing widening or modifying bridges .
If complete bridges are removed do not start removal activities until traffic is no longer carried on the bridge .
For bridge removal activities over or adjacent to roadways that are only closed to traffic when removal work is being performed .
Have all necessary personnel materials and equipment to complete the work onsite before closing the roadway .
Perform activities without interruption until the roadway is reopened . .
Perform bridge removal activities only when the roadway is closed to traffic except as specified for preliminary work. . During roadway closures debris from bridge removal activities may fall directly onto the roadway if protection is furnished for highway facilities .
Minimum protection for paved areas is a footthick earthen pad or a inchthick steel plate placed over the impact area .
Before reopening the roadway all debris protective pads and devices must be removed and the roadway swept clean with wet power sweepers or equivalent methods. . For girder bridges completely remove each girder within a span before starting removal of the adjacent girder. . For slab bridges perform removal activities within a span along a front parallel with the primary reinforcing steel .
Temporary support shoring temporary bracing and protective covers must not encroach within feet horizontally or feet vertically of traffic lanes or shoulders open to traffic .
Temporary support shoring temporary bracing and protective covers over railroad property must conform to guidelines of the railroad company involved and provide the minimum clearances specified for railroad traffic .
.C Protective Covers Provide protective covers for removal work over traffic or railroad property .
Protective covers must .
Be constructed before starting removal activities . .
Prevent any materials equipment or debris from falling onto traffic or railroad property. . Be supported using shoring falsework or the existing structure . .
Provide the openings specified in section .
If no openings are specified for removal work provide a vertical opening of feet and a horizontal opening of feet for traffic. . Be cleaned of debris and fines before being removed .
At locations where only bridge railing is removed protective covers must extend from the face of the exterior girder or at least feet inside of the railing to be removed to at least feet beyond the outside face of the railing .
At locations where entire girders are removed protective covers must extend at least feet beyond the outside face of the bridge railing .
A separate protective cover is not required during removal of bridge segments if portions of the bridge satisfy the requirements for protective covers .
.C Preliminary Work Preliminary work is limited to activities that will not reduce the structural strength or stability of the bridge or bridge elements to a hazardous level as determined by the Engineer or do not cause debris or any other material to fall onto the roadway .
You may perform preliminary work if you use protective covers .
Protective covers must .
Support all loads SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .
Prevent dust and fine material from falling onto the traveled way .
Extend at least feet beyond the limit of the work being performed .
Bottom slabs of box girders may be considered as protective covers for preliminary work performed on top slabs inside the limits of the exterior girders .
Use temporary support shoring and bracing during preliminary work if needed to ensure the stability of the bridge .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED STRUCTURE REHABILITATION .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for rehabilitating structures .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
BRIDGE DECK REPAIR AND PREPARATION .A General Section .
includes specifications for repairing concrete deck surfaces and preparing concrete deck surfaces to receive an overlay or a deck treatment .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Rapid Setting Concrete Rapid setting concrete must comply with the specifications for bonding materials in section .C .
You may extend rapid setting concrete using a clean uniform and rounded aggregate filler with a moisture content of no more than .
percent .
Aggregate gradation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
The amount of aggregate filler must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Concrete strengths for extended concrete must be at least as specified for magnesium phosphate concrete .
Combine components of dualcomponent magnesium phosphate by mixing only complete units supplied by the manufacturer .
Do not add water to dualcomponent magnesium phosphate .
.C Construction .C General Before starting deck rehabilitation activities complete the removal of any traffic stripes pavement markings and pavement markers .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES Coarse aggregate remaining above the removal depth must be firmly embedded .
Highpressure water jet equipment must have rotating or oscillating jets and be rated at psi minimum .
Cold milling equipment must .
Have a minimum concrete removal depth of inch .
Provide a surface relief of at most inch .
Provide a inch grade tolerance Cold milling equipment must have .
or riding tracks .
Automatic grade control system with electronic averaging with sensors on each side .
Conveyer system that leaves no debris on the bridge .
Drum that operates in an upmilling direction .
Bullet tooth tools with tungsten carbide steel cutting tips .
Maximum tool spacing of inch .
Maximum operating weight of lb .
Maximum track unit weight of lbft .
New tooth tools at the start of the work Provide personnel on each side of the milling drum to monitor milling activities .
Maintain constant radio communication with the operator during milling activities .
.C Removing Concrete Deck Surface Remove the concrete deck surface to the depth described .
Before the removing concrete sweep the deck surface and blow the deck clean with highpressure air .
Remove the deck surface by cold milling or highpressure water jetting .
.C Removing Asphalt Concrete Surfacing Where shown remove asphalt concrete surfacing and reinforced concrete expansion dams from concrete bridges and approaches .
Before removing asphalt concrete surfacing verify the depth of the surfacing at the supports and midspans of each structure in each shoulder in the traveled way and at the roadway crown if a crown is present .
Remove asphalt concrete surfacing by cold milling .
At least inch of asphalt concrete surfacing must remain after milling activities .
Remove the remaining asphalt surfacing using other authorized means .
Do not damage the concrete slab .
.C Removing Seals Where shown remove bituminous chip seals bituminous slurry seals and polymer chip seals from bridge decks by grinding .
Grinding must comply with section .
Remove no more than inch of concrete deck surface .
.C Removing Unsound Concrete Where shown remove unsound portions of bridge decks curbs and railings .
Unsound concrete is concrete that emits a dead or hollow sound when chained or tapped with a metal tool .
The Engineer determines the soundness of concrete .
Equipment and tools that in the Engineers opinion remove excess quantities of sound concrete are not allowed .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES For bridges over railroads stop removal activities when trains pass under the bridge .
Reinforcing steel exposed after removing unsound concrete must be restored to position and blocked and tied under section .
Replace or repair reinforcing steel damaged and rendered useless during removal .
.C Rapid Setting Concrete Patch Before placing rapid setting concrete patches abrasive blast clean the contact surfaces of existing concrete and reinforcing steel .
Remove at least inch of concrete and all foreign material .
Immediately before placing new concrete clean surfaces by sweeping and pressure jetting or other authorized means to remove debris .
The surface temperature of the existing concrete must be at least degrees F during placement of the rapid setting concrete .
Contact surfaces to receive magnesium phosphate concrete must be dry .
Contact surfaces to receive modified highalumina concrete or portlandcementbased concrete may be damp but not saturated .
Magnesium phosphate concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing zinc cadmium aluminum or copper .
Modified highalumina based concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing aluminum .
Do not retemper concrete .
Finishing tools cleaned with water must be thoroughly dried before working concrete .
The Engineer may require that you use a flowcontrolled modified concrete on slopes greater than percent .
Cure modifiedhighaluminabased concrete and portlandcement based concrete using the curing compound method .
Do not cure magnesium phosphate concrete .
.C Prepare Concrete Deck Surface Prepare concrete bridge decks after the removal of any unsound concrete and placement of any rapid setting concrete patches and before applying deck treatments or placing deck overlays .
Perform the following activities in the order listed .
Abrasive blast the deck surface with steel shot .
Steel shot must comply with SSPCAB .
Recycled steel shot must comply with SSPCAB . .
Sweep the deck surface. . Blow the deck surface clean using highpressure air .
The deck surface must be dry when abrasive blasting is performed .
Remove all laitance surface contaminants and foreign material from the deck surface .
If the deck surface becomes contaminated before placing the deck treatment or overlay abrasive blast clean the contaminated area and sweep the deck clean .
.C.C Reserved .D Payment The payment quantity for rapid setting concrete patch is the volume determined from scale weights divided by a plastic density of lbcu ft .
If rapid setting concrete is used to fill voids from the removal of unsound concrete the payment quantity for remove unsound concrete is the same as the payment quantity for rapid setting concrete patch .
No deduction is made for concrete used to fill spalls that existed before the work began. . BRIDGE DECK TREATMENT .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for treating bridge decks .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .A Materials Not Used .A Construction Not Used .A Payment Not Used .B Methacrylate Resin Bridge Deck Treatment .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for treating bridge decks with a highmolecularweight methacrylate resin .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Submit a work plan for applying the methacrylate resin treatment .
Include in the plan .
Schedule of work for the test area and for each bridge .
Description of equipment for applying resin .
Range of gel time and final cure time for resin .
Description of absorbent material to be used .
Description of equipment for applying and removing excess sand and absorbent material .
Procedure for removing resin from the deck and equipment to be used .
Procedure for storing and handling resin components and absorbent material .
Procedure for disposing of excess resin and containers Submit an SDS for each resin component and diatomaceous earth shipment before use .
Submit test samples of methacrylate resin components at least days before use .
.Bd Quality Assurance Complete a test area before starting deck treatment activities .
Notify the Engineer at least days before treating the test area .
The test area must be .
At least sq ft .
Located within the project limits outside the traveled way at an authorized location .
Constructed using the same materials equipment and construction methods to be used in the work and under conditions similar to those anticipated when the work will be performed .
The completed test area must demonstrate compliance with these specifications and work will be completed within the time allowed .
The Engineer performs friction testing of the treated test area under California Test .
Allow days after completion of the test area for the Engineer to perform the test .
Do not perform deck treatment activities until the test area is authorized .
The authorized test area is the standard of comparison in determining the acceptability of treated deck surfaces .
The Engineer may perform testing under California Test to verify the coefficient of friction of the treated deck surfaces .
The coefficient of friction of the treated surface must be at least .
when tested under California Test .
.B Materials Highmolecularweight methacrylate resin consists of resin promoter and initiator .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES Highmolecularweight methacrylate resin must be low odor and comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Volatile contenta max ASTM D Viscositya max cP Brookfield RV with UL adaptor RPM at C ASTM D Specific gravitya min at C ASTM D . Flash pointa min C ASTM D Vapor pressurea max mm Hg at C ASTM D . Tackfree time max minutes at C Prepare specimens under California Test PCCsaturated surfacedry bond strength min psi at hours and F California Test aPerform test before adding the initiator .
Sand for the abrasive sand finish must be a commercialquality dryblast sand .
The size of the sand must be such that not less than percent passes the no .
sieve and not less than percent is retained on the no .
sieve when tested under California Test .
Absorbent material must be diatomaceous earth abrasive blast dust or an authorized substitute recommended by the resin supplier .
.B Construction Notify the Engineer at least days before delivery of methacrylate resin components in containers larger than gallons to the job site .
The Engineer determines the exact methacrylate resin application rate at time of placement .
Highmolecularweight methacrylate resin applied by machine must be combined in volumetric streams of promoted resin to initiated resin by static inline mixers and applied without atomization .
You may apply resin manually .
Mix at most gallons of resin at a time .
The deck must be dry before applying resin .
The concrete surface must be from to degrees F. Relative humidity must be not more than percent during the work shift .
Thoroughly mix all resin components .
Apply resin to the deck within minutes of mixing at an approximate application rate of sq ftgal .
Resin that thickens during application is rejected .
Uniformly spread the resin .
Completely cover surfaces to be treated and fill all cracks .
Redistribute excess resin using squeegees or brooms within minutes of application .
For textured or grooved deck surfaces remove excess resin from the texture indentations .
Apply the abrasive sand finish no sooner than minutes after applying the resin .
The sand application rate must be at least lbsq yd or until saturation as determined by the Engineer .
Apply absorbent material before opening the lane to traffic .
Remove excess sand and absorbent material by vacuuming or power sweeping .
Traffic or equipment is not allowed on the treated surface until you have verified that the following conditions have been met and the Engineer has authorized the opening of the treated surface to traffic and equipment .
Treated deck surface is tack free and not oily .
Sand cover adheres and resists brushing by hand .
Excess sand and absorbent material has been removed .
No material will be tracked beyond the limits of treatment by traffic Remove resin from the deck surface if the Engineer determines the conditions listed above have not been met and the allowable lane closure time will be exceeded .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .B Payment The payment quantity for furnish bridge deck treatment material is the volume of mixed highmolecular weight methacrylate resin placed .
.C.J Reserved .
DECK OVERLAYS .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for overlaying concrete bridge decks .
.A Materials Not Used .A Construction Not Used .A Payment Not Used .B Polyester Concrete Overlays .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for placing polyester concrete overlays on concrete bridge decks .
Placing polyester concrete overlay includes placing a prime coat of methacrylate resin to the bridge deck before placing the polyester concrete overlay .
Furnishing polyester concrete includes furnishing and placing the trial overlay and concrete base for the trial overlay .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Submit a work plan for the placement of the deck overlay .
Include the following in the work plan .
Schedule of overlay work for each bridge and a schedule of work for any trial overlays .
Description of equipment for applying methacrylate resin .
Description of equipment for measuring mixing placing and finishing the polyester concrete overlay .
Method for isolating expansion joints .
Cure time for polyester concrete .
Description of equipment for applying sand .
Method for storage and handling of methacrylate resin and polyester concrete components .
Method for disposal of excess methacrylate resin polyester concrete and containers For each shipment of methacrylate and polyester concrete submit an SDS for each component .
Submit test samples of methacrylate and polyester resins at least days before use .
Submit aggregate and resin volumes recorded from the volumetric mixer at the end of each work shift .
.Bd Quality Assurance Complete a trial polyester concrete overlay before starting overlay activities .
Notify the Engineer at least days before constructing the trial overlay .
The trial overlay must be .
At least by feet and the same thickness as the overlay shown .
Constructed on a prepared concrete base within the project limits at an authorized location SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .
Constructed using the same materials equipment and construction methods to be used in the work and under conditions similar to those anticipated when the work will be performed Use the trial overlay to determine the initial polyesterconcrete set time .
The Engineer performs friction testing of the trial overlay under California Test .
Allow days after completion of the trial overlay for the Engineer to perform the testing .
The completed trial overlay must demonstrate compliance with these specifications and that the work will be completed within the time allowed .
Do not perform overlay activities until the trial overlay is authorized .
The authorized trial overlay is the standard of comparison in determining the acceptability of the overlay .
The Engineer may perform testing under California Test to verify the coefficient of friction of the overlay surfaces .
Dispose of the trial overlay and concrete base after acceptance of all polyester concrete overlay surfaces .
.B Materials Polyester concrete consists of polyester resin binder and aggregate .
Polyester resin binder must .
Be an unsaturated isophthalic polyesterstyrene copolymer .
Contain not less than percent by weight gammamethacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane an organosilane ester silane coupler .
Be used with a promoter compatible with suitable methyl ethyl ketone peroxide and cumene hydroperoxide initiators .
Comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Viscositya cP RV no .
spindle RPM at C ASTM D Specific gravitya at C ASTM D .. Elongation min Type I specimen . . inch thick Rate .
inmin ASTM D Sample Conditioning ASTM D Tensile strength min psi Type I specimen . . inch thick Rate .
inmin ASTM D Sample conditioning ASTM D Styrene contenta by weight ASTM D PCC saturated surfacedry bond strength min psi at hours and F California Test Static volatile emissiona max gramsq m loss SCAQMD Method aTest must be performed before adding initiator .
Aggregate for polyester concrete must .
Comply with sections .C .C and .C except fine aggregate must consist of natural sand .
Have not more than percent crushed particles retained on the no .
sieve when tested under California Test .
Have a weightedaverage aggregate absorption of not more than percent when tested under California Tests and SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .
At the time of mixing with resin have a moisture content of not more than one half of the weighted average aggregate absorption when tested under California Test .
Comply with the percentage passing limits for one of the aggregate gradations shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation Sieve size Percentage passing inch maximum No .
maximum No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
Highmolecularweight methacrylate for the resin prime coat must comply with section .B except .
Methacrylate resin must be free of wax .
Tackfree time requirements do not apply .
Friction testing is not required for the resin prime coat Sand for abrasive sand finish must .
Be commercialquality blast sand .
Be graded such that not less than percent passes the no .
sieve and not less than percent is retained on the no .
sieve when tested under California Test .
Have an average absorption of not more than percent when tested under California Test .B Construction .Ba General Notify the Engineer at least days before delivery of methacrylate resin components in containers larger than gallons to the job site .
The Engineer provides the final grade and cross slope before the start of overlay work .
The Engineer tests existing deck surface smoothness under section .Dbii and may require you to modify the existing deck smoothness under section .
Modifying the existing deck smoothness is change order work .
Complete the construction of approach slabs before placing polyester overlay .
New concrete deck surfaces must comply with section .F before starting overlay work .
.Bb Placing Methacrylate Resin The Engineer determines the exact percentage of polyester resin binder at the time of placing .
The deck must be dry before placing the methacrylate prime coat .
The concrete surface must be from to degrees F and the relative humidity must be not more than percent .
Sweep the deck and blow it clean with compressed air .
Thoroughly mix all components of the methacrylate resin .
Apply the resin to the deck surface within minutes of mixing .
Apply the resin uniformly and spread to completely cover surfaces to be overlaid .
Apply methacrylate resin at an approximate rate of sq ftgal .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES Place methacrylate prime coat on magnesium phosphate concrete patches no sooner than hours after final set or on modified highalumina based concrete patches no sooner than minutes after final set .
.Bc Placing Polyester Concrete Use a continuous mixer to mix polyester concrete .
The continuous mixer must .
Employ an auger screw device with a discharge chute .
Be equipped with an automatic metering device that measures and records aggregate and resin volumes .
Have a visible readout gage that displays volumes of aggregate and resin being recorded .
Be certified under California Test before use .
Produce a satisfactory mix consistently during a demonstration Record polyester concrete volumes at least every minutes including time and date .
Finishing equipment for polyester concrete must .
Have grade control capabilities resulting in a roadway surface that meets the smoothness requirements of section .Dbii and is capable of adjusting for a variable thickness overlay along and across the existing deck surface .
The use of fixed height skidsupported strike off equipment is not allowed. . Be used to consolidate the polyester concrete .
Have a foot minimum paving width Place polyester concrete .
Immediately after applying the methacrylate prime coat .
Before gelling occurs .
Within minutes of adding the initiator The weight of resin binder must be approximately percent of the weight of the aggregate .
Polyester concrete must have an initial set time from to minutes when tested using an initialsettingtime Gillmore needle under ASTM C. Consolidate and finish the overlay to the required grade and cross section using finishing equipment .
Polyester concrete must be consolidated to a relative compaction of not less than percent when tested under California Test .
Texture the polyester concrete surface before gelling occurs by longitudinal tining under .Fbiii except do not perform initial texturing .
Apply a sand finish of not less than .
lbsq yd before gelling occurs .
Protect the overlay from moisture for at least hours after finishing .
Do not allow traffic or equipment on the overlay for at least hours after final finishing .
Completed polyester concrete deck surfaces must have a uniform surface texture with a coefficient of friction of at least .
when tested under California Test and a surface smoothness complying with section .Dbii .
Taper the polyester concrete overlay edges if the overlay is not completed within the allowable lane closure time and is more than inch higher in elevation than the adjacent pavement .
Taper the edges that are transverse to the direction of traffic at a horizontalvertical slope .
Taper the edges that are longitudinal to the direction of traffic at a horizontalvertical slope .
Tapers may remain and be overlaid with polyester concrete overlay .
.B Payment The payment quantity for furnish polyester concrete overlay is the volume determined using .
Quantity of resin binder used .
Percentage by weight of resin binder in the polyester concrete .
Unit weight of lbcu ft SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .C Polyester Concrete Expansion Dams .C General .Ca Summary Section .C includes specifications for constructing polyester concrete expansion dams .
Polyester concrete expansion dams must comply with the specifications for polyester concrete overlays in section .B except a trial overlay is not required .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
.Cb Definitions Reserved .Cc Submittals Reserved .Cd Quality Assurance Reserved .C Materials Not Used .C Construction For new asphalt concrete overlays place the asphalt concrete overlay before starting polyester concrete activities .
Saw cut and remove asphalt concrete at expansion dam locations .
For existing asphalt concrete overlays remove expansion dams and asphalt concrete to the limits shown .
Removing expansion dams must comply with section .
except a bridge removal work plan is not required .
Where a portion of the asphalt concrete overlay is to remain saw cut a inchdeep true line along the edge to remain in place before removing the asphalt concrete .
Do not damage the existing surfacing to remain in place .
Prepare the deck surface under section .C .
You may use a mechanical mixer to mix the polyester concrete for expansion dams .
The mixer capacity must not exceed cu ft unless authorized .
Initiate the resin and thoroughly blend it immediately before mixing it with the aggregate .
Mix the polyester concrete for at least minutes before placing .
The application rate of methacrylate resin must be approximately sq ftgal .
You may place and finish expansion dams using hand methods .
Protect expansion dams from moisture traffic and equipment for at least hours after finishing .
For expansion dams over feet long install inchwide joint material at foot intervals across the width of the expansion dam .
Joint material must be either expanded polyurethane or expanded polyethylene .
.C Payment The payment quantity for polyester concrete expansion dam is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
.D Concrete Overlays .D General Section .D includes specifications for overlaying bridge decks with concrete .
Constructing concrete overlays must comply with section .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .D Materials Not Used .D Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .E Multilayer Polymer Overlays Reserved .F.M Reserved .
REPAIRING STRUCTURES .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for repairing structures .
.A Materials Not Used .A Construction Not Used .A Payment Not Used .B Repairing Spalled Surface Areas .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for repairing spalled concrete surfaces except on bridge decks .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals For alternative filler material submit a test sample of at least complete unit of all materials for repairing the concrete surfaces .
Allow days for testing .
For a contract with less than original working days submit certificates of compliance for the filler material and bonding agents .
.Bd Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Mortar must comply with section .F .
Shotcrete must comply with section .
Alternative filler materials and bonding agents must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Abrasion resistance max grams at days California Test Modulus of elasticity psi at days California Test .
x to .
x Water soluble chlorides max mgkg California Test Water soluble sulfates max mgkg California Test For a contract with less than original working days alternative materials must be authorized before use .
.B Construction Remove unsound concrete under section .C .
Clean concrete surfaces and existing reinforcing steel by abrasive blasting before placing filler material .
Place reinforcing steel where shown .
Fill spalled surface areas under section .F or you may use an authorized alternative filler material and bonding agent .
If using an alternative filler material apply a bonding epoxy before placing the filler material .
Place the filler material under the manufacturers instructions .
If using shotcrete you may apply the shotcrete using a drymix process with a hydration liquid applied immediately after placing the shotcrete .
The final surface finish of the patched concrete surface must comply with section .F .
Patched concrete must emit a ringing sound similar to adjacent sound concrete when struck with a metal tool days after placement .
Removing and patching spalled concrete more than inches deep is change order work .
.B Payment The payment quantity for repair spalled surface area is the area measured of the completed repaired surface .
Measured areas are recorded daily by the Engineer and agreed upon by you .
.C Epoxy Crack Injection .C General .Ca Summary Section .C includes specifications for filling cracks in concrete structures with pressureinjected epoxy .
.Cb Definitions Reserved .Cc Submittals Reserved .Cd Quality Assurance Before starting injection activities and at hourly intervals when requested take a ounce sample of mixed epoxy from the injection gun .
If samples show improper proportioning or mixing stop injection activities and correct deficiencies .
.C Materials Epoxy must comply with the specifications for epoxy resin adhesive for injection grouting of concrete pavement .
Multiple formulations may be required for cracks of varying widths .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .C Construction The Engineer selects cracks having widths from to mils for injection and filling .
Clean cracks of material that would impair bonding of epoxy using oilfree compressed air .
Remove any remaining material by flushing with water under pressure .
After flushing blow cracks clean with oilfree compressed air .
Insert injection ports into cracks .
Space the ports not more than a distance equal to the thickness of the concrete being injected .
Spacing at ends of cracks must be equal to half the concrete thickness .
Adjust port spacing to ensure epoxy substantially fills the cracks .
Seal the crack surfaces between ports with tape or other temporary sealant capable of retaining epoxy in cracks during pressure injection and until epoxy has hardened .
Concrete temperature must be from to degrees F during injection activities .
Pressure inject epoxy adhesive into cracks through injection ports .
Use the lowest practical pumping pressure .
Injection equipment must maintain epoxy proportion and mix consistency .
Fill cracks completely .
Do not allow epoxy to run down the face of the concrete from the head of the injection gun .
Start injection at the st port at the end of a crack .
Pump epoxy into the port until epoxy runs substantially from the adjacent port .
Seal the st port and start injection from the next port .
Continue in this manner until the crack is filled .
For slanting or vertical cracks start injecting at the lower end of the crack .
Where vertical and horizontal cracks intersect inject the vertical crack below the intersection first .
Seal ports by removing the fitting filling the void with epoxy and covering the void with tape or surface sealant .
Leave the sealing tape and temporary surface sealant in place until the epoxy has hardened .
Clean excess epoxy from concrete surfaces exposed to public view after removing sealant .
.C Payment For cracks extending around corners of members the payment quantity for inject crack epoxy is the crack length measured on both faces including the crack length shown to be filled on the opposite side of a member that is completely filled after injection from only side .
.D HeatStraighten Steel Girders Reserved .E.J Reserved ..
RESERVED MODIFYING STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for modifying structures .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
REFINISHING BRIDGE DECKS .A General Section .
includes specifications for refinishing bridge decks .
The Engineer determines the exact area to be refinished .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .B Materials Concrete for refinishing bridge decks must be either portland cement concrete or rapid setting concrete .
Portland cement concrete must comply with section and the following .
Concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard. . Free water must not exceed lbcu yd . .
Aggregate must contain from to percent fine aggregate .
The remaining portion must be pea gravel .
Grade pea gravel such that percent passes the inch sieve and at most percent passes the no .
sieve . .
Engineer may request that admixtures be used .
Rapid setting concrete must comply with section .. Epoxy adhesive must comply with the specifications for epoxy adhesive for bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete .
.C Construction .C General For removal work performed within feet of a traffic lane or over a traffic lane remove the dust and residue using an authorized vacuum a water spray or a shield method .
Make a inchdeep saw cut around the perimeter of the deck to be refinished .
Remove concrete in areas to be refinished to a depth of approximately inch .
Do not damage concrete to remain in place .
Prepare existing deck areas more than inch below adjoining deck surfaces by removing at least inch of surface material to expose sound aggregate .
Remove concrete by abrasive blast cutting abrasive sawing impact tool cutting machine rotary abrading or other methods .
Removal methods must be authorized .
Clean prepared areas of dust and loose and deleterious materials by brooming abrasive blast cleaning and using highpressure air .
Reblast contaminated areas before starting concrete placement activities .
Protect existing reinforcement exposed during concrete removal .
Cut off dowels inch below the existing deck surface or at the bottom of concrete removal whichever is lower .
Where refinishing is not required cut dowels off inch below the finished surface .
Patch holes with rapid setting concrete complying with section .. You may refinish isolated high areas by cutting the concrete down flush with adjoining deck surfaces .
Use abrasive sawing grinding impact tool cutting or other authorized methods .
Fill prepared areas flush with the plane of the adjoining deck using concrete .
Transversely score fresh concrete surfaces .
Use a stiffbristled broom or other suitable device .
Completed surfaces must have a uniform texture with a coefficient of friction of at least .
when tested under California Test .
Grind or groove surfaces having a coefficient of friction less than .
under section .
Refinished surfaces must be flush with the adjoining surface and not vary more than .
foot from the lower edge of a foot straightedge placed in the longitudinal direction .
.C Placing Portland Cement Concrete Abrasiveblast clean concrete surfaces to be refinished .
Sweep blastcleaned surfaces and blow them clean using highpressure air .
Apply an epoxy adhesive to cleaned surfaces immediately after cleaning .
Surfaces must be dry and have a temperature of at least degrees F when applying the adhesive .
The Engineer determines the application rate .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES Place concrete on fresh epoxy adhesive .
Consolidate concrete immediately after placement until voids are filled and free mortar appears on the surface .
Strike off concrete to the required grade .
Cure concrete under section .H .
Do not apply loads of any type to the concrete until at least days after placement .
.C Placing Rapid Setting Concrete Blow surfaces to be refinished with highpressure air immediately before placing rapid setting concrete .
Abrasiveblast clean concrete surfaces that are contaminated before the concrete is placed .
Do not allow traffic on concrete until hours after final set unless authorized .
.D Payment The payment quantity for refinish bridge deck is the sum of the area measured along the surface and .
square foot for patching around each dowel .
The Department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the refinish bridge deck quantity. . ACCESS OPENINGS .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing access openings and closing access openings when access is no longer required .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
Steel plates hardware and threadlocking compound must comply with section .
.B Materials Rapidsetting concrete must comply with section .B .
.C Construction .C General Removing portions of bridges must comply with section .
Limits of removal shown are approximate .
The Engineer must authorize removal limits before you start removal activities .
Paint exposed ends of the remaining reinforcement with coats of organic zincrich coating as specified for exposed ends of prestressing steel in section .Ba .
Within cells where work activities are performed remove existing formwork and concrete that interfere with the work .
In cells that adjoin hinges bent caps or abutments remove existing forms and sharp projections in the cell between the adjoined element and feet past the access opening .
.C Deck Access Openings Remove portions of existing bridge decks including bar reinforcing steel at the locations shown .
.C Soffit Access Openings Remove portions of the existing soffit including the bar reinforcing steel at the locations shown .
Seal the access openings with access doors when cell access is no longer required .
.C Soffit Access Opening Extensions For bridge soffit access opening extensions remove and replace concrete to the limits shown .
You may reduce removal limits if authorized .
Reconstruct and seal soffit access openings to the original dimensions when cell access is no longer required .
Use concrete or rapidsetting concrete to reconstruct the access openings .
Placing concrete must comply with section .
Placing rapidsetting concrete must comply with section .C .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .C Close Deck Access Openings Close deck access openings using rapidsetting concrete .
Placing rapidsetting concrete must comply with section .C .
Use water to flush dust from areas to be filled with concrete .
Remove all water by air blasting before placing concrete .
Do not allow traffic on the new concrete until at least hour after final set unless authorized .
If the close deck access opening work has not been completed use temporary deck cover plates to temporarily close the deck access openings before opening the lane to traffic .
Temporary deck cover plates must remain in place until the deck access opening is permanently closed .
.D Payment Not Used .
CORING CONCRETE .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for coring holes through concrete structures .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals If cored holes are greater than feet in length submit .
Work plan for the coring activities including methods and equipment to be used .
Labeled cores If reinforcement shown not to be cut is cut during coring operations submit a work plan for repairing the cut reinforcement and preventing cutting of additional reinforcement .
Allow business days for review .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Water for coring activities must either be from the local water supply or contain .
Not more than ppm chlorides as Cl .
Not more than ppm of sulfates as SO .
No impurities that discolor the concrete or etch the surface .C Construction Use coring methods that do not shatter or damage the concrete adjacent to the holes .
Stop coring operations if reinforcement shown not to be cut is cut during coring operations .
Do not resume coring operations until your work plan is authorized .
If cored holes are greater than feet in length .
Alignment of the cored hole must not deviate from that shown by more than inch per feet of length with a total maximum deviation of inches. . Label each core with the core location immediately after coring .
Do not allow water from coring activities to fall onto traffic flow across shoulders or lanes occupied by traffic or flow into gutters or other drainage facilities .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .D Payment The payment quantity for core concrete is the length measured along the centerline of the hole .
The payment quantity includes the length of any expansion joints. . CORING AND PRESSURE GROUTING DOWELS .A General Section .
includes specifications for coring holes through concrete and grouting dowels into the cored holes .
Coring must comply with section .. .B Materials Grout must comply with ASTM C or ASTM C Type K with a compressive strength of psi at days when tested under California Test .
Dowels must comply with the specifications for bar reinforcing steel in section .
Water for grout must comply with the specifications for water in section .D .
Admixtures must not contain more than ppm of chlorides as Cl when tested under California Test and not more than ppm of sulfates as SO when tested under California Test .
.C Construction Clean loose and foreign material from concrete and steel surfaces that will be in contact with the grout .
Flush holes with water and let them dry to a surfacedry condition immediately before grouting .
Seal the ends of holes after placing the dowels .
Place a vent tube at one end of the hole and an injection feed tube at the other end of the hole .
For holes with only a single end place vent and injection feed tubes in the same end .
Place tubes such that the air will vent and the hole will be completely filled with grout .
Mix grout under the manufacturers instructions .
Pump grout into holes .
Use sufficient pressure so that the hole is free of voids .
Continually waste grout until air and water eject from the vent tubes and there are no visible slugs .
.D Payment Payment for furnishing dowels is not included in the payment for core and pressure grout dowel. . STEEL COLUMN CASINGS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for fabricating installing and cleaning and painting steel column casings .
Column casings must comply with the specifications for structural steel in section .
Cleaning and painting column casings must comply with the specifications for cleaning and painting new structural steel in section .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance For field welding of column casings .
Only visual inspection is required .
nd sentence of clause .. and the st sentence of clause .. of AWS D. do not apply .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .B Materials .B General Steel for casings must comply with ASTM AAM or ASTM AAM Grade .
Mortar must comply with section .F .
Polyethylene must have a compressive strength of at least psi at no more than percent deflection when tested under ASTM D Suffix B .
Drain extension pipe must comply with the specifications for drainage piping in section .
.B Grout Grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
Do not exceed gallons of water per lb of cement .
Cement must comply with section .B .
Water must comply with section .D .
Admixtures must comply with section except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of .
percent by weight .
For noncircular columns with a maximum gap greater than inches extend the grout as follows .
Aggregate must consist of at least percent fine aggregate and approximately percent pea gravel by weight. . Fine aggregate must comply with section .C . .
Size of pea gravel must be such that percent passes the inch sieve at least percent passes the inch sieve and not more than percent passes the no .
sieve . .
Minimum cement content of the grout must not be less than lbcu yd .
Mix the grout as follows .
Add water to the mixer followed by cement and any aggregates or admixtures . .
Mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout. . Agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped. . Do not add water after initial mixing .
.C Construction .C General Remove and dispose of all material from the space to be occupied by column casing materials .
Bond polyethylene to column surfaces where shown .
Use an authorized waterproof adhesive .
Apply adhesive to the entire contact surface .
Use spacers to center casings around columns during placement .
You may weld spacers to the inside of casings .
Do not use spacers in areas where polyethylene is used .
Paint the information that is on existing columns onto casings under section .E .
.C Painting Apply the undercoat before shipment to the job site .
Do not paint surfaces that are to be thermal spray coated or covered with polyethylene .
Apply final coats after installing the casing .
.C Grouting Grout the space between casing and column faces .
Grouting equipment must comply with section .Bdii .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES If hot weather conditions will contribute to quick stiffening of the grout cool the grout by authorized methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping activities .
If freezing weather conditions are anticipated during and following the placement of grout provide adequate means to protect the grout in the casings from damage by freezing .
Do not .
Allow the grout temperature to rise above degrees F during mixing and pumping .
Grout when the ambient or grout temperature is less than degrees F Limit the height of each grout lift to minimize casing undulations and displacements .
Undulations in the casing surface must not exceed inch in inches .
Total casing displacement from the position shown must not exceed inches at any point .
You may use bracing or other means to restrain casing .
Except where shown restraints may not pass through columns .
Allow grout to harden before placing the next lift of grout unless a bracing system is used .
The maximum height of grout lifts for portions of casings with polyethylene is feet .
Install external injection valves for grouting casings .
Begin filling casing from the bottom .
Space valves so that grout fills the void between the casing and the column .
Seal casings at the bottom .
Pump grout such that a uniform grout head around the column is maintained and no visible water or air is ejected from the top of the grout .
Cover grout at the casing top with mortar .
Slope mortar to drain .
Remove accessories from casings no sooner than hours after placing grout .
Voids must be filled with mortar and finished flush with the exterior casing surface .
.D Payment Not Used .
COMPOSITE COLUMNS CASINGS Reserved .
PRESTRESSING STEEL GIRDERS Reserved .
BRIDGE JOINT RESTRAINERS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and installing bridge joint restrainers .
Bridge joint restrainers must comply with the specifications for miscellaneous bridge metal in section .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals .Aa General Reserved .Ab CableType Restrainers Submit certified copies of mill test reports for each manufactured length of cable .
Submit certified copies of the mill test and heat treating reports for each heat of bars used for cable yield indicators .
Submit at the manufacturers plant SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .
cabletype restrainer test sample for each restrainers or fraction thereof produced .
The sample restrainer must .
Consist of a cable fitted with a swaged fitting and right hand thread stud at both ends .
Be feet in total length .
turnbuckle fitted with an inch stud at each end for each turnbuckles or fraction thereof . .
Greater of percent or of the cable yield indicators produced from each mill heat. . disc springs of each size produced from each mill heat .
Items to be submitted at the manufacturers plant must be submitted with all manufacturers plantapplied coatings .
.Ac PipeType Restrainers Submit shop drawings showing the method of grouting pipetype restrainers .
.A Quality Assurance Bridge joint restrainer materials are inspected at the fabrication site .
Notify the Engineer .
When materials have been delivered to the fabrication site .
At least days before starting fabrication .B Materials .B General Reserved .B Cable Type Restrainers .Ba General Cabletype restrainers consist of cables swaged fittings studs nuts cable yield indicators disc springs and if shown turnbuckles .
Cables must be galvanized inch preformed by wire strand core or independent wire rope core complying with Federal Specification RRW right regular lay manufactured of improved plow steel with a minimum breaking strength of tons .
Each swaged fitting must .
Be machined from hotrolled steel bars complying with AISI C . Be annealed suitable for cold swaging .
Have a hole drilled through the head to accommodate the locking pin .
Have the manufacturers identifying mark stamped on the body The locking pin must be a inchdiameter zincplated steel spring pin .
The pin must keep the stud in proper position .
Before galvanizing mill a inch slot for the locking pin in the stud end .
Each stud must comply with ASTM A after galvanizing .
Nuts must comply with ASTM A including appendix X except lubrication is not required .
Each cable yield indicator must .
Be machined from hotrolled steel bars complying with AISI C . Be annealed suitable for cold swaging .
Have the heat number and manufacturers identifying mark stamped on the end surface Disc springs must be made from steel complying with ASTM AAM Grade .
Turnbuckles must be steel pipe type .
Pulls for turnbuckles must consist of a swaged fitting and stud assembly .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES Steel parts must comply with ASTM AAM or A Grade AISI and must not be rimmed or capped steel .
Pipe sleeves must be commercialquality welded steel pipe .
Concrete for filling cable drum units must either comply with the specifications for minor concrete or be a concrete mix with a inch maximum combined aggregate grading and at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section .
except pads may consist of only elastomer and laminated reinforcement is not required .
PVC must be commercial quality .
Bond breaker on PVC pipe must be a mortartight wrapping of plastic or rubber sheet at least .
inch thick .
Expanded polystyrene and hardboard must comply with section .B .
Neoprene sheets must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section ..
The sheets must be smooth free from pinholes and surface blemishes and show no evidence of delamination .
Closedcell expanded neoprene material must be commercial quality and comply with the stiffness requirements in ASTM D for Class SC Grade SCE material or firmer .
.Bb Corrosion Protection Reserved .Bc Fabrication .Bci General You are responsible for determining the required lengths of cabletype restrainers .
Each swaged fitting turnbuckle stud and nut assembly must develop the specified breaking strength of the cable .
Machine the wall of the reduced section of the cable yield indicator such that the indicator yields at a load of from to pounds when tested in compression along the major axis at a test speed of at most inchminute .
Clean and paint disc springs the described color using a paint recommended by the manufacturer of the disc springs .
Disc springs do not need to be galvanized .
The minimum size of fillet welds must comply with AWS D. except as follows Minimum Fillet Weld Sizes Base metal thickness of thicker part joined T inches Minimum size of fillet weld inches T T T T You may drill holes in steel parts after galvanizing if you repair the holes as specified for repairing damaged galvanized surfaces in section .B .
The finish coat must match color no .
of FEDSTD .
Securely wrap each free end of restrainerunit cables to prevent separation .
Ship cabletype restrainers as complete units .
.Bcii Applying Corrosion Protection Reserved SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES .B Bar Type Restrainers Bartype restrainers consist of HS bars bearing plates couplers anchorage devices and incidentals .
You must determine the required length of each bartype restrainer .
Bartype restrainers must comply with the specifications for bar prestressing steel in section .
Each anchorage device and coupler must develop the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the steel bar and include locking devices to prevent turning or loosening .
Bearing plates must comply with ASTM AAM .
Elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section .
and must be bonded to bearing plates with adhesive complying with Federal Specification MMMA .
Ship each bartype restrainer as a complete unit including anchorage device and coupler .
.B Pipe Type Restrainers Pipetype restrainers consist of double extrastrong steel pipe and associated hardware .
Double extrastrong pipe for pipetype restrainers must comply with ASTM AAM Grade B. Grout for bonding the pipe to the existing concrete must comply with section .B .
.C Construction .C General Place new concrete adjacent to restrainers before installing them .
Where removing and replacing restrainers remove at most percent of the restrainers at any joint and replace them with an equal proportion of new restrainers before subsequent removal activities .
Perform all removal and replacement symmetrically about the centerline of the existing bridge .
If paint removal or welding at connections to existing steel is not described at restrainer locations wash loose dirt and dust from existing contact surfaces of HS bolted connections without disturbing the existing paint .
Clean and paint existing contact surfaces of HS bolted connections that contain rust loose paint or other foreign substances other than dirt and dust .
Cleaning and painting existing contact surfaces is change order work .
Repair painted areas of existing structural steel damaged by your operations or from drilling holes through existing steel members .
Repairing painted areas must comply with the specifications for repairing damaged galvanized surfaces in section .B .
.C Cable Type Restrainers Notify the Engineer at least days before tightening and setting cabletype restrainer units .
.C Bar Type Restrainers Clean and paint new metal surfaces of bartype restrainer units after fabrication as specified for new structural steel in section except .
SSPCQP SSPCQP and AISCSSPCQP certifications are not required .
Blastcleaned surfaces require only a single undercoat of inorganic zinc primer .C Pipe Type Restrainers Bond pipetype restrainers to existing concrete by completely filling the void between the pipe and the cored hole with grout within the limits shown .
Provide filler material and seals along the sides of the pipe to prevent grout from entering the bridge hinge joints .
The filler material and seals must not restrict joint movement .
.D Payment The payment quantity for miscellaneous metal restrainer does not include the weight of nonmetallic materials used in constructing the restrainers .
SECTION EXISTING STRUCTURES ..
RESERVED ABANDONING STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for abandoning structures .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
ABANDONING PEDESTRIAN UNDERCROSSINGS Reserved ..
RESERVED RESERVED DIVISION VII DRAINAGE FACILITIES GENERAL GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing drainage facilities. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used CULVERT AND DRAINAGE PIPE JOINTS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing joint systems and couplers for culverts and drainage pipes .
Joint systems and couplers for culverts and drainage pipes are classified as standard positive or downdrain .
.B Definitions shear strength Required joint shear strength expressed as a percentage of the calculated pipe shear strength at a transverse section remote from the joint .
moment strength Moment strength required of the joint expressed as a percentage of the calculated moment capacity of the pipe on a transverse section remote from the joint .
tensile strength Resistance to the longitudinal force that tends to separate adjacent pipe sections .
integral joint overlap Projection of pipe barrel into another pipe barrel .
sleeve joint overlap Minimum sleeve width required to engage abutted pipe barrels .
watertightness Ability of a joint to hold water under pressure without leaking .
joint Connection point for or more pipe sections .
.C Submittals For watertight joints submit your analysis or test results performed on representative joints proposed for installation .
Submit a certificate of compliance for each classification of joint systems and couplers .
Where field leakage testing is shown for pipe systems submit .
Proposed field leakage test procedure for each portion of each pipe system at least days before you start testing .
The submittal for each proposed field leakage test procedure must include .
Type of test exfiltration lowpressure air negative air pressure or other authorized method ..
Specific joints or pipe sections to be tested ..
Maximum and minimum pressures or hydrostatic head to be applied ..
Duration of tests from location to location ..
Date and time of each test ..
List of test equipment to be used ..
Date of last calibration if applicable .
Leakage calculations for the exfiltration and infiltration tests SECTION GENERAL .
Repair procedure for joints or pipe sections that fail the field leakage test .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da Watertightness Test Perform watertightness tests of the assembled joints .
The assembled joints must pass the tests without joint leakage .
The watertightness test must consist of testing the hydrostatic pressure on a joint by connecting pipe sections under the manufacturers instructions .
Provide suitable bulkheads within the pipe adjacent to and on either side of the joint or at the outer ends of the joined pipe sections .
Do not place mortar or concrete coating filling or packing in addition to that normally required for the joint before conducting the watertightness test .
After the pipe sections are fitted together with the gasket or gaskets in place subject the assembly to a foot water pressure head above the pipe crown for minutes .
Moisture or beads of water appearing on the surface of the joint are not considered leakage .
Perform the test on individual joints at the manufacturers plant .
Test joint watertightness on pipe sections in straight alignment and on pipe sections deflected from straight alignment .
When you test joints on pipe sections not in straight alignment position the pipe sections to create a gap on one side of the outside pipe perimeter that is inch wider than the gap for the pipe sections in straight alignment .
If you use coupling bands to test the pipe sections not in straight alignment and the maximum gap on one side of the outside pipe perimeter is less than inch wider than that for the pipe sections in straight alignment position the coupling band and the pipe sections to provide the maximum gap .
.Db Performance Specifications For joint systems and couplers under section .Db determine the values for joint properties by mathematical analysis or an authorized test .
Joint components subject to bending forces must not be stressed beyond the minimum specified yield strength of the material as determined by using the plastic section modulus .
Joint systems or couplers must .
Perform their intended function .
Possess durability equivalent to that of the pipe .
Comply with the quality characteristics shown in the following table SECTION GENERAL Joint Classification Requirements Requirement Quality characteristic Standard Positivea Downdrainb Shear strength min Moment strength min Tensile strength diac min lb diac min lb Joint overlapd Integral and smaller diae min in diae min in and larger diae min in Sleeve width min in Watertightness Where described Where described Required aPositive joints must comply with either shear strength moment strength and joint overlapsleeve properties or shear strength and joint overlapintegral characteristics .
bJoints for downdrains have at least the specified values when tested with joints sealed to comply with the watertightness requirement .
cLimits for corrugated metal pipe arch depend upon the equivalent diameter of circular pipe under AASHTO M for corrugated steel pipe and AASHTO M for corrugated aluminum pipe .
dJoints designed to comply with required values by means other than joint overlap as shown in the table may be used if authorized .
eInside diameter of circular pipes or inside horizontal dimension of oval or arch pipes .
.D Field Leakage Testing .Da General Perform field leakage testing on culverts and drainage structures wherever field leakage testing is shown .
Field leakage testing includes .
Cleaning and presoaking pipes .
Installing and removing bulkheads or plugs necessary to perform tests .
Removing and disposing of waste materials .
Retesting .
Repairing .
Changing the drainage system to comply with specifications for field leakage testing For pipe systems less than feet in length test all joints for leakage .
For pipe systems feet or greater in length test each pipe system for leakage at locations selected by the Engineer at a rate of .
joints per pipe joints for pipe systems less than mile in length .
joints per pipe joints for pipe systems from mile to miles in length .
joints per pipe joints for pipe systems more than miles in length For every selected joint or section that fails leakage requirements the Engineer may select up to more joint locations or sections between joints for testing .
Clean the pipe and remove debris and sediment before you start testing .
SECTION GENERAL Clean and test each pipe system and appurtenances by using the exfiltration infiltration lowpressure air or negative air pressure method except the Engineer must approve the use of the infiltration test if the groundwater table is low .
You may test installed pipe joints using air or water under low pressure .
Field leakage testing is conducted after backfilling .
Do not use your test equipment until it is authorized .
The Engineer may require a calibration test of gauges or other instrumentation .
Use only leak test method on a contiguous pipe system unless the pipe type or diameter changes in the same run .
Complete the cleaning and testing of each pipe system between inlets or ends within days after backfilling for storm drain lines and structures .
Perform each test in the presence of the Engineer .
Prevent joints from separating during a test .
Repair any damage resulting from the field leakage test .
Take corrective action and retest the line if the leakage exceeds the allowable quantity .
Determine the leak source and repair or replace the defective pipe whenever an installed pipe system fails to comply with the requirements under the test method used .
The Engineer does not accept a pipe installation if it fails to pass the field leakage test .
Stop all obvious leaks even if the leakage is below the allowable quantity .
.Db Exfiltration and Infiltration Testing Exfiltration and infiltration tests must comply with ASTM C except .
You may fill the pipe with clear water to allow normal absorption into the pipe wall before performing the exfiltration leakage test .
Start the leakage test within hours after filling the pipe and complete the field leakage test within hours thereafter .
The test period must be at least hour in duration .
For plastic and metal pipe the absorption period is not required . .
Leakage must not be more than gallons per inch of nominal pipe diameter per mile of pipe per day with a minimum test pressure of feet of water column above the pipe crown at the upper end of the pipe or above the active groundwater table whichever is higher .
Limit the length of pipe you test such that the pressure on the invert of the lower end of the section does not exceed feet of water column .
Increase the allowable leakage by percent for each increase in pressure of .
feet above the basic foot water column measured above the crown or at the lower end of the section . .
Whenever a suitable head of groundwater exists above the pipe crown and if the pipe is large enough to work inside the Engineer may accept the installed pipe on the basis of visible leakage repair during the infiltration leakage test. . Take into account all lateral or side storm drains included in the test section in computing the allowable leakage .
Make an allowance of .
gallons per hour per foot of head above the invert for each junction structure or drainage inlet included in the test section .
Storm drains side storm drains and fittings must be open clean and free draining upon final completion of the work .
.Dc LowPressure Air Test You may use the lowpressure air test instead of the exfiltration test or the infiltration test for pipes inches in nominal diameter or less .
You may prewet the pipes .
Test pipes from inlet to inlet or shorter lengths .
Do not use the lowpressure air test for drainage pipes over inches in nominal diameter regardless of the material type .
If you use a lowpressure air test perform the test immediately following pipe cleaning .
Brace plugs and bulkheads to prevent release during the lowpressure air test .
Locate gauges air piping manifolds and valves above the ground .
Do not allow anyone to enter a manhole or inlet of a plugged pipe when it is under pressure .
Equip the air testing apparatus with a pressure release device such as a rupture disk or a pressure relief valve designed to relieve pressure in the pipe at psi when under test .
SECTION GENERAL Start the test after the pressure is stabilized at or above an internal pressure of .
psi greater than the average back pressure of the groundwater that could submerge the pipe .
Start recording the time when the internal pressure drops to .
psi .
The tested portion of the pipe passes the field leakage test when the pressure drop is less than psi for the time period calculated for the size and length of the pipe to be tested as shown in the following table Minimum Test Time for Pressure Drop Nominal pipe diameter inches Time for pressure drop minutes feet . . . . . . . . . . .Dd Other Allowable Tests If authorized you may test .
Pipes over inches in nominal diameter joint at a time under ASTM C instead of the exfiltration test specified in section .Db . .
Plastic pipe inches or less in nominal diameter with the lowpressure air test specified in ASTM F. .
Pipes inches or less in nominal diameter with the negative .
psi vacuum air pressure test specified in ASTM C instead of the exfiltration test or lowpressure air test specified in section .Db and .Dc .
The minimum test times for pressure drop for pipes .. inches in nominal diameter and smaller must be the same as the lowpressure air test specified in section .Dc .. inches in nominal diameter must be .
minutes per feet .. inches in nominal diameter must be .
minutes per feet .De Joints or Pipe Section Not Passing Leakage Testing Identify joints or pipe sections that exceed the maximum allowable leakage after you complete field leakage testing .
Repair and retest the failed joints or pipe sections until they comply with the test requirements .
Repair and retest the failed joints or pipe sections as specified in the repair procedures submitted under section .C .
If the same joint fails the leakage test a second time remove and replace the pipe sections on either side of the joint with new pipes .
Replace any pipe section that fails .
Retest the replaced pipe section for leaks .
.Df Reserved .
MATERIALS Resilient joint material must be a neoprene expanded rubber or sheet rubber gasket O ring rubber gasket butyl rubber base joint sealant or other authorized resilient material .
All joints including any connection must be capable of transferring the required shear across the joint .
Watertightness must be attained by use of an authorized durable highquality resilient joint material designed to perform the intended function. . CONSTRUCTION Not Used SECTION GENERAL .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for field leakage testing .
Is the length of the pipe that has passed field leakage tests .
Is measured ..
Along the invert of the pipe .. To the inside face of drainage inlets or similar structures that are within the length of the tested pipe .
Includes the length through elbows tees and other fittings that have passed field leakage tests ALTERNATIVE CULVERTS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing alternative culverts .
Choose from the types of alternative culverts shown .
Reinforced concrete pipe must comply with section .
Corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches must comply with section .
Corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arches must comply with section .
HDPE pipe must comply with section .
PVC pipe must comply with section .
Structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with section .
Structural aluminum plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with section .
Reinforced concrete box culverts must comply with section .
Alternative culverts include concrete collars and concrete tees and reinforcement for connecting new pipe to existing or new facilities. . MATERIALS Concrete for the collars and tees must be minor concrete .
Reinforcement for the concrete collars or tee connections must comply with section . . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used ALTERNATIVE SLOTTED PIPE .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for installing alternative slotted pipe .
Choose from the types of alternative slotted pipe shown .
Do not mix different types of slotted pipe in the same installation .
Slotted plastic pipe must comply with section .
Slotted corrugated steel pipe must comply with the specifications for slotted corrugated steel pipe in section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used SECTION GENERAL .
PAYMENT Not Used CONCRETE BACKFILL FOR PIPE TRENCHES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing concrete backfill in pipe trenches .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals If RSC is used for concrete backfill submit the concrete mix design and test data from an authorized laboratory at least days before excavating the pipe trench .
The laboratory must specify the cure time required for the concrete mix to attain a psi compressive strength when tested under California Test .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Concrete backfill must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
You may use RSC for concrete backfill except .
Section does not apply .
RSC must comply with minor concrete sections .C .D .B .C .D and .E .
CONSTRUCTION For installation of plastic pipe where saturated clay peat or other unsuitable material is encountered immediately adjacent to the pipe trench the material must be removed to a distance at least equal to of the pipe diameter but not less than inches on each side of the pipe .
Place concrete backfill in the trench against undisturbed material at the sides and bottom of the trench in a way that prevents floating or shifting of the pipe and voids or segregation of the concrete .
Immediately remove foreign material that falls into the trench before or during placement of the concrete .
Construct and compact earth plugs at the ends of the planned concrete backfill to contain the concrete within the trench where necessary .
Wherever minor concrete is used do not place materials on top of the concrete backfill within hours of placing the concrete backfill .
Wherever RSC is used do not place materials on top of the concrete backfill before the required cure time to attain psi has elapsed .
Consolidate concrete backfill using highfrequency internal vibrators .
If HMA is to be placed directly on the concrete backfill broom the surface with a heavy broom to produce a uniform rough surface. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for concrete backfill pipe trench is the volume determined from the dimensions shown and the length of pipe if the limits of concrete backfill are shown .
If the limits of concrete backfill are not shown the payment quantity for concrete backfill pipe trench is the volume determined as follows SECTION GENERAL .
Horizontal limits are determined from vertical planes inches outside of each side of the pipe for a diameter or span of less than inches and inches outside of each side of the pipe for a diameter or span of inches or greater. . Upper limit is determined from a horizontal plane inches above the top of the pipe. . Lower limit is determined from a horizontal plane at the bottom of the pipe . .
If alternative pipe is shown the payment quantity for concrete backfill pipe trench is determined from the required trench width for the alternative pipe with the smallest outside diameter and the length of the pipe. . Volume occupied by the pipe is not included in the payment quantity .
Concrete backfill placed outside of these limits is not included in the payment .
TEMPORARY CULVERTS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing temporary culverts .
Temporary culverts include pipe bends wyes tees and other branches .
Excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section . . MATERIALS You may install a removed undamaged temporary culvert in the permanent work if it complies with the specifications for the permanent culvert and it is new when installed as a temporary culvert on the project. . CONSTRUCTION Install a size and type of temporary culvert capable of sustaining the intended load and discharging a quantity of water equivalent to the type and size of culvert shown .
Obtain authorization for the strength and capacity of the culvert before its installation .
Excavate and backfill the trench for a temporary culvert in a way that provides a firm nonsettling foundation for the roadbed to be constructed over the culvert. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for temporary culvert .
Is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line. . Includes the length of pipe reducers bends wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
The length of pipe reducer is included in the length of the larger diameter pipe connected to the reducer. . Is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in foot increments if the pipe is cut to fit a structure of slope .
TEMPORARY SLOTTED PIPE Reserved RESERVED RESERVED PLASTIC PIPE GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for fabricating and installing plastic pipe .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for plastic pipe including the average pipe stiffness resin material cell classification and date of manufacture .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used PLASTIC PIPE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing plastic pipe .
Installing plastic pipe includes excavation backfill connection of new pipe to new or existing facilities reinforcement concrete collars or tees and other connecting devices .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals For corrugated polyethylene pipe submit the manufacturers copy of plant audits and test results from the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program for the current cycle of testing for each pipe diameter furnished .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Plastic pipe must be Type C or Type S corrugated polyethylene pipe or corrugated PVC pipe with smooth interior .
The residue from the ignition of HDPE and PVC compounds must not exceed percent as determined under ASTM D except the muffle furnace temperature must be degrees F. Pipes and fittings must be homogenous throughout and uniform in color opacity density and other properties .
The inside and outside surfaces must be semimatte or glossy in appearance and free of chalky sticky or tacky material .
The pipe walls must be free of cracks holes blisters voids foreign inclusions or other defects affecting the pipe wall integrity or visible to the naked eye .
Do not use pipes or fittings with abrasions or scratches deeper than percent of the wall thickness .
The joint surfaces where SECTION PLASTIC PIPE the gaskets bear must be smooth and free of imperfections ridges fractures or cracks that could adversely affect the joint seal .
Store pipes in unit packages and protect the bell end of the pipes from damage .
Support unit packages with racks or dunnage to prevent damage and bending .
If unit packages are stacked do not allow the weight of the upper units to cause deformation to the pipes in the lower units .
Do not store pipes adjacent to heat sources .
Do not allow pipes to overhang vehicles or storage areas unsupported by more than feet .
Cover pipes to provide temporary sun block protection .
Provide adequate air circulation around the covered pipes to reduce excessive heat accumulation .
Protect gaskets from exposure to weather heat ozone oil grease and sunlight for any time period exceeding hours .
Do not store gaskets near electrical or exhaust heat sources .
The Department rejects pipes with cracked or split gaskets .
Protect pipes and fittings from damage when handling and installing .
.B Backfill Structure backfill material for plastic pipe must comply with section except the gradation of structure backfill must comply with the following table Gradation of Structure Backfill for Plastic Pipe Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
No .
Controlled lowstrength material and slurry cement backfill must comply with section .
.C Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe Corrugated polyethylene pipe must be inches or less in nominal diameter .
Type C and Type S corrugated polyethylene pipe must be manufactured from HDPE virgin compounds and comply with AASHTO M . HDPE compounds used in the manufacture of corrugated polyethylene pipe and fittings must comply with AASHTO M except the mix must contain from to percent welldispersed carbon black .
The corrugated polyethylene pipe manufacturer must .
Participate in the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program for each plant supplying corrugated polyethylene pipe and fittings for the project .
Conduct and maintain a quality control program under National Transportation Product Evaluation Program .D Corrugated PVC Pipe with Smooth Interior Corrugated PVC pipe must have smooth interior and be manufactured as a single extrusion .
The corrugated exterior profile must be annular and seamless .
The pipe dimensions wall thickness socket sizes and fitting tolerances must comply with ASTM F. The minimum stiffness of corrugated PVC pipe must be psi when tested under ASTM D. Corrugated PVC pipe and fittings must be manufactured from PVC virgin compounds except clean reworked recycled PVC materials generated from the manufacturers pipe or fitting fabrication may be reused .
Corrugated PVC pipe must comply with ASTM F for cell classification under ASTM D. Fillers that lower the tensile strength of the compound or change the minimum cell classification are not SECTION PLASTIC PIPE allowed .
PVC compounds must contain at least .
percent by weight rutile titanium dioxide or the quantity recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
The chemical resistance of corrugated PVC pipe and fittings must comply with ASTM D for cell classification S. The manufacturers code must include the day month year shift and plant of manufacture .
Do not expose pipes to direct sunlight for more than days .
.E Joints Plastic pipe joints must comply with section .Db for standard or positive joints .
Where sleeve joint connections are used the sleeve width must be at least inches and engage at least corrugations of each pipe being joined .
Joints for pipes shown as watertight must be watertight under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement and must comply with section .Da for watertightness .
For corrugated polyethylene pipe .
If watertight joints are shown use Type S corrugated polyethylene pipe with gaskets .
If watertight joints are not shown use gasketed joints when specified .
Gaskets for Type C corrugated polyethylene pipe must be installed on each side of the joint .
Gaskets must comply with ASTM F and be factoryinstalled . .
Corrugated polyethylene pipe joints manufactured to comply with section .Db for integral joints must be laid to line and grade with sections closely jointed .
Corrugated polyethylene pipe to be joined by sleeve joints must be laid to line and grade with the separate sections not more than inches apart and then firmly joined together with at least corrugations from each pipe section engaged in the coupler .
For corrugated PVC pipe with smooth interior .
Elastomeric gaskets must comply with ASTM F for lowhead applications .
Use extruded or molded gaskets cured in a way so that any cross section will be dense homogeneous and free of pores blisters pitting or other imperfections .
Double gaskets must be singlepiece gaskets that fit into the first full corrugation valleys on the spigot end .
Ship gaskets in containers that will prevent damage from UV exposure and handling. . Wyes tees reducers elbows couplings laterals and other fittings must be molded or fabricated under ASTM F for cell classification or as specified in ASTM D. . Lubricant must comply with the pipe manufacturers instructions .
The lubricant must not have a detrimental effect on gaskets or pipes . .
Joints must comply with section .Db for integral joints except the joint overlap requirements are as shown .
Pipe joints must be bell and spigot type with gaskets ready for field assembly .
Install joints so that the elastomeric gasket will be compressed radially between the pipe bell and spigot to form a tight seal when assembled .
.F.H Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Install Type C corrugated polyethylene pipe wherever corrugated interior wall type is shown .
Install Type S corrugated polyethylene pipe or corrugated PVC pipe wherever smooth interior wall type is shown .
You may install corrugated or smooth interior wall pipe if the type of plastic pipe is not shown .
For PVC pipe whenever the atmospheric temperature is forecast to be degrees F or less demonstrate to the Engineer that the bar and block method or any other mechanical assistance method for assembling the pipes will not damage the pipes before proceeding with pipe assembly .
SECTION PLASTIC PIPE .B Earthwork Excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section except .
Where saturated clay peat or other unsuitable material is encountered immediately adjacent to the pipe trench remove the material to a distance at least equal to the pipe diameter on each side of the pipe if compacted backfill is to be placed or a distance at least equal to the pipe diameter but not less than inches on each side of the pipe if slurry cement or controlled lowstrength material is to be placed. . Backfill corrugated polyethylene pipe greater than inches in nominal diameter with either controlled lowstrength material under section .G or with slurry cement backfill under section .E. . Place controlled lowstrength material or slurry cement backfill used for structure backfill to a level at least inches above the pipe crown .
Lay plastic pipe in a trench excavated to the established lines and grades .
Grade and prepare the bottom of the trench as shown throughout the entire length of the pipe .
Removing unsuitable material and replacing it with suitable material is change order work .
.C Pipe Placement Provide the necessary facilities for lowering and properly placing pipe sections in the trench .
Lay plastic pipe to line and grade with sections closely jointed .
Do not let the pipe trench flood before backfilling .
Construct concrete collars or tee connections with minor concrete whenever concrete collars or tee connections are required to connect new plastic pipe to existing or new pipe .
Reinforcement for concrete collars and tees must comply with section .
For corrugated PVC pipe with smooth interior .
Install gaskets on pipe spigots after the pipe is placed into the trench and ready for joint connection .
Place the gasket on the spigot end under the pipe manufacturers installation instructions .
The leading edge of the gasket must point toward the spigot end whenever a double gasket is used .
Both the spigot and bell ends must be free of debris before connection .
Apply the pipe manufacturers recommended lubricant to the inside of the bell and over the gasket .
Insert the spigot end of the pipe into the bell end until the factory provided insertion line on the spigot end lines up with the bell edge . .
Whenever the spigot end of a pipe is shortened cut the end square and bevel it to the same angle as provided on the factoryfinished spigot end so that burrs are not visible .
Remark the shortened pipe with a new insertion line on the spigot using a factorymarked spigot insertion line as a guide. . Cover the ends of installed corrugated PVC pipe that were not backfilled after installation at the end of each day . .
Pipes must not exhibit deflection in excess of percent of the original inside diameter at any location after being backfilled to at least feet above the top of the pipe or to the completed grade whichever is less. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for plastic pipe .
Is the length designated by the Engineer .
Is measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
Includes the length of pipe elbows wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
Is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in foot increments if the pipe is cut to fit a structure or slope SLOTTED PLASTIC PIPE Reserved RESERVED CONCRETE PIPE GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing concrete pipe .
Excavation backfill and culvert beddings must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Where pipes are connected to inlet and outlet structures place the ends of the pipes flush or cut them off flush with the structure face .
Lay and joint reinforced concrete pipe used for drainage purposes and dry conduits under generally accepted practices suitable for the purpose intended .
Connect new reinforced concrete pipe to new or existing drainage facilities as shown .
Furnish the necessary facilities for lowering and properly placing pipe sections in the trench .
Clean and then seal each joint with the type of sealing material necessary to make a tight joint to prevent leakage and infiltration .
Lay pipes to lines and grades with the sections closely jointed .
Lay pipes upgrade .
Fill any voids occurring in the outer and inner annular sealing material with the same type of sealing material and finish the inside of the joint smooth .
Take every precaution to prevent flooding of the pipe trench before backfilling activities start. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for concrete pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
The payment quantity includes the length of bends wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
If pipes are cut to fit a structure or a slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in foot increments .
If you construct CIP connection instead of cutting off the pipe to fit the structure the payment quantity is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe to the inside face of the structure .
REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing reinforced concrete pipe .
.B Definitions modified designs Designs that differ from direct designs shown with respect to reinforcement only .
oval shaped pipe Pipes having major and minor internal axial dimensions described .
The minor axis length must be to percent of the major axis length .
The st dimension designated represents the rise and the nd dimension represents the span .
special designs Designs that differ from direct designs in any respect from those shown .
.C Submittals If you choose to use resilient joint materials submit them for testing and authorization .
For circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method submit .
Shop drawings .
Modified designs and special designs must comply with the Departments bridge design specifications .
For modified designs do not change the clear coverage between the surface of SECTION CONCRETE PIPE the concrete and the outside of the reinforcement or the thickness of the pipe barrel wall shown .
Submit sets of shop drawings for initial review by the Office of Design and Technical Services .
Submit sets of shop drawings after the initial review for use during construction and by the Office of Design and Technical Services .
Shop drawings must include .. Wall thickness ..
Type size location and configuration of the reinforcement ..
List of station locations for the pipes including the size wall type and maximum cover height ..
Method of excavation bedding and backfill for each location .
Proof of adequacy for modified design and special design proposals .
The Engineer will determine the adequacy of modified and special designs based upon compliance with crack requirements and structural design parameters .
The Department will not be liable to you for failure to accept any modified design or special design you submit. . A copy of the concrete mix design before using the concrete or revising the mix proportions .
A certificate of compliance for each pipe shipment .
The certificate must .. Be signed by the manufacturers quality control representative .. State that all materials and workmanship comply with the specifications and authorized shop drawings For nonreinforced concrete pipe substituted for circular reinforced concrete pipe described or chosen by class submit proof of adequacy for proposed modifications or special designs .
Proof must consist of edge bearing tests either certified by an authorized laboratory or the pipe manufacturers tests witnessed by the Department .
The tests must demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed design .
A minimum of proof tests will be required for each size and class you supply .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Before hydrostatic testing reinforced concrete pipe must be tested under the edge bearing method to a maximum Dload that is percent greater than the .inch cracking Dload under AASHTO M or to the actual Dload required to produce a .inchwide crack whichever is less .
.D Field Testing of Siphon and Pressure Pipe Perform field leakage tests on siphons and lowhead conduits with internal hydrostatic heads not exceeding feet .
Fill the pipe with water to a hydrostatic head of feet above the highest point in the line after the pipe has been laid and backfill has been placed and compacted to a minimum of feet above the pipe .
Conduct a hydrostatic test for a period of not less than hours .
Make accurate measurements of the water required to maintain the test pressure during that period .
Any leakage developed by the test must not exceed the allowable leakage as computed by the following formula E .HLD where E allowable leakage in gpm H difference in elevation in feet between the water surface at feet above the highest point in the line and the invert elevation of the pipe at its lowest point L length of the culvert or drainage pipe in feet D internal diameter of the pipe in inches Furnish all water materials and labor for the hydrostatic test .
Conduct all hydrostatic tests in the presence of the Engineer .
The Department does not pay for hydrostatic testing .
Stop any leakage in excess of the allowable leakage as authorized .
Repeat the hydrostatic test until the total leakage does not exceed the allowable leakage .
Stop all obvious leaks whether or not the leakage from the line exceeds the allowable leakage .
You may maintain the pipe line full of water for not more than hours before you start hydrostatic testing .
SECTION CONCRETE PIPE .D Circular Reinforced Concrete Pipe Described or Chosen by Class The basis for acceptance of reinforced concrete pipe over inches in nominal diameter is determined from results of the edge bearing test for the load to produce a .inchwide crack .
Testing to the ultimate load is not required except as necessary to obtain samples for the absorption test .
Pipes inches in nominal diameter and smaller do not need to be tested to the load to produce a . inchwide crack if the pipe is subjected to a load equivalent to the ultimate test load and complies with section ..
Instead of broken pipe pieces obtained as specified above you may furnish inch diameter cores from pipe sections selected by the Engineer for performing the absorption test .
Pipe sections that have been tested to the actual .inchwide crack will not be loadtested further and those sections that comply with or exceed the required strength and workmanship standards may be used in the work if authorized .
.D Circular Reinforced Concrete Pipe Direct Design Method Sample and test the concrete compressive strength under AASHTO M at least once every production shift but not less than once daily .
The edge bearing test does not apply to direct design method pipes .
.D Oval Shaped Reinforced Concrete Pipe The basis for acceptance of oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe larger than an equivalent inch nominaldiameter circular pipe must be determined by the results of the edge bearing test for the load to produce a .inchwide crack .
Testing to the ultimate load will not be required except as necessary to obtain samples for the absorption test .
Oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe inches in nominal diameter and smaller does not need to be tested to the load to produce a .inchwide crack if the pipe is subjected to a load equivalent to the ultimate test load and complies with section ..
Instead of broken pipe pieces obtained as specified above you may furnish inchdiameter cores from pipe sections selected by the Engineer for performing the absorption test .
Pipe sections that have been tested to the actual .inchwide crack will not be loadtested further and those sections that comply with or exceed the required strength and workmanship standards may be used in the work if authorized. . MATERIALS .A General The cementitious material and aggregate for concrete pipe must comply with section .
except gradation requirements do not apply to the aggregate and the use of SCM must comply with AASHTO M . The concrete for reinforced concrete pipe must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and have a water to cementitious material ratio that does not exceed .
by weight .
You may use SCM .
Reinforcement must have a minimum cover of inch except pipes with a nominal diameter of inches or less must have a minimum cover of inch .
Special reinforced concrete pipe having concrete cover over the steel reinforcement greater than the cover under AASHTO M must comply with section .
except the crack width produced by the Dload test under AASHTO M must be determined by the following formula b t d x . inch t d C where b Width of crack to be produced instead of .inch crack under AASHTO M t Wall thickness of pipe inches d Effective depth of section to be tested feet C Concrete cover over steel reinforcement in excess of cover under AASHTO M SECTION CONCRETE PIPE If concrete collars or tee connections are required to connect new concrete pipe to new or existing pipes the concrete collars or tee connections must be constructed of minor concrete .
Reinforcement for the concrete collars or tee connections must comply with section .
.B Delivery Storage and Handling Rubber gaskets must be stored at degrees F or less .
Do not expose rubber gaskets to direct sun rays for more than hours .
Sufficiently protect jointing materials from the air and sun to prevent drying or deterioration .
Keep liquid types of sealing materials in molds or runners .
.C Circular Reinforced Concrete Pipe .C General Circular reinforced concrete pipe described by class must comply with section .C for the class of pipe described .
If the class of pipe is not described and the nominal diameter is less than inches choose the class of pipe .
The pipe chosen must comply with section .C .
Pipes must be marked as specified in AASHTO M except circular pipe sections with elliptical reinforcing must have the location of the minor axis of the reinforcing indicated by inchwide waterproof painted stripes on the inside and outside of each pipe at the top and bottom at least inches long at each pipe section end or you may provide a lift hole or lift holes at the top of each pipe along the minor axis of the reinforcement .
If the class of pipe is not described and the nominal diameter is inches or greater choose either .
The class of pipe .
The pipe chosen must comply with section .C . .
The wall thickness and reinforcement details under section .C .
If lift hole is provided the lift hole must be located at the balance point if lift holes are provided the lift holes must be spaced equidistant on each side of the balance point .
The lift holes must not interfere with the reinforcement .
After placing the pipe fill the open lift holes with cement mortar or concrete plugs before backfilling .
.C Circular Reinforced Concrete Pipe Described or Chosen by Class Circular reinforced concrete pipe described or chosen by class must comply with AASHTO M . If the class of circular reinforced concrete pipe is not described choose the class of pipe and corresponding method of backfill for the type of installation shown .
If the class of circular reinforced concrete pipe is described choose the method of backfill for the type of installation shown .
The Dload to produce a .inchwide crack must be not less than the specified Dload .
For pipe classes not specified under AASHTO M but within the minimum and maximum size limits under AASHTO M determine the wall thickness and steel area by interpolation from data given in the tables for pipes of the next smaller size and pipes of the next larger size .
For pipe classes except Class I that are less than the minimum size for a particular class under AASHTO M the minimum wall thickness must be not less than inches and the steel area must be not less than .
sq inlf of pipe barrel .
The Department will grant the authorization required under AASHTO M to extrapolate minimum wall thicknesses and steel areas beyond the limits for wall A or B in table and for wall B in table under AASHTO M if you submit your pipe designs in advance and the pipes comply with all of the specified tests and performance requirements .
For reinforced concrete pipe sizes inches in nominal diameter and smaller you may substitute nonreinforced concrete pipe if the nonreinforced concrete pipe complies with the following requirements SECTION CONCRETE PIPE .
Minimum edge bearing strength must be the Dload to produce the ultimate load for the class of equivalent reinforced concrete pipe under AASHTO M . .
Pipes must comply with AASHTO M MM Class or as required to comply with the specified Dload requirements .
You may request authorization for modified or special designs under AASHTO M MM . . Cementitious material and aggregate for nonreinforced concrete pipe must comply with specifications for cementitious material and aggregate under section .. .C Circular Reinforced Concrete Pipe Direct Design Method Circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method must comply with AASHTO M . The wall thickness and reinforcement you choose must comply with the details shown .
Use the backfill method shown for the particular pipe design chosen .
The wall thickness of Wall X circular reinforced concrete pipe must not vary by more than inch from the wall thickness shown .
Determine the mix proportions for the concrete to be used in direct design method pipes .
Concrete must comply with the specifications for concrete designated by compressive strength .
The circumferential reinforcement for circular reinforced concrete pipe must be smooth or deformed with a minimum yield strength of psi .
Longitudinal reinforcement must be welded to circumferential reinforcement at not more than inch spacing if the reinforcement is smooth or at not more than inch spacing if the reinforcement is deformed .
Splices of circumferential reinforcement must develop a strength at least equal to Awr x Fy .
Where Awr required area of reinforcement shown sq in Fy specified yield strength of reinforcement psi Spacers or stirrups may be welded to the longitudinal reinforcement .
The welding of spacers or stirrups will be allowed on not more than percent of the circumferential reinforcement at not less than inch spacing along the pipe length .
The strength of the circumferential reinforcement across the completed welds must be at least equal to .
x Awr x Fy where spacers or stirrups are welded to the circumferential reinforcement in excess of the above requirements or where longitudinals are welded to the circumferential reinforcement .
If you determine that handling and installation stresses require additional reinforcement furnish and place additional reinforcement .
The Department does not pay for additional reinforcement required for handling and installation stresses .
Markings for circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method must comply with AASHTO M except the pipe class marking is not required .
The markings under AASHTO M must be supplemented with the Contract number maximum cover height and method of backfill .
.D Oval Shaped Reinforced Concrete Pipe Oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe must comply with AASHTO M MM .
The Department will grant the authorization required under AASHTO M M to extrapolate the minimum wall thicknesses and steel areas beyond the limits in table and table under AASHTO M MM if you submit your pipe designs in advance and the pipes comply with the specified tests and performance requirements .
Special oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe having concrete cover over the steel reinforcement greater than the cover specified under AASHTO M MM must comply with section .C except the crack width produced by the Dload test under AASHTO M MM must be determined by the following formula SECTION CONCRETE PIPE b t d x . inch t d C where b Width of crack to be produced instead of .inch crack under AASHTO M t Wall thickness of pipe inches d Effective depth of section to be tested feet C Concrete cover over steel reinforcement in excess of cover under AASHTO M MM .E Reserved .F Joints Joints for culvert and drainage pipes must be standard joints unless the classification is described .
At your choosing concrete pipe joints must comply with the details shown or section .Db .
Unless described otherwise sealing materials must be one or more of the following .
Cement mortar composed of part portland cement and parts sand by volume and the following .. Well graded sand passing a no .
sieve .
..
Mix materials to a consistency suitable for the purpose intended .
Use the mortar within minutes after you add the mixing water .
.. You may use admixtures of hydrated lime fire clay diatomaceous earth or other authorized inert material in the mortar to facilitate workability .
Obtain authorization for the quantity of admixture. . Rubber gasketed joints complying with ASTM C. Rubber gasketed joints must be ..
Flexible and able to withstand expansion contraction and settlement .
..
The type of rubber gaskets requiring lubrication .
Lubricate the rubber gaskets with lubricant recommended and supplied by the pipe manufacturer. . Resilient joint materials consisting of polyvinyl chloride fiberglass impregnated with epoxy resin or other suitable resilient materials .
You may use other joint sealant materials that prevent leakage and infiltration if authorized .
Joints for siphons and pressure pipes and joints for pipes shown as watertight must be watertight under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement and must comply with section .Da for watertightness. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Earthwork Lay the pipe in a trench excavated to the lines and grades established by the Engineer .
Grade and prepare the bottom of the trench to provide a firm and uniform bearing throughout the entire pipe length .
You may partially or completely backfill culvert pipe trenches while the joint mortar is still plastic .
If the joint mortar sets before you place the backfill do not backfill the pipe trench within hours after jointing the pipe sections .
.C Laying Pipe Reinforced concrete pipe used for siphons and lowhead conduits with internal hydrostatic heads not exceeding feet must have watertight joints under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement .
Place circular pipe with elliptical reinforcement with the minor axis of the reinforcement in the vertical position .
SECTION CONCRETE PIPE Pour or pump liquid materials into the joint space in a continuous operation and agitate until the joint is completely filled .
Do not allow free water to come in contact with the pipeline until portland cement sealing materials have set at least hours. . PAYMENT Not Used NONREINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing nonreinforced concrete pipe .
Nonreinforced concrete pipe must comply with the requirements in section for substitution of nonreinforced concrete pipe for circular reinforced concrete pipe designated or selected by class. . MATERIALS Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION If you substitute nonreinforced concrete pipe for reinforced concrete pipe excavation and backfill for nonreinforced concrete pipe must comply with the details shown for reinforced concrete pipe. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED CORRUGATED METAL PIPE GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches .
Corrugated metal pipe arches must comply with section .E .
Excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for .
Corrugated steel materials .
Corrugated aluminum materials .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .DQuality Control .Da Field Testing of Corrugated Steel Pipe Siphons Perform field leakage tests on corrugated steel pipe siphons .
Fill the pipe with water to a hydrostatic head of feet above the highest point in the line after the pipe has been laid and backfill has been placed and compacted to a minimum of feet above the pipe .
Conduct a hydrostatic test for a period of not less than hours .
Make accurate measurements of the water required to maintain the test pressure during the test period .
Any leakage developed by the test must not exceed the allowable leakage as computed by the following formula E .HLD where E allowable leakage in gpm H difference in elevation in feet between the water surface at feet above the highest point in the line and the invert elevation of the pipe at its lowest point L length of the culvert or drainage pipe in feet D internal diameter of the pipe in inches Furnish all water materials and labor for the hydrostatic test .
Conduct all hydrostatic tests in the presence of the Engineer .
The Department does not pay for hydrostatic testing .
Stop any leakage in excess of the allowable leakage as authorized .
Repeat the hydrostatic test until the total leakage does not exceed the allowable leakage .
Stop all obvious leaks whether or not the leakage from the line exceeds the allowable leakage. . MATERIALS .A General Corrugated metal pipe must be corrugated aluminum pipe or corrugated steel pipe as described .
Do not mix aluminum and steel materials in any installation except coupling band fastening hardware .
Ship handle and lay corrugated metal materials in a way that prevents bruising scaling or breaking of the galvanized surface aluminized surface or protective coating .
If concrete collars or tee connections are required construct the collars or tee connections with minor concrete .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE .B Dimensions and Thickness Dimensions and thicknesses shown are nominal and must comply with AASHTO M for corrugated steel pipe and AASHTO M for corrugated aluminum pipe .
The nominal sheet thickness for corrugated metal pipe must be equal to or greater than the nominal thickness described .
Lapped longitudinal seams of riveted pipe arches must be placed in the top arch and must be staggered so as to alternate on each side of the center of the top arch at least inches .
.C Protective Coatings Linings and Paving Where coating lining or paving is shown pipes must be protected with bituminous coating or bituminous lining or have the invert paved with one or more of the following materials .
Bituminous coating .
Polymeric sheet coating .
Bituminous lining .
Bituminous invert paving Remove moisture dirt oil unbonded or incompatible paint grease alkalies or other foreign matter from the surface to be protected before application of the coating lining or paving material .
The bituminous coating for bituminous coated pipes must be applied to the inside and outside of pipes to a minimum thickness of .
inch under AASHTO M Type A .
An asphalt mastic coating may be used instead of the bituminous coating on corrugated steel pipe if linings and paving are not required .
The asphalt mastic must be placed on the outside surface of the pipe .
The inside of the pipe does not need to be coated .
Asphalt mastic coatings must comply with AASHTO M except the asbestos fibers are not required .
The asphalt mastic material must be applied uniformly to the surface with a thickness of at least .
inch at any point .
The asphalt mastic coating must be applied at the fabrication plant .
Pinholes blisters cracks or lack of bond are cause for rejection .
Polymeric sheet coatings must comply with AASHTO M . The polymeric sheet coating must be applied to both sides of the galvanized sheet before corrugating .
The thickness of the coating must be at least .
inch .
Pinholes blisters cracks or lack of bond are cause for rejection .
A bituminous lining must be applied to the inside of the pipe over the bituminous coating wherever bituminous lining is shown .
For bituminous lined corrugated metal pipe the rivet heads inside the pipe must be located in the valley of the corrugation .
Provisions must be made at the ends of the pipes to retain bituminous material during the fabrication process .
Both the inside and outside surfaces must be bituminous coated under AASHTO M Type A .
In addition to this coating the valleys on the inside periphery must be filled by the centrifugal process with the same type of bituminous material to the extent that the thickness on the crests of corrugations is at least inch .
The lining must be smooth and uniform and its surface must be parallel to a line projected along the crests of the corrugations .
Bituminous paving must be applied to the inside bottom portion of the pipe over the bituminous coating under AASHTO M Type C where bituminous paving is shown .
If protective coatings are applied to pipes clearly identify the thickness of the metal on each section of pipe and fittings on the inner surface with paint or by other authorized means .
Repair damaged protective coatings linings and invert paving .
Use bituminous material under AASHTO M or other authorized materials to repair damaged bituminous coatings .
Use asphalt mastic material under AASHTO M to repair damaged asphalt mastic coatings .
Use tar base material under AASHTO M to repair damaged polymeric sheet coatings .
Coupling bands and connecting hardware for coated pipes must have a protective coating .
Coupling bands to be protected by coatings under AASHTO M may be singledipped with the coating thickness requirement waived .
SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE .D Coupling Bands Coupling bands for corrugated metal pipe must comply with either section .D or section .Db .
Choose one of the types of corrugated metal pipe coupling bands shown .
The metal bands must be corrugated dimpled or otherwise formed in a way that will effectively engage the corrugations of the pipe ends .
Coupling bands for corrugated steel pipe must comply with AASHTO M . Coupling bands for corrugated aluminum pipe must comply with AASHTO M . If channel or wing channel coupling bands are used the interior bend radii of the pipe flange and the channel must be at least the thickness of the metal of which they are formed .
Joints for siphons must consist of connections made with coupling bands shown for positive joints .
Do not use universal coupling bands .
Joints for siphons and joints for pipes shown as watertight must be watertight under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement and must comply with section .Da for watertightness .
.E Corrugated Steel Pipe .E General Corrugated steel materials must comply with AASHTO M and be fabricated from either zinccoated steel sheet or aluminumcoated steel sheet as shown .
Zinccoated steel sheet must comply with AASHTO M except the coating weight is determined under ASTM AAM and AAM .
Aluminumcoated steel sheet must comply with AASHTO M . .E Fabrication .Ea General Corrugated steel pipe must be fabricated by one of the following methods .
Riveting .
Helically corrugated steel pipe with a continuous helical lock seam .
Continuous helical welded seam paralleling the corrugation Pipes fabricated from .inchthick sheets must be helically corrugated steel pipe with a continuous helical lock seam or a continuous helical welded seam .
Annular corrugated steel pipe must be fabricated from sheets having either byinch or by inch corrugations .
.Eb Fabrication by Riveting Pipes fabricated by riveting must comply with AASHTO M . .Ec Fabrication by Continuous Helical Seam .Eci General Helically corrugated steel pipe must comply with AASHTO M . Helically corrugated pipe must be fabricated using corrugation profiles and continuous helical seam pitches as shown in the following table SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE Corrugation Profile Diameter Inches Nominal pitcha inches Max .
pitcha inches Nominal depth inches Seam pitcha inches aPitch must be measured at right angles to the direction of corrugations .
A tolerance of inch on seam pitch is allowable .
.Ecii Fabrication by Continuous Lock Seam You may use pipes fabricated with a continuous helical lock seam extending from end to end of each length for full circle and equivalent pipe arch sizes .
Fabrication must comply with AASHTO M . .Eciii Fabrication by Continuous Welded Seam You may use pipes fabricated with a continuous helical welded seam parallel to the corrugations for full circle and equivalent pipe arch sizes .
Control the welding process so that the combined width of the weld and adjacent spelter or aluminum coating burned by the welding does not exceed times the metal thickness .
If the spelter is damaged by the welding outside the specified area repair the weld and damaged spelter adjacent to the weld under section .B If the metalizing is applied immediately in a continuous operation following the resistance welding apply a coating of aluminum to the welded area of aluminumcoated pipe using the metalizing process under AWS C. except surface cleaning will not be required .
.E End Finish Helically corrugated steel pipe ends may be rerolled to form annular corrugations extending at least corrugations from the pipe end or to form an upturned flange with or without reformed annular corrugations .
The diameter of the reformed ends must not exceed that of the pipe barrel by more than the depth of the corrugation .
All types of pipe ends whether rerolled or not must be matched in a joint so that the maximum difference in diameter of the abutting pipe ends is inch .
If the ends of helically corrugated steel lock seam pipes have been rerolled the lock seam in the rerolled end must not contain visible cracks in the base metal and the tensile strength of the lock seam must be at least percent of the tensile strength required for the remainder of the pipe .
This requirement does not apply to the lock seam located within a flange formed in rerolling .
The rerolled ends of the pipe and flanges must exhibit good workmanship and must not have open lock seams .
If corrugated steel pipe is rerolled for coupling with a wing channel coupling or a channel coupling band the maximum distance from any point on the end of the pipe to the plane normal to pipe axis and passing through the outermost portion of the pipe end must not exceed the width of the channel minus the thickness of the pipe metal .
The difference between the minimum and maximum flange diameter must not exceed inch .
Fabricate pipes so that they can be joined effectively with the described standard coupling bands .
.E Damaged Galvanizing Repair damaged galvanized surfaces under section .B .
If you burn the galvanized surfaces by welding thoroughly clean all the surfaces of the welded connections by wire brushing and remove all traces of the welding flux and loose or cracked galvanizing before repair .
.E Damaged Aluminum Coatings Repair damaged aluminum coatings under section .B .
SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE .E Corrugated Steel Pipe Siphons The thickness of siphons must be the described thickness .
If coating is required coated pipes must comply with section .C .
Order pipes for siphons in lengths that will keep the number of field connections to a minimum .
If soldering is required the outside seams of pipe fabricated by riveting or continuous helical lock seam must be soldered the solder being sweated into the joints .
If the pipe is fabricated by riveting rivets on the circumferential seams must be spaced at approximately inch centers with a maximum spacing of inches .
If the pipe is fabricated by a continuous helical welded seam soldering is not required .
.F Corrugated Aluminum Pipe .F General Corrugated aluminum materials must comply with AASHTO M and AASHTO M . .F Fabrication .Fa General Corrugated aluminum pipe must be fabricated by riveting or with a continuous helical lock seam paralleling the corrugations .
Annular or helically corrugated pipe must be fabricated from sheets having byinch or byinch corrugations .
.Fb Fabrication by Riveting Pipes fabricated by riveting must be lap joint construction with annular corrugations .
Fabrication must comply with AASHTO M . .Fc Fabrication by Continuous Helical Lock Seam For full circle and equivalent pipe arch sizes you may install pipes fabricated with a continuous helical lock seam extending from endtoend of each length .
Fabrication must comply with AASHTO M . .F End Finish Helically corrugated aluminum pipe ends may be rerolled to form annular corrugations extending at least corrugations from the pipe end .
The diameter of the reformed ends must not exceed the diameter of the pipe barrel by more than the corrugation depth .
All types of pipe ends whether rerolled or not must be matched in a joint so that the maximum difference in diameter of the abutting pipe ends is inch .
If the ends of helically corrugated aluminum lock seam pipes have been rerolled the lock seam in the rerolled end must not contain visible cracks in the base metal and the tensile strength of the lock seam must be at least percent of the tensile strength required for the remainder of the pipe .
The rerolled pipe ends must exhibit good workmanship and must not have open lock seams .
Pipes must be fabricated so that they can be joined effectively with the described standard coupling bands. . CONSTRUCTION Excavate a pipe trench to the lines and grades established by the Engineer .
Grade and prepare the trench bottom to provide a firm and uniform bearing throughout the entire pipe length .
Lay annular corrugated pipe in a trench with .
Outside laps of circumferential joints upgrade .
Longitudinal laps positioned other than in the invert .
Separate sections spaced not more than inches apart and then firmly joined together Lay helical corrugated pipe in a trench with separate sections spaced not more than inches apart and then firmly jointed together with corrugations in alignment .
Corrugations or projections on the coupler must properly engage the corrugations of the pipe section before bolts are tightened .
Connect new corrugated metal pipe to new or existing drainage facilities as shown .
SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE Wherever pipes are connected to inlet and outlet structures place the ends of the pipes flush or cut them off flush with the structure face. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for corrugated metal pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
The payment quantity includes the length of pipe reducers bends wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
Pipe reducers are paid for as pipe of the larger diameter connected to the reducer .
If pipes are cut to fit a structure or slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in foot increments .
SLOTTED CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing slotted corrugated steel pipe. . MATERIALS Slotted corrugated steel pipe must be grateslot type as shown .
Grate assemblies for slotted corrugated steel pipe must comply with section but may be fabricated from any of the materials under section .
for steel bars plates and shapes .
Any damage to the galvanized surface of the pipe at the toe of the grate assembly fillet weld connection to the pipe must be repaired under section .B .
Where a heel guard is shown the heel guard must be expanded metal and must comply with ASTM F Type II Class and Grade B. Galvanizing must comply with section .B .
Coupling bands for slotted corrugated steel pipe must be galvanized or coated as shown .
Joints must be watertight .
If you use a channel coupling band place a inchthick closedcell sponge neoprene gasket or butyl rubber joint sealant in the channel interior for its full width .
If you use a modified hugger band place a butyl rubber joint sealant between the coupling band and the periphery of the pipe .
The butyl rubber joint sealant material must .
Be an extruded strip or bead compounded from a nondrying nontoxic synthetic resin base with butyl rubber and inorganic extenders and be percent solid material with no shrinkage .
Be furnished in byinch strips or inchdiameter beads on inchwide release paper and wound into rolls .
Have enough adhesion so that the strip or bead will adhere to the galvanized steel and be soft enough to allow cold flow if compressed during connection of the pipe sections .
Not flow or sag at temperatures up to degrees F or become brittle crack or lose adhesion at degrees F . Contain no migrating components that could leach out or produce a chemical reaction with the galvanized steel You may use an alternative joint sealant or sealing method for slotted corrugated steel pipe to provide a watertight joint if authorized. . CONSTRUCTION Do not start installation of slotted corrugated steel pipe until after paving of the traffic lanes adjacent to the pipe have been completed at the locations where the pipe is to be placed .
Join slotted corrugated steel pipe with coupling bands as shown .
Cover pipe slots with a heavy duty tape or other authorized covering during backfilling and paving activities to prevent material from entering the slots .
SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE Place cement treated structure backfill for slotted corrugated steel pipe under the details shown and section .E for soil cement beddings .
Cover the completed cement treated structure backfill with a curing seal of asphaltic emulsion Grade SS or CSS .
Do not place loads on the cement treated structure backfill within hours after placement. . PAYMENT Not Used SPIRAL RIB PIPE .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing spiral rib pipe .
The specifications for profile and fabrication in section do not apply to spiral rib pipe. . MATERIALS Steel spiral rib pipe must be fabricated by continuous helical lock seam under section .Ecii .
Aluminum spiral rib pipe must be fabricated by continuous helical lock seam under section .Fc .
The fabricated rib configuration for spiral rib pipe must be one of the following .
Three rectangular ribs spaced midway between seams with ribs inch wide by inch high at a maximum rib pitch of inches .
Two rectangular ribs and halfcircle rib equally spaced between seams with ribs inch wide by inch high at a maximum rib pitch of inches with the halfcircle rib diameter spaced midway between the rectangular ribs .
For steel spiral rib pipes rectangular ribs equally spaced between seams with ribs inch wide by inch high at a maximum rib pitch of inches The rib pitch measured at right angles to the direction of the ribs may vary by inch .
Coupling bands for spiral rib pipes must comply with section .D .
You may use the coupling band shown or an authorized coupling band under section .Db for use on a pipe corrugation of by inch for corrugated metal pipe on spiral rib pipe having by inch rerolled annular ends. . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used COMPOSITE STEEL SPIRAL RIB PIPE WITH SMOOTH INTERIOR .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing composite steel spiral rib pipe with smooth interior .
Composite steel spiral rib pipe must have a smooth interior and must comply with the specifications for corrugated metal pipe in section except profile and fabrication. . MATERIALS The precoated exterior of composite steel spiral rib pipe with polymeric sheet coating must comply with section .C .
The pipe interior must be lined with polyethylene polyolefin plastomer .
The pipe dimensions wall thickness and fitting tolerances must comply with ASTM AAM .
Composite steel spiral rib pipe must be fabricated by continuous helical lock seam under section .Ecii .
Three rectangular ribs must be spaced midway between seams with ribs inch wide by inch high at a maximum rib pitch of inches on center .
The rib pitch measured at right angles to the direction of the ribs may vary by inch .
SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE Pipes formed from polymer precoated sheets must comply with ASTM AAM Grade except the sheet side for the pipe interior must have additives that will enhance the bond of the sheet to the extruded polyethylene liner .
Before application of protective coatings the galvanized sheet must be cleaned with an alkaline cleaner followed by chrome pretreatment .
Steel sheets coated with zinc metallic coating must comply with ASTM AAM .
The polyethylene for filling the ribs and the internal liner must be virgin resin .
The virgin resin quality characteristics must comply with the values in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Melt index min ASTM D I .g min .
Flow rate ratio ASTM D II Density ASTM D . gcc .
Hardness Shore D ASTM D Ash content ASTM D . Joint coupling bands fabricated from the steel sheets used to manufacture pipes must comply with section .C and section .D except steel sheets with polymetric coating on both sides .
Coupling bands must be inches wide for nominal pipe diameters less than inches .
Coupling bands must be inches wide for nominal pipe diameters inches and greater .
Galvanized nuts bolts and washers must comply with section .B .
Expanded rubber gaskets must comply with ASTM D Type Class C and Grade .
Protect gaskets from excessive exposure to heat direct sunlight ozone oil or grease .
Gaskets placed over spiral ribs must have a groove routed to match the ribs depth and width before installation .
Do not substitute Orings for gaskets .
The gasket adhesive must be part urethane elastomeric joint sealant under ASTM C Type S Grade NS Class Use NT A and M. Use the sealant within months from the date of manufacture .
Store the adhesive at an ambient temperature of degrees F or below .
Do not use any adhesive that has been stored at temperatures exceeding degrees F. Manufactured pipe joints must comply with section .Db for sleeve joints .
Each standard and random length of pipe must be marked clearly in permanent letters not less than inch in height at intervals of feet or less with at least the following .
Manufacturers code and name or trademark .
ASTM AAM .
Nominal pipe size Each coupling band must be marked clearly with at least the following .
Manufacturers code and name or trademark .
ASTM AAM .
Nominal size The manufacturers code must include the day month year shift and manufacturing plant .
Store pipes in unit packages with the pipe ends protected from deformation and damage .
Support unit packages with racks or dunnage to prevent damage and bending .
Stack unit packages to ensure that the weight of the upper units will not cause deformation to pipes in the lower units .
Do not store pipes adjacent to electrical or exhaust heat sources .
Do not expose pipes to direct sunlight for periods exceeding days .
Cover pipes with an opaque sheeting material to provide sun protection .
Arrange the opaque sheeting material so that it provides adequate air circulation around pipes to reduce excessive heat accumulation .
Ship gaskets in containers SECTION CORRUGATED METAL PIPE that will prevent damage from UV exposure and handling .
Do not store gaskets near electrical or exhaust heat sources or where they will be exposed to the sunlight for more than hours. . CONSTRUCTION Lay composite steel spiral rib pipe in the same way specified for helical corrugated pipe in section .
except the gap between pipe sections must not be more than inch .
Clean the pipe ends before applying the adhesive and installing the gaskets and the coupling bands .
Cover the ends of installed composite steel spiral rib pipe that were not backfilled after installation at the end of each day .
Repair damaged polymeric pipe coatings on pipe and pipe fittings .
For polymeric coatings with damaged areas less than square inches in area repair breaks and scuffs under the manufacturers recommended repair procedures .
Do not install a pipe if the individual breaks or total area of the breaks exceeds square inches in area or if the total area of the breaks exceeds .
percent of the total pipe surface area .
The polymer repair material must be one of the following .
Denflex Coating Dennis Chemical Company St. Louis MO .
ScotchClad Protective Coating M Company St. Paul MN .
Ranbar Trispec TPC Black Synthetic Coating P.D .
George Company Manor PA Clean and dry surfaces to be coated .
The repair coating must be at least .
inches thick after hardening and must bond securely and permanently to the pipe .
Apply coats if the thickness of the repair coating is not measured .
Allow minutes drying time between the coats. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED STRUCTURAL PLATE CULVERTS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing structural plate culverts .
Excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section .
Section does not apply. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used STRUCTURAL METAL PLATE PIPE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit certificates of compliance for structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches .
Submit a copy of the manufacturers assembly instructions before assembling structural plates .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches must be fabricated from structural steel plates or structural aluminum plates .
The type of metal steel or aluminum is described .
Structural plates nuts and bolts for structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with AASHTO M MM .
Structural plates nuts and bolts for structural aluminum plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with AASHTO M . Bolts must be zinccoated steel and comply with ASTM A .
Nuts must be zinc coated steel and comply with ASTM A Grade C. Do not mix aluminum and steel materials in the same installation except steel bolts and nuts on structural aluminum plate pipe .
The thickness of galvanized coating for structural steel plate is determined under ASTM AAM and ASTM AAM .
If welding of steel is required it must comply with AWS D. Structural Welding Code .
Weld steel plates except fittings before galvanizing .
If welding of aluminum is required it must comply with AWS D.D.M Structural Welding Code .
The Engineer may perform nondestructive testing of the welds .
Corner plates must be at least .
inch thick for structural steel plate pipe arches that are .
inch thick .
SECTION STRUCTURAL PLATE CULVERTS .B Protective Coating Structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches must be protected with bituminous coating where coating is shown .
Coating must comply with section .C except polymeric sheet coatings are not allowed and asphalt mastic may be field applied .
If protective coating is applied to plates for structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches each plate must have the nominal metal thickness painted on the inner surface of each plate so that the plate thickness can be readily identified .
After installation coat the portion of nuts and bolts used for assembly of coated structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches projecting outside the pipe .
The portion of nuts and bolts projecting inside the pipe need not be coated .
If asphalt mastic is used for the protective coating the surface at pipe joints need not be coated before assembly .
Joints must be sealed thoroughly after assembly with the asphalt mastic on the outside of the sealed joint .
Repair damaged coatings under section .C .
.C Identification If plates of two dissimilar thicknesses are involved in one cross section of an installation the installation is described by pipe size and by a symbol designating the number and thickness of plates required .
For example the symbol .. designates an installation for one plate length composed of four .inchthick steel plates and one .inchthick steel plate the thicker plates to be centered on the invert .
This designation does not prevent you from using fewer plates if the minimum thickness requirements are complied with .
.D Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Assemble structural plates under the manufacturers instructions .
Repair damaged galvanized surfaces under section .B .
You may construct pipes and pipe arches with fewer plates than the number designated if the number of plates around the circumference of structural metal plate pipes and pipe arches are described .
Before backfilling tighten plate section bolts within the ranges shown in the following table Bolt diameter inch Torque ftlb Place struts as shown during construction of pipes arches and pipe arches .
Maintain the struts in place until backfill has been placed to the grading plane elevation or feet over the crown whichever is less .
Remove the struts before construction of structures at the ends of pipes arches and pipe arches .
Wherever pipes are connected to inlet and outlet structures place the ends of the pipes flush or cut them off flush with the structure face .
Each side of an arch must rest on a galvanized metal angle or channel bearing that is securely anchored to the footing and capable of resisting the arch thrust without damage to the angle or channel. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for structural metal plate pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
The payment quantity includes the length of bends and elbows .
If the pipe is cut to fit a structure or slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in foot increments .
SECTION STRUCTURAL PLATE CULVERTS METAL LINER PLATE PIPE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing metal liner plate pipe .
Metal liner plate pipe must be constructed from flange or flange plates .
Pipes must be circular and consist of a series of galvanized corrugated metal liner plates with a minimum width of inches for flange plates and inches for flange plates .
Furnish plates with inch diameter or larger grouting holes with pipe plugs .
When the plates are installed grouting holes must be spaced so that one line of holes is at the pipe crown and one line of holes is on each side at approximately the midpoint as shown .
The holes in each line must be not more than feet apart and holes in adjacent lines must be staggered .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for metal liner plate pipe .
Submit a copy of the manufacturers instructions before you assemble pipes .
For tension test specimens submit mill test reports as specified for plates for each heat and thickness upon notification .
.D Quality Assurance Prepare and test specimens for tension under ASTM AAM for plates and ASTM AAM for sheets. . MATERIALS .A General The base metal for liner plates must comply with ASTM AAM .
Ungalvanized flat sheets and plates must comply with the quality requirements in the following table Quality characteristics Tensile strength min psi Yield point min psi Elongation in inches min Galvanize plates under AASHTO M MM after the plates are formed punched and curved .
Bolts and nuts for assembling flange plates must not be less than inch in nominal diameter .
Bolts and nuts for circumferential flange seams must comply with ASTM A for Grade A chemical and mechanical requirements and Grade B dimensions .
Bolts and nuts for longitudinal seams must have square heads with a square shoulder to engage the plate .
Bolts and nuts for longitudinal plate seams from .
to .
inch thick must comply with ASTM A for Grade A chemical and mechanical requirements .
Bolts for longitudinal plate seams from .
to .
inch or thicker must comply with the chemical and mechanical requirements under ASTM A .
Nuts for use on bolts specified in ASTM A must comply with ASTM A for Grade A chemical and mechanical requirements and Grade B dimensions .
Bolts and nuts for the assembly of flange plates must not be less than inch in nominal diameter for .
to .
inch thick plates and not less than inch in nominal diameter for plates of greater thickness .
Bolts and nuts must be quickacting coarse thread complying with ASTM A .
Galvanize bolts and nuts under ASTM AAM .
The moment of inertia based on the average of ring of plates must not be less than the values shown in the following table SECTION STRUCTURAL PLATE CULVERTS Uncoated plate thickness Moment of inertia inchesinch inch flange flange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Longitudinal seams must have enough bolts to develop the ultimate seam strength shown in the following table Uncoated plate thickness Strength lbft of length of pipe inch flange flange .
. . . . . . . . Plates must be .
Punched for bolting on both longitudinal and circumferential seams or joints .
Formed to produce squarely formed flanges .
Fabricated so that complete erection is from the inside of the pipe Bolt holes in flanges must be spaced so that plates of the same curvature are interchangeable and to allow staggering of the longitudinal seams .
Drilling punching or drifting to correct defects in manufacturing is not allowed .
Plates with improperly punched holes will be rejected .
Circumferential bolt spacing must be approximately inches centertocenter for flange plates and must be approximately inches centertocenter for flange plates .
.B Pressure Grouting Grout for pressure grouting must consist of a suitable mixture of cementitious material sand and a chloridefree admixture designed to provide a pumpable mix .
The grout must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and no more water than necessary to provide a pumpable grout .
Materials for grout must be commercial quality .
Grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
Admixtures must comply with the specifications for admixtures in section except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of .
percent by weight and may be dispensed in solid form .
Add water to the mixer followed by cement and admixture .
Mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout .
Do not exceed gal of water per lb of cement .
Retempering of grout is not allowed .
SECTION STRUCTURAL PLATE CULVERTS Agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped .
.C Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Install pipes in existing embankments and natural ground by the tunnel method except you may use open trench methods with shaped bedding near the entrance if authorized .
Excavation must not precede plate installation by more than the width of a plate .
Do not leave any excavation including the face unsupported except during excavation activities .
Voids between the liner plate and the wall of the excavation must be forcegrouted within hours of excavation .
Assemble liner plates under the pipe manufacturers instructions .
Handle plates in a way that prevents bruising scaling or breaking of spelter coating .
Replace plates damaged during handling or placing and plates with damaged spelter coating except you may repair small areas of spelter coating with minor damage under section .B if authorized .
Tighten bolts specified in .
ASTM A to a torque from to ftlb .
ASTM A to a torque from to ftlb Metal liner plate pipe must not vary by more than foot from the line established by the Engineer and by more than .
foot from the grade established by the Engineer .
Grouting equipment must be .
Capable of grouting at a pressure of at least psi .
Equipped with a pressure gauge having a fullscale reading of not more than psi Force the grout through grouting holes in the plates in such a sequence and with enough pressure to completely fill the voids .
Remove the plugs in grouting holes adjacent to the grouting hole being force grouted to allow inspection of the grout filling .
You may use freerunning aggregate forced pneumatically into the voids between the liner plate and the wall of the excavation as temporary support of the excavation .
Pressure grouting of aggregate must comply with section .Bd if the aggregate is pressure grouted within hours of excavation. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for metal liner plate pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
RESERVED SUBSURFACE DRAINS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for constructing subsurface drains .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each type of subsurface drain involved .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Protective Coating If described as coated subsurface drains must be protected with a coating under section .C. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Repair damaged coatings under section .C .
.B Filter Fabric Remove loose or extraneous material and sharp objects immediately before placing filter fabric .
The subgrade and trench to receive the filter fabric must comply with the compaction and elevation tolerance specified for the material involved .
Handle and place filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
Align and place filter fabric without wrinkles .
Overlap adjacent roll ends of filter fabric at least inches .
The preceding roll must overlap the following roll in the direction that the permeable material is being spread .
Completely replace torn or punctured sections damaged during placement or repair by placing a piece of filter fabric that is large enough to cover the damaged area and comply with the overlap specified .
Cover filter fabric with the thickness of overlying material within hours of placing the fabric. . PAYMENT Not Used UNDERDRAINS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing underdrains .
Excavation and backfill must comply with section .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each type of pipe tubing and fitting .
SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS .C Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General For alternative pipe underdrain do not mix types of pipe in the same installation .
.B Perforated Steel Pipe Perforated steel pipe and coupling bands must comply with AASHTO M and AASHTO M with the following modifications .
Pipe must comply with any one of the full circle types specified in AASHTO M . .
Pipe perforations must be drilled or punched. . Perforations must be located in the inside of crests or in the flat tangent portion of all corrugations but not in both locations in a given length of pipe .
The weight of galvanizing must comply with ASTM AAM and ASTM AAM .
You may substitute sleeve type couplings for the band couplers required under AASHTO M . The couplings must be plastic or galvanized steel suitable for holding the pipe firmly in alignment without the use of sealing compound or gaskets .
The couplings must have mechanical properties that will prevent distortion under normal conditions of use .
.C Perforated Aluminum Pipe Aluminum underdrain pipe and fittings must comply with AASHTO M and the following modifications .
Pipe must comply with Type III specified in AASHTO M . .
Pipe perforations must be either drilled or punched . .
Minimum thickness of sheet must be .
inch .
You may substitute sleeve type couplings for band couplers required under AASHTO M . The couplings must be plastic or aluminum suitable for holding the pipe firmly in alignment without the use of sealing compound or gaskets .
The couplings must have mechanical properties that will prevent distortion under normal conditions of use .
.D Perforated Plastic Pipe Perforated plastic pipe must be smoothwall PVC plastic pipe corrugated PVC plastic pipe with a smooth interior surface or corrugated polyethylene plastic tubing .
Smoothwall PVC plastic pipe must comply with AASHTO M . Corrugated PVC plastic pipe with a smooth interior surface must comply with material and structural requirements in AASHTO M . Pipe must have perforations located in the bottom half of the pipe the perforations must be slots complying with the size and opening area requirements in AASHTO M . Inside diameter and diameter tolerances must comply with AASHTO M or M . Corrugated polyethylene plastic tubing must comply with AASHTO M or M . PVC plastic pipe must be connected with belled ends or with sleevetype or stoptype couplings under AASHTO M . Polyethylene tubing must be connected with snapon screwon or wraparound fittings and couplings under AASHTO M or AASHTO M . .E Underdrain Outlets and Risers Underdrain outlets and risers must be fabricated from the same material as the underdrain pipe or from corrugated metal pipe .
Do not mix aluminum and steel in the same installation except for covers and coupling band fastening hardware .
Outlet and riser pipe and fittings must not be perforated .
Welded steel covers must be galvanized under section .B after fabrication .
Welding workmanship and technique must be equal to the best practice in modern commercial shops .
SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS Covers must be fitted and bolted onto the riser pipe or elbow .
.F Permeable Material .F General Permeable material for use in backfilling trenches under around and over underdrains must consist of hard durable clean sand gravel or crushed stone and must be free from organic material clay balls or other deleterious substances .
Permeable material must have a durability index of not less than .
Use Class permeable material for underdrains unless the class or type of permeable material is specified in the special provisions .
At bridge abutments and wingwalls use either Class or Class permeable material .
Place filter fabric between Class permeable material and backfill .
No filter fabric is required with Class permeable material .
.F Class Permeable Material Alternative gradations within Class permeable material are identified by types .
Place one of the types specified for Class permeable material .
The percentage composition by weight of Class permeable material in place must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Class Permeable Material Gradation Requirements Sieve size Percentage passing Type A Type B No .
No .
No .
.F Class Permeable Material The percentage composition by weight of Class permeable material in place must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Class Permeable Material Gradation Requirements Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
Class permeable material must have a sand equivalent value of not less than .
SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS .F Class Permeable Material The percentage composition by weight of Class permeable material in place must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Class Permeable Material Gradation Requirements Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
At least percent by weight of Class permeable material must be crushed particles as determined by California Test .
.G Filter Fabric Filter fabric for use with underdrains must comply with section .B .
At bridge abutments and wingwalls filter fabric for underdrains must be Class A .
.H.N Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Excavate trenches for underdrains place filter fabric install pipe and backfill trenches with permeable material as shown .
Where underdrains are installed in trenches outside the subgrade area backfill the top inches of the trench with structure backfill complying with section .
Join lengths of perforated steel pipe and perforated aluminum pipe with couplers .
Lay perforated pipe with the perforations down .
Solvent cementing of joints on perforated plastic pipe is not required .
Repair damaged galvanized surfaces under section .B .
Underdrain outlets and riser covers must seat uniformly and not be subject to rocking .
Place perforated polyethylene tubing to line and grade in a closefitting semicircular bedding groove formed in the bottom of the trench .
At bridge abutments and wingwalls .
Install welded steel covers on underdrains terminating underground. . Place permeable material in horizontal layers .
Thoroughly consolidate permeable material along with and by the same methods specified for structure backfill in section .
Ponding and jetting of permeable material or structure backfill adjacent to permeable material is not allowed. . You may substitute permeable material for structure backfill material where the required width of backfill material adjacent to the neat lines of the permeable material as shown is approximately foot or less. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for pipe underdrain is the length measured parallel with the slope line .
The payment quantity includes the length measured along the centerline of elbows outlets and risers and the length of wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
HORIZONTAL DRAINS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing horizontal drains .
SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS Section does not apply. . MATERIALS Horizontal drains must consist of nominal inch schedule PVC plastic pipe complying with ASTM D. At your option the type grade and design stress designation of the pipe must be or as specified in ASTM D. The plastic pipe must comply with the National Sanitation Foundation Standard No .
if the plastic pipe is used to conduct water for human consumption .
Slotted pipe must have rows of slots .
The rows must be in the longitudinal direction of the pipe and the slots must be cut in the circumferential direction of the pipe .
The rows must be centered on of the rd points degrees apart of the pipe circumference .
Each row of slots must comply with one of the configurations shown in the following table .
The Engineer determines the configuration to be used .
Number of slots per linear foot Width of slot inch Minimum opening per linear foot square inches . . . . . .
Slots must be spaced uniformly along the pipe .
The minimum opening is measured on the inner surface of the pipe .
Perforated pipe must have rows of perforations with row on each side of the pipe and the rd row on the top .
The perforations must be inch in diameter spaced at inch centers with the top perforations staggered in relation to the holes on either side .
Fittings for the PVC plastic pipe must be schedule Type II PVC solvent weld type fittings and must comply with ASTM D. You may use machined male and female ends instead of couplings .
Unslotted or unperforated PVC plastic pipe approximately to feet in length must be provided at the outlet of the drain .
The Engineer determines the exact length of pipe. . CONSTRUCTION The locations shown for horizontal drains are approximate .
The Engineer determines the exact locations and placement sequence .
Any ordered exploratory work is change order work .
Complete the installation of horizontal drains at a bench in an excavation slope before excavating more than feet below the bench .
Furnish water required for drilling .
Drill horizontal holes to the designated lines and grades with rotary equipment capable of drilling to inchdiameter holes feet long through soil and rock formations .
Install plastic pipe with pipe slots or perforations on top by pushing it into the hole or inserting it inside the drill rod then retracting the drill rod so that the drilled hole is cased for the full depth .
Tightly plug the entrance end with a rounded or pointed extension that does not extend more than .
foot beyond the end of the pipe .
During casing activity cement plastic pipe together to form a continuous tube .
Prevent telescoping and damage to plastic pipe during installation .
Identify each drain by securely attaching a permanent brass plate with a number assigned by the Engineer to the outlet end of the nonperforated pipe drain or by other permanent marking designated by the Engineer .
Tightly plug the annular space between the hole and the pipe with earth for a length of at least feet at the outlet end of the drilled hole .
SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS Connect the outlet end of the drain to the collector system by installing a pipe tee pipe plug street ell and galvanized steel pipe or plastic pipe .
The Engineer determines the length of the pipe .
Furnishing and installing a collector system is change order work .
During drilling activities determine the drilled hole elevation at foot intervals and the elevation at the upper end of the completed drain hole .
You may take measurements by inserting tubes or pipes and measuring liquid levels or by other authorized methods .
Dispose of water used for drilling and water developed during drilling activities under section .
Comply with the requirements of the RWQCB for nonstormwater discharges and the Departments Construction Site Best Management Practices BMP Manual for dewatering. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for furnish and install drain pipe horizontal drain is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and from the outlet end to the collector system .
The payment quantity for drill hole is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe for the length of the hole drilled except the Department does not measure or pay for any hole drilled where the drain pipe can not be installed for the full length of the drilled hole .
EDGE DRAINS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing plastic pipe edge drains and edge drain outlets .
Edge drain outlets include .
Outlet pipes vent pipes cleanouts and Yfittings at cleanout pipes .
Intermediate outlet connections between the couplings at each end of the curved section of the Y fitting Edge drains include cross drain interceptors at structure approaches at end anchors or pressure relief joints and at pavement terminals joining existing pavements .
Section does not apply. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Pipe and Pipe Fittings Pipe installed in trenches to be backfilled with asphalt treated permeable material must be PVC degree C electric plastic conduit EPC or EPC and must comply with NEMA TC .
All other edge drain pipe and edge drain outlets vents and cleanouts must be one of the following .
PVC degree C electric plastic conduit EPC or EPC and must comply with NEMA TC . . PVC plastic pipe schedule or schedule and must comply with ASTM D. At your option the type grade and design stress designation of the pipe may be or as specified in ASTM D. Pipe must be straight end or bell end .
Bell end sockets must comply with ASTM D except for marking .
Pipe shown as slotted must have rows of slots in the pipe .
The rows must be in the longitudinal direction of the pipe and the slots must be cut in the circumferential direction of the pipe .
The rows must be spaced equally around the circumference of the pipe .
Each row must have uniformly spaced slots per linear foot of pipe .
The slots must be .. inch wide and of a length to provide at least .
square inches of slot opening per linear foot of pipe .
Other suitable configurations of slots that provide drainage equal to or better than the above slot requirements may be used if authorized .
SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS Fittings for PVC degree C electric plastic conduit must comply with NEMA TC and fittings for PVC plastic pipe must be sockettype fittings under ASTM D for schedule pipe and ASTM D for schedule pipe .
Yfittings must be shop fabricated from pipe as specified for the type of edge drain pipe installed .
The fitting must provide an unobstructed passageway through both legs of the Yfitting .
.C Treated Permeable Material At your option permeable material for edge drains must be asphalt treated permeable material or cement treated permeable material complying with section for treated permeable bases .
.D Filter Fabric Filter fabric must comply with section .B .
.E Miscellaneous Concrete for splash pads must be constructed of minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Mortar placed where edge drain outlets and vents connect to drainage pipe and existing drainage inlets must comply with section .
Expansion type pressure plugs for cleanouts must seat firmly against the pipe lip and be one of the following .
Expandable plugs manufactured from neoprene under section .B with commercial quality stainless steel bolts and hex nuts .
Commercial quality expandable duct plugs consisting of reinforced polypropylene rigid threaded plug with a commercial quality thermoplastic rubber sealing ring Aggregate base for backfilling trenches in existing paved areas must comply with the materials specifications for Class aggregate base inchmaximum gradation under section .B .
Use minor HMA to backfill trenches in existing asphalt shoulders .
The inch screen or grate must be made of commercial quality galvanized metal with nominal inch square openings .
.F.H Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Before excavating trenches for the installation of edge drains outlets vents and cleanouts in existing paved areas cut the outline of the paved areas to be removed to a neat line to a minimum depth of inches with a powerdriven saw or a wheel type rock cutting excavator .
Cuts along the joint between existing asphalt concrete and existing concrete pavement are not required .
Remove concrete deposits that could occur along the lower edge of the concrete pavement in Type installations .
Join pipe and fittings with commercial quality solvent cement and primer specifically manufactured for use with rigid PVC plastic pipe and fittings .
The solvent cement and primer must be made by the same manufacturer .
The color of the primer must contrast with the color of the pipe and fittings .
Apply the solvent cement and primer under the manufacturers instructions .
Spread treated permeable material when the atmospheric temperature is above degrees F. You may spread the treated permeable material in or more layers .
Where edge drains are to be installed adjacent to asphalt treated permeable base you may spread the lower inches of asphalt treated permeable material in a separate operation then spread the upper portion of the asphalt treated permeable material with the adjacent asphalt treated permeable base .
Place asphalt treated permeable material at a temperature of not less than degrees F or more than degrees F except the temperature of asphalt treated permeable material spread with asphalt treated permeable base must comply with section for spreading asphalt treated permeable base .
SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS Compact asphalt treated permeable material spread with adjacent asphalt treated permeable base with the adjacent base and in the same way specified in section for compacting the base .
Compact all other layers of treated permeable material with a vibrating shoetype compactor connected to the spreading device .
The vibrating shoetype compactor must be in operation when the material is being spread in the trench and must be turned off when the material is not being spread .
Cure cement treated permeable material that is not covered with HMA within hours after compacting the permeable material by sprinkling the material with a fine spray of water every hours during daylight hours or by covering the material with a white polyethylene sheet not less than mils thick .
Start the curing requirements at a.m. on the morning following compaction of the cement treated permeable material and continue for the next hours or until the material is covered with HMA whichever is less .
Do not spray the cement treated permeable material with water during the first hours after compacting .
You may cover the cement treated permeable material with the polyethylene sheet during the first hours or before the start of the curing period .
Backfill and compact trenches in existing embankment areas with native material .
Aggregate base backfill must be spread and compacted by methods that produce a uniform base firmly compacted and free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
Place Type A pavement markers under section on paved shoulders or dikes at outlet vent and cleanout locations where authorized .
The waiting period for placing pavement markers on new HMA surfacing does not apply .
Clean edge drain outlets vents and cleanout pipes during installation and remove obstructions after installation .
Use a highpressure flexible hose with a nominal inchdiameter nozzle containing flushing and propelling jets .
Insert the hose into each edge drain outlet vent and cleanout pipe and push it through the pipe with a minimum psig water pressure so that the entire edge drain system is penetrated by the flushing nozzle .
At your expense replace pipes found to be plugged including replacement of treated permeable material surfacing and backfill materials .
Install outlet and vent covers at the end of each outlet pipe and vent pipe .
Dispose of surplus excavated material. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for edge drain is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe with no deductions for gaps in edge drain pipe at outlets and vents .
The payment quantity for edge drain outlet is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe .
PERMEABLE MATERIAL BLANKET Reserved RESERVED Reserved GEOCOMPOSITE DRAIN SYSTEMS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing geocomposite drain systems .
Geocomposite drain includes filter fabric and plastic pipe .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for the geocomposite drain certifying that the drain produces the specified flow rate .
The certificate must be accompanied by a flow capability graph for the geocomposite SECTION SUBSURFACE DRAINS drain showing flow rates and the externally applied pressures and hydraulic gradients .
Include verification by an authorized laboratory for the flow capability graph .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Filter fabric must be Class A .
.B Geocomposite Drain Geocomposite drain must comply with the specifications for geocomposite wall drain .
.C Plastic Pipe Plastic pipe must comply with the specifications for pipe for edge drains and edge drain outlets in section .
.D Drainage Pads Drainage pads must be constructed of minor concrete .
.E Treated Permeable Base Treated permeable base to be placed around slotted plastic pipe at the bottom of geocomposite drains must comply with section .
If asphalt treated permeable base is used place the base material at a temperature of not less than degrees F or more than degrees F. . CONSTRUCTION Install the geocomposite drain with the drainage void and the filter fabric facing the embankment .
The fabric facing the embankment side must overlap at least inches at all joints and wrap around the exterior edges at least inches beyond the exterior edge .
If additional fabric is needed to provide overlap at joints and wraparound at edges the added fabric must overlap at least inches and be attached to the fabric on the geocomposite drain .
Place core material manufactured from impermeable plastic sheeting having nonconnecting corrugations with the corrugations approximately perpendicular to the drainage collection system .
If the fabric on the geocomposite drain is torn or punctured replace the damaged section completely or repair it by placing a piece of fabric that is large enough to cover the damaged area and provide at least a inch overlap. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED OVERSIDE DRAINS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing overside drains .
Excavation and backfill must comply with section .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each of the following materials .
Steel .
Aluminum .
Plastic .D Quality Assurance Joints for overside drains must comply with section .Da for watertightness. . MATERIALS .A General For alternative pipe downdrain choose of the types shown .
Fabrication of overside drain materials must comply with the details and dimensions shown .
If authorized minor variations may be used to allow the use of the manufacturers standard jigs and templates during the fabrication .
The material thickness must be not less than the thickness described .
For pipe downdrains under concrete slope paving the end of the downdrain must consist of steel pipe or steel conduit .
Do not mix steel and aluminum pipe in the same installation .
You may use the anchor assemblies shown with an aluminum installation if the anchor assemblies are electrically insulated .
Plastic pipe and fittings used for overside drains must be from manufacturer for each installation .
Welding workmanship and techniques must be equal to the best practice in modern commercial shops .
.B Steel Pipe Overside Drains Steel entrance tapers pipe downdrains reducers coupling bands and slip joints must be fabricated from galvanized steel sheets and must comply with AASHTO M and section .
The nominal thickness of the sheet must be at least .
inch .
The pipe must be Type I pipe under AASHTO M . Steel tapered inlets and flume downdrains must be fabricated from steel sheets under section .B .
Coupling bands for corrugated steel pipe must comply with either section .B or section .Db for downdrain pipe .
The weight of galvanizing for overside drain materials must comply with ASTM AAM and AAM .
Galvanized surfaces on overside drain materials that are damaged must be repaired under section .B .
.C Aluminum Pipe Overside Drains Aluminum entrance tapers pipe downdrains reducers coupling bands and slip joints must be fabricated of aluminum sheets and comply with AASHTO M and section .
The nominal thickness of the sheet must be at least .
inch .
The pipe must be Type I pipe under AASHTO M . SECTION OVERSIDE DRAINS Aluminum tapered inlets and flume downdrains must be fabricated of aluminum sheet complying with AASHTO M with a thickness of at least .
inch .
Coupling bands for corrugated aluminum pipe must comply with either section .C or section .Db for downdrain pipe .
.D Plastic Pipe Overside Drains Plastic pipe for overside drains must be Type S corrugated highdensity polyethylene pipe and comply with section .
Plastic pipe joints must comply with section .Db .
If pipe joint details are shown the tensile strength requirements do not apply .
The joint overlap requirements for integral joints must comply with the requirements for positive joints .
.E Anchor Assemblies A single anchor assembly includes .
pipe stakes with necessary hardware .
Bars or coupling bands .
Hardware for fastening downdrain pipe or flume downdrain .
Pipe stakes plates bars clip brackets and hardware must be hotdip galvanized after fabrication under section .B .
.F Cable Anchorage System Cable anchorage systems for pipe downdrains must comply with section .E .
Cables welded steel eyes steel rods turnbuckles thimbles cable clamps and anchor plates must comply with specifications for similar materials in section .B .
Steel pipe must comply with specifications for pipe posts in section .F .
Concrete for concrete anchors must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
.G Protective Coatings If described as coated metal overside drains must be protected with coating under section .C .
If a protective coating is applied to a metal overside drain each section of the downdrain pipe and each accessory must have the nominal thickness of the metal clearly identified on the inner surface with paint or other authorized means .
Repair damaged coatings under section .C. . CONSTRUCTION Install entrance tapers and tapered inlets so that they function properly and efficiently keep material in the dike and prevent water from percolating under or around them .
The seal between the taper or inlet and the surrounding material must be watertight .
Connect an entrance taper to a downdrain pipe by means of a band coupler or a slip joint .
Weld or rivet bulkheads and outlet pipes or flume pieces to the taper or inlet to form watertight connections .
Securely anchor a downdrain to the slope of the ground as shown if the downdrain is not in a trench .
Cable must not contact soil in finished position .
Either adjust position or replace affected portion of cable with galvanized steel rod of equivalent diameter .
If a plastic pipe joint restrainer assembly under Alternative A is used install it immediately below the pipe bell .
The bell end of a plastic pipe overside drain must face uphill .
SECTION OVERSIDE DRAINS .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for pipe downdrain is measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
The payment quantity includes the length of elbows wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
If the pipe is cut to fit a structure or slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in foot increments .
Payment for the length of slip joints is not included in the payment for pipe downdrain .
The payment quantity for pipe downdrains under concrete slope paving is measured from the beginning of the corrugated steel pipe to the end of the downdrain .
The payment quantity for an entrance taper includes the length of the tapered section and the tail pipe .
The payment quantity for a tapered inlet includes the length of the tapered section and the flume stub .
RESERVED MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for installing miscellaneous drainage facilities for water drainage and transmission and constructing casings for bridges .
Miscellaneous drainage facilities include pipe components made of pipe or other materials .
Pipe risers include pipe riser connections and bar reinforcement steel riser safety cage .
Miscellaneous drainage facilities do not include steel covers frames and grates frames and covers manhole frames and grates manhole frames and covers or other miscellaneous metal parts .
Iron and steel items used for miscellaneous drainage facilities must comply with section .
For a miscellaneous drainage component with alternative in the bid item description choose from the types of the component shown .
Do not mix different types of the same component in the same location. . MATERIALS Steps and ladders must be steel if they are installed in steel or concrete drainage facilities or aluminum if they are installed in aluminum drainage facilities .
Hardware installed in aluminum drainage facilities must be aluminum .
Epoxyresin adhesive for bonding a pipe slip joint to a cross drain must comply with the materials specifications for applying epoxyresin adhesive to concrete .
Boards for redwood covers must be no .
heart structural grade SS redwood .
Minor concrete drainage appurtenances including concrete foundations bases and basin floors must comply with section . . CONSTRUCTION Excavation and backfill for miscellaneous drainage facilities must comply with section .
Attach steps and ladders to miscellaneous drainage facilities where described .
If new drain inlets or manholes are placed in paved or surfaced areas do not construct the drain to final grade until the paving or surfacing adjacent to the drain is completed .
Install drainage pipe stubs pipe riser connections and bar reinforcement steel riser safety cages. . PAYMENT The Department does not pay for pipe or casing in excess of the length shown .
The payment quantity for any type of pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe to the nearest .
foot of pipe .
CORRUGATED METAL PIPE DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing drainage facilities with corrugated metal pipe .
Corrugated metal pipe and coatings must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
PAYMENT Not Used WELDED STEEL PIPE DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section included specifications for fabricating and installing drainage facilities with welded steel pipe .
Drainage facilities constructed with welded steel pipe include .
Energy dissipators .
Inlets .
Risers .
Reducers .
Manholes .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit color options for the finish paint .
The Engineer selects the color of the finish paint .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Test the pipe under the operating head for hours with no leaks .
Correct any leaks or defects and retest if necessary. . MATERIALS .A General Welded steel pipe must comply with one of the following specifications .
AWWA C . ASTM AAM Grade B . API Specification L Grade B or Grade X .B Coatings .B General If a coating is described coat all portions of the welded steel pipe drainage facility .
Repair of internal and external wall coatings must comply with the following .
Breaks or scuffs in the epoxy coating that are less than square inches must be repaired by the application of epoxy material similar to and compatible with the durability adhesion and appearance of the original epoxy coating under section of AWWA C . Repair coating must be a minimum thickness of .
inch mils after drying .
Department rejects a pipe section if individual breaks exceed square inches or if the total area of breaks exceeds .
percent of the total surface area of the pipe section .B Coal Tar Coating A coal tar coating for welded steel pipe must be applied before shipping as follows .
The interior and exterior surfaces must be cleaned primed and coated with coal tar enamel . .
The exterior surface must be wrapped with a bonded felt wrapper under AWWA C and section A. of the appendix .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES .B FactoryApplied FusionBonded Epoxy Coating Factoryapplied fusionbonded epoxy coating must be applied to the interior and exterior surfaces of welded steel pipe under AWWA C. If a fusionbonded epoxy coating will be exposed to abovegrade sunlight the exterior coated wall surfaces must be primed and painted .
The primer and paint must comply with the type standard and coating thickness as shown in the following table Coatings Type Standard Coating thicknessa mil Primer Zinc rich AASHTO M ..
Finish paint Exterior grade latex satin or flat Complying with State VOC requirements and as recommended by the manufacturer of inorganic zincrich primer .. aDry film thickness .B Asphalt Coating Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General After the pipe has been fabricated and welded into lengths it must be thoroughly cleaned of dirt oil grease loose scale and other foreign material .
Perform field welding under AWWA C. Install welded steel pipe such that it is not electrically connected to or in direct physical contact with other metal pipe .
If welded steel pipe is mechanically connected to public utility lines or other metal pipe provide electrically insulated connections .
Place the connections within feet of the pipes ingress or egress to any building or structure .
Electrically insulated connections are not required for connections to nonmetallic pipe .
If backfill material contains rock or highly expansive clay soils install a sand shield under AWWA C section A. of the appendix .
Before backfilling at the welded joints pressure test the pipe .
.B Coatings Repair damage to coatings under section .C. . PAYMENT Not Used PRECAST CONCRETE PIPE DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing drainage facilities with precast concrete pipes. . MATERIALS PC concrete pipe for drainage facilities must comply with AASHTO M MM .
Concrete must comply with section except for the aggregate gradation requirements .
Reinforcement must comply with section . . CONSTRUCTION Construct mortar joints under section .
You may form inlets in place as an alternative to using PC concrete pipe and cutting the side openings .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
PAYMENT Not Used DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES .
GENERAL .A General Section .
includes general specifications for fabricating and installing appurtenances to drainage facilities .
Drainage appurtenances include .
Miscellaneous metal appurtenances .
Drainage inlet markers .
Drainage gates Miscellaneous metal appurtenances are not included in the payment for miscellaneous drainage facilities .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Construct concrete appurtenances under section .
.D Payment Not Used .
FLARED END SECTIONS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for fabricating and installing flared end sections .. .A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance The Department accepts a PC concrete flared end section based on section .. of AASHTO M . .B Materials .B General Minor fabrication variations in flared end sections may be authorized .
.B Concrete Flared End Sections PC flared end sections must comply with the specifications for Class III reinforced concrete pipe in AASHTO M and the following requirements .
Portland cement and aggregate must comply with section except for the aggregate gradation requirements .
Area of steel reinforcement per linear foot of a flared end section must be at least equal to the minimum steel requirements for circular reinforcement in a circular pipe with the same diameter as the internal diameter of the circular portion of the flared end section Reinforcement must comply with section .
Cutoff walls for PC concrete flared end sections must be minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES .B Metal Flared End Sections Metal flared end sections must be prefabricated steel or aluminum sections .
Prefabricated steel flared end sections must comply with AASHTO M and AASHTO M . Prefabricated aluminum flared end sections must comply with AASHTO M and AASHTO M . Metal flared end sections may be used as an alternative to PC concrete flared end sections or plastic flared end sections .
Metal flared end sections used on concrete pipe inches in diameter or smaller must have toe plates .
Mortar used to connect metal flared end sections to PC concrete pipe must comply with section .
Welded wire fabric must be commercial quality .
.B Plastic Flared End Sections Plastic flared end sections must comply with ASTM D. .B Alternative Flared End Sections An alternative flared end section must be the same material type as the drainage facility that it is attached .
Comply with the material specifications in section .
.C Construction Construct cutoff walls under section .
.D Payment Not Used .. DRAINAGE GATES .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing drainage gates .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Automatic Drainage Gates .Ba General An automatic drainage gate must .
Provide free outflow .
Prevent backflow .
Be attached to the pipe or anchored to a concrete wall The gate must be assembled in the shop and its cast iron parts must be shop coated with commercial quality asphaltic paint .
.Bb Automatic Drainage Gates for Low Head Pressure Reserved .Bc Automatic Drainage Gates for High Head Pressure Reserved .B Slide Headgates Reserved .C Construction Not Used SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES .D Payment Not Used .
INLET DEPRESSIONS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing inlet depressions for drainage .
.B Materials .B General Reserved .B Hot Mix Asphalt Inlet Depressions HMA drainage inlet depressions must comply with section .
In shoulder areas of roadways use the HMA type that is specified for roadway construction .
In locations outside the shoulder areas use the HMA type that is specified for miscellaneous areas .
.B Concrete Inlet Depressions Concrete drainage inlet depressions must comply with specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
.C Construction If necessary to match the grade of the surrounding material place and finish HMA by hand .
Whenever concrete pavement is placed near an inlet depression place the pavement before constructing the inlet depression .
Whenever concrete inlet depressions are constructed in shoulder areas place the concrete on the prepared base material compacted to at least percent relative compaction .
After the placement to the lines and grades shown smooth the surface with a float and trowel .
If concrete is adjacent to isolation joints smooth the surface with an edger .
Broom finish the smoothed concrete surface .
Create a surface with a coefficient of friction of at least .
when tested under California Test .
Apply any necessary water immediately before brooming the surface .
Cure the concrete under section .I .
.D Payment Not Used .
DRAINAGE INLET MARKERS .A General Section .
includes specifications for installing drainage inlet markers .
.B Materials If a specific type of drainage marker is not shown choose one of the following .
Thermoplastic .
Medal medallion .
Plastic medallion .
Stamped concrete The thermoplastic drainage inlet marker must be free of lead and chromium and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES Thermoplastic Inlet Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Thickness in .. Legend color nonreflective Blue or green Background color nonreflective AASHTO M White Skid resistance min BPNa ASTM E aBPN means British Pendulum Number The metal medallion drainage inlet marker must be fabricated from commercialgrade stainless steel aluminum brass or bronze sheet metal or cast and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Metal Medallion Inlet Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Thickness of metal in ..
Height of marker in .. Legend color nonreflectiveb Blue or green Background color nonreflectiveb White or bare metal Skid resistance min BPNa ASTM E aBPN means British Pendulum Number bRequirement if metal marker is colored The plastic medallion drainage inlet marker must be fabricated from plastic that contains UV inhibitors and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Plastic Medallion Inlet Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Thickness in .. Thickness with dome in .. Legend color nonreflective Blue or green Background color nonreflective White Weathering resistance ASTM D year without yellowing fogging or pitting .C Construction Install prefabricated drainage inlet markers by .
Mechanically cleaning and preparing the surface .
Attaching the prefabricated drainage inlet markers to the surface with adhesives fasteners or heat as recommended by the manufacturer Install stamped concrete drainage inlet markers by .
Imprinting uncured concrete with an authorized concrete stamp for drainage inlet markers .
Producing stamped concrete surfaces that are free from blemishes .D Payment Not Used SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES ..
RESERVED GRATED LINE DRAINS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for installing grated line drains .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for the grate line drains from the manufacturer .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Concrete backfill must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
PC polymer concrete drain sections must be either nonsloped uniform depth sections to inches or .
percent presloped sections with graduated depths from to inches .
.B Line Drain Channel Drain channel sections must be manufactured using monolithic polymer concrete with no side extensions .
The interior surface of the line drain channel must be smooth below the level of the frame grate and associated connections .
Monolithic polymer concrete must be consist of aggregate with either polyester resin or vinyl ester resin .
The polymer concrete must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tensile strength min psi ASTM C Compressive strength min psi ASTM C Bending strength min psi ASTM C Moisture absorption max ASTM C . Chemical resistance ASTM C Pass Freezethaw number of cycles without weight loss min ASTM C .C Line Drain Frames and Grates Line drain frames and grates must meet the following design and performance requirements .
Grated line drain frames and grates must be manufactured of ductile iron complying with section .. Frames and grates include bolts nuts frame anchors and other connecting hardware .
Galvanizing or asphalt paint coating is not required. . Frames and grates whether onepiece or separate must be classified heavy duty traffic rated with a transverse proofload strength of pounds .
Grates and frames must be piece anchored into the body of the line drain unless shown as removable .
Removable grates must be separate from the frame and must .. Be held in place by locking devices that are tamper resistant ..
Provide a minimum repetitive pullout resistance of lbft of length after completion of hours of salt spray testing under ASTM B .. Be match marked in pairs before delivery to the job site and grates must fit into the frames without rocking .
If a combination of piece frame and grate and removable grates are used the locations of the removable grates are shown .
Except for grates installed within designated pedestrian paths of travel grate design must accept inflow of runoff through openings consisting of a minimum of percent of the total top surface area SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES of the grate .
Individual openings or slots must have a dimension not greater than inches measured in the direction of the grated line drain flow line. . Grates installed within designated pedestrian paths of travel must be certified as conforming to the provisions of the ADA. . CONSTRUCTION Excavation and backfill must comply with section .
Grated line drains must be installed in trenches excavated to the lines and grades established by the Engineer .
Grade and prepare the bottom of the trench to provide a firm and uniform bearing throughout the entire length of the grated line drain .
Installation of grated line drains and joints must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Install grated line drains to the lines and grades with sections closely jointed and secured such that no separation of the line drains occur during backfilling .
The frame or grate must not extend above the level of the surrounding concrete backfill .
Connect grated line drains to new or existing drainage facilities as shown .
Place concrete backfill in the trench as shown .
Place against undisturbed material at the sides and bottom of the trench in a manner that prevents floating or shifting of the grated line drain and voids or segregation in the concrete .
Immediately remove foreign material that falls into the trench before or during concrete placement .
Where necessary construct and compact earth plugs at the ends of the concrete backfill to contain the concrete within the trench .
Secure frames or line drain wall to the surrounding concrete backfill with steel anchoring rods as shown .
Alternative securing methods must provide a minimum pullout resistance of lbft of length of grated line drain frame .
Concrete backfill must be finished flush with the adjacent surfacing .
The surface of the concrete must be textured with a broom or burlap drag to produce a durable skid resistant surface. . PAYMENT Not Used CASINGS FOR BRIDGES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing welded steel pipe casings through bridges and under approach slabs .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit shop drawings for the temporary support of casings at the abutments .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES .B Casing Casings for bridges must be welded steel pipe complying with section .. Before shipping the exterior surfaces of the casing must be cleaned primed and coated to comply with ANSIAWWA C or ANSIAWWA C. Wrapping tape for repairing damaged coating and wrapping field joints and fittings must be a pressure sensitive PVC or polyethylene tape with a minimum thickness of mils inches wide .
.C Casing Hanger Assemblies Casing hanger assemblies include a concrete clevis plate adjustable steel yoke cast iron pipe roller steel roller rod and hex nuts .
Steel components must be galvanized .
You may use embedded steel welded linked eye rods instead of a clevis plate .
The casing hanger assembly must be rated for the water supply line and casing .
Clevis plate yoke roller rod expansion anchors pipe clamps nuts and bolts and other fittings must be adequate for the type and size of the water supply line and casing being supported .
Clevis plate expansion anchors yoke rod pipe clamps nuts and bolts and other fittings must be steel and comply with section .. .D Concrete Casing Supports Concrete casing supports must consist of either a PC or CIP minor concrete pipe cradle galvanized steel pipe clamp and anchor bolts .
Wire mesh and reinforcement must be commercial quality .
Moist cure the PC concrete casing support for at least days .
Epoxy for anchoring the concrete casing supports must be one of the following types .
Epoxy binder .
Rapid set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers .
Standard set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers .
CONSTRUCTION Install casings at each abutment and extend the casing to the greater of .
feet beyond the approach slab .
feet beyond the end of the adjacent wingwall .
feet beyond the abutment Where the casing passes through an abutment wall the casing must be additionally wrapped with layers of lb asphaltfelt building paper securely taped or wired in place .
Anchor PC concrete casing supports with epoxy .
If a blockout is shown in the bridge abutment wall for the casing the space between the casing and bridge abutment wall must be filled with mortar complying with section .
Openings for casings through the bridge superstructure concrete must either be formed or consist of pipe sleeves that are two pipe sizes larger than the casing .
Repair damaged coating on the casing and wrap field joints and fittings with wrapping tape as follows .
Before wrapping thoroughly clean and prime the pipe casing joints and fittings under the tape manufacturers instructions. . Wrap the tape tightly with uniform lap free from wrinkles and voids to provide not less than a mil thickness. . Wrapping at joints must extend at least inches over adjacent pipe casing coverings .
Apply tension such that the tape will conform closely to contours of the joint .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for welded steel pipe casing is the length measured along the centerline of the casing .
RESERVED EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for performing work on existing drainage facilities .
Drainage facilities include culverts inlets headwalls endwalls aprons drains pipes gutters gutter depressions junction structures spillways and check dams. . MATERIALS Temporary pipe plug must be one of the following .
Wall of minor concrete not less than inches thick .
Tight brick wall not less than inches thick with cement mortar joints .
Commerciallymanufactured plug if its use is required for less than months .
CONSTRUCTION Trenches holes depressions and pits caused by removing salvaging reconstructing abandoning destroying modifying resetting relocating adjusting relaying remodeling and rehabilitating highway facilities must be backfilled with embankment material under section .
If the trenches holes depressions and pits are in surfaced areas that remain undisturbed backfill with material that is equal or better in quality and to the thickness of the surrounding materials .
Where partial removal of reinforced concrete is required remove a sufficient volume of concrete to expose the reinforcement for splicing .
Splicing must comply with section .
Clean off material adhering to the reinforcement before placing new concrete. . PAYMENT Not Used REMOVE DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
GENERAL Section includes work for removing drainage facilities. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Box culverts inlets headwalls and endwalls must be completely removed if any portion of these structures is within feet of the grading plane in excavation areas within foot of original ground in embankment areas or shown to be removed .
Except for concrete pipe removing PCC components of drainage facilities must comply with section .B .
Reuse frames grates and covers at the locations shown. . PAYMENT Payment for removing and reusing frames grates and covers is included in the payment for the various items of work that include the reused frames grates and covers .
REHABILITATE DRAINAGE STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section includes specifications for cleaning and preparing inspecting and evaluating repairing rehabilitating and reinspecting culverts .
Storm drains pipes conduit risers downdrains median drainage inlets and underdrains are included in the work under section if they are attached to the culvert .
SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES Repair as described .
Repairing includes .
Filling voids below and around the exterior of the culverts .
Restoring culvert openings .
Smoothing protrusions inside culverts Rehabilitate as described .
Rehabilitating includes .
Filling voids below and around culverts .
Paving culvert inverts .
Installing pipeliners inside culverts For a miscellaneous drainage component with alternative in the bid item description choose from the types of the component shown .
Do not mix different types of the same component in the same location .
.A Definitions alternative pipeliner Bid items used where more than one type of pipeliner is shown for a given culvert .
annular space Space or void between the outside wall of the pipeliner and the inside wall of a culvert .
lateral pipe opening Opening in a culvert for a connecting pipe or drain of any kind .
service opening Opening in a culvert for maintenance repair inspection or cleaning .
wastewater Water and contaminants generated by culvert rehabilitation .
waterway Existing drainage system including surface water tributaries and groundwater .
.A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance .Aa General Use an authorized laboratory with staff experienced and capable of conducting the specified testing .
Your staff that performs inspections must be trained and experienced in locating defects breaks and obstacles .
.Ab Preconstruction Meetings .Abi Prerehabilitation Meeting Before starting cleaning and preparation work you must schedule and attend a prerehabilitation meeting with the Engineer .
Include any subcontractors manufacturers and other parties involved in the culvert work .
Provide a meeting facility that is within miles of the job site or at another location accepted by the Engineer .
.Abii Pregrouting Meeting Before starting grouting work you must schedule and conduct a grouting meeting with the Engineer and your personnel involved in the grouting work including your .
Project superintendent .
Supervisory personnel .
Grouting foreman .
Grouting subcontractors Provide a meeting facility that is within miles of the job site or at another location accepted by the Engineer .
.Ac Quality Control .Aci Annular Space Grouting The grout cast density at the point of placement must be from to lbcu ft and the minimum compressive strength must be psi at days .
SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES Test the grout for compressive strength under ASTM C except that specimens must be moist cured before the day compressive strength test and not be oven dried .
If the grouting plan shows multiple stages the grouting plan must include test results that verify that the grout stiffness is adequate for placement of multiple lifts .
For each batch of grout perform density and viscosity tests under ASTM C and ASTM C in the presence of the Engineer .
Grout density must be within lbcu ft of the density in the authorized grout plan with mix design .
The time of efflux outflow must not exceed seconds as specified in ASTM C unless otherwise authorized .
For pipeliners with a stiffness of less than psi the grout pumps pressure measured at the point of injection must not exceed either of the following .
psi .
Manufacturers instruction For pipeliners with a stiffness of at least psi the grout pumps pressure measured at the point of injection must not exceed .
psi .
The pipeliner must be able to withstand a static head of grout that is inches above the highest crown elevation .
The maximum grout pressure for a static grout head must not exceed the grout pumps maximum allowable pressure .
Install a grout pressure gauge and recorder immediately adjacent to each injection port .
Continuously record on paper with ink the actual grouting pressure versus time .
Record grout pressure to an accuracy of .
psi .
Attach a gauge to a saddletype diaphragm seal to prevent clogging with grout .
.Acii CCTV Recording CCTV recordings must be made and submitted in high quality electronic media such as CD or DVD .
The CCTV equipment must include .
CCTV camera with articulating head .
Transporter adapted for conditions of the culvert .
Television monitor .
Lighting .
Cables and power sources CCTV equipment must .
Be specifically designed and constructed for pipe inspection .
Have camera lighting for minimizing reflective glare .
Have an adjustable focaldistance range from inches to infinity .
Produce a minimum resolution of lines per inch for both the camera and monitor .
Have a remotereading meter counter accurate to percent over the length of the particular section being inspected Verify accuracy of the distance meter in the CCTV with a walking meter rollatape or other authorized device .
Where human entry is possible for the entire length of the culvert you may use a handheld video camera with lighting as an alternative to CCTV .
Video and audio content must comply with the requirements for CCTV .
Inspect at a rate that is not more than feet per minute .
.Aciii Photographs Use a digital camera and lighting .
Lighting and photo quality must be suitable to provide clear and focused photographs of the entire culvert surface under all conditions .
.Aciv Monitoring of Annular Space Grouting Wherever a pipeliner with annular space grouting is described monitor the grouting and record pressures throughout the grouting process .
Verify compliance with the manufacturers instructions for each phase of SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES the grouting process .
Gauges must comply with ANSI B Grade A .
The pressure gauges recorder and field equipment must be calibrated by an independent testing agency .
.Acv Pipeliners Pipeliners must be continuous over the entire length of the culvert and must have no visual defect such as foreign inclusions concentrated ridges discoloration pitting pin holes cracking or other deformities .
The pipeliner must not be overdeflected .
There must not be segregation or voids in the grout .
.Acvi Deflection Testing of Pipeliners If a pipeliner with annular space grouting is described test the pipeliner for deflection .
Test after grouting and in the presence of the Engineer .
For pipeliners with a nominal inside diameter of inches or less either pull a mandrel through the pipeliner by hand or use another authorized method .
The mandrel must be .
Rigid and nonadjustable .
Comprised of at least legs and have an odd number of total legs .
Longer than it is wide .
Made of steel .
Fitted with pulling rings at each end .
Stamped or engraved on some segment other than a runner indicating pipeliner material specification nominal size and mandrel outside diameter e.g .
HDPE F SDR . .
Furnished in a suitable carrying case labeled with the same data as stamped on the mandrel .
Authorized before use For pipeliners with a nominal inside diameter greater than inches determine the deflection using a inch diameter rigid nonadjustable metal bar a minimumradius rigid template or other authorized method .
The pipeliner must not be overdeflected .
For pipeliners inches or less in nominal diameter the mandrel must pass through the entire pipeliner .
For pipeliners greater than inches in nominal diameter the deflection must be the lesser of either of the following .
percent greater than the actual dimension of the pipeliner in place .
This actual dimension includes the pipe joint system. . percent of the nominal pipeliner dimension .
If more than percent of the nominal pipeliner dimension is overdeflected the pipeliner is rejected .
If percent or less of the nominal pipeliner dimension is overdeflected the pipeliner may remain in place and the Department deducts percent of the bid amount for that pipeliner .
.B Materials .B General Slurry cement backfill for culverts must comply with section .E .
.B Contact Grout Grout for contact grouting must comply with section and contain .
Not more than percent bentonite by weight of cement and water .
Not less than lb of cement per cubic yard If sand is used in the grout mix the sand must comply with section .C and the gradation requirements in the following table SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES Sieve size Percent passing No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
.B Annular Space Grout Grout for annular space grouting must be lowdensity foam concrete that consists of water cementitious materials foaming agent and optional chemical admixtures .
Cementitious materials must comply with section except .
Use of SCM is not mandatory .
You may only use SCM if you submit a statement from the foaming agents manufacturer verifying that the foaming agent is compatible with the SCM Foaming agent must comply with ASTM C. .C Construction .C General Comply with the following work sequence and notify the Engineer before you start each of the following steps .
Clean and prepare .
Inspect and evaluate .
Repair culvert .
Rehabilitate culvert .
Restore openings .
Perform postrehabilitation inspection Before starting the inspection the culvert must be clean and free of water and debris .
During all culvert work keep the culvert clean and free of water and debris .
Wherever culvert struts are described in the grouting plan install struts before starting any grouting .
Wherever structural concrete repairs to the culvert are shown or ordered the structural concrete repair must be complete and the concrete must have a compressive strength of at least psi before starting any grouting .
Wherever concrete invert paving is shown or ordered the invert paving must be complete and the concrete paving must have a compressive strength of at least psi before starting any grouting .
.C Cleaning and Preparation Remove all debris sediment and other accumulated material from the culvert invert and restore the flow area to the original flow area or to the diameter shown .
Where shown disconnect down drains towards the downstream end of the culvert .
Clean the culvert with highvelocity cleaning equipment and air mover or mechanically powered equipment .
If human entry is possible you may use nonmechanically powered cleaning equipment .
.C Inspection and Evaluation After cleaning and preparation is complete inspect the entire length of the culvert and submit the inspection and evaluation report .
Inspect by either CCTV or human entry .
If sediment debris or other accumulated material is found during inspection stop the inspection and reclean the culvert .
Cleaning must comply with the manufacturers instructions for the type of pipeliners SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES shown .
Cleaning must be complete to allow accurate CCTV and photography of the entire culvert .
No payment is made for recleaning .
Make a degree inspection video and photographic record of each joint and lateral joint .
If the CCTV camera does not pass from one end of the culvert through the entire length of the culvert reset the equipment and inspect from both ends until the entire length is documented .
If the inspection video is low quality and does not adequately depict the condition of the culvert correct the deficiencies and reinspect the culvert .
Low quality may result from .
Poor camera head position .
Poor focus .
Low lighting .
Rapid rate of progression .
Missing documentation of time and location .
Inadequate cleaning of the culvert No payment is made for reinspection due to low quality and recleaning .
.C Repairing After obtaining authorization of the inspection and evaluation report repair the existing culvert as described or ordered .
Complete repairs before starting rehabilitation work .
.C Rehabilitation .Ca General Place slurry cement backfill around the culvert and below the culvert invert as shown .
.Cb Annular Space Grouting Before starting grouting activities install the bulkheads and place grout injection tubes and breather tubes with removable plugs around the pipeliner and through bulkheads as shown in the authorized grouting plan .
Grout the entire annular space between the pipeliner and culvert without voids or grout segregation .
If you determine before starting grouting that the entire annular space is not accessible for grouting submit a work plan for correcting the annular space to allow for grouting .
No payment is made for correction of the annular space to allow for grouting .
Mix the water cementitious materials and chemical admixtures before adding the foaming agent to the grout .
Add the foaming agent at the job site .
Grout must be placed in a continuous manner and injected in lifts .
The height of the lifts must not exceed the height in the authorized grout plan or be less if needed to avoid floating shifting or deforming the pipeliner .
Monitor the injection pressure including the pressure for the last lift at the crown .
If the pipeliner can not withstand grouting pressures or static head either reduce the maximum pressure at the point of grout injection or employ staged grouting .
.Cc Restoring Openings Within hours of installing a pipeliner restore the lateral pipe and service openings risers downdrains median drainage inlets and underdrains .
Restore these openings before starting pipeliner installation at another culvert location .
The openings must conform and match the invert of connecting pipes .
Do not excavate unless authorized .
Restore openings from the interior of the pipe .
Use either a CCTV and remotecontrol cutting device or human entry .
The area of the restored opening must be at least percent of the original area .
Openings must have an edge that is crackfree smooth and free of burrs and projections .
SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES Where human entry is possible grout the restored opening so that the seal is watertight .
Grout must be one of the following .
Quickset epoxy mortar .
Highviscosity epoxy .
Hydrophilic vulcanized expansive rubber strip .
Manufacturers recommended mix .Cd Postrehabilitation Inspection Postrehabilitation inspection must comply with section .C .
.D Payment Payment for the following work is included in the payment for cleaning inspecting and preparing the culvert .
Cleaning and preparation .
Quality control and assurance .
Keeping the culvert free of water and debris .
Inspection and evaluation .
Repairing .
Performing postrehabilitation inspection Unless a separate pay item is described for diverting the culvert flow payment for diverting the flow of water away from the culvert is included in the payment for cleaning inspecting and preparing the culvert .
Repairs additional cleaning disconnecting downdrains and reconnecting down drains are paid as change order work unless such work is described in the Contract .
Record the quantity of slurry cement backfill that is installed in the culvert and submit this quantity .
The Department does not pay for slurry cement backfill material that is wasted disposed of or remaining on hand after the completion of the work .
Pipeliners are measured along the flow line of the existing culvert .
No payment is made for pipeliner length in excess of the measured length . .
FILL CULVERT VOIDS Reserved .
CONTACT GROUTING Reserved .
INVERT PAVING Reserved .
EDPM RUBBER PIPE JOINT SEAL Reserved .
WELDED STEEL PIPELINERS Reserved .
PLASTIC PIPELINERS Reserved .
CUREDINPLACE PIPELINERS Reserved SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES .
MACHINE SPIRAL WOUND PVC PIPELINERS .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section .
includes specifications for installing machine spiral wound PVC pipeliners directly into the culvert .. .Ab Definitions Reserved .Ac Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each reel of PVC strip and include .
Name of the manufacturer .
Plant location .
Date of manufacture and shift .
Cell classification .
Unit mass .
Average pipeliner stiffness and profile type .Ad Quality Assurance Reserved .A Materials Each reel and continuous PVC strip must be distinctively marked on the inside surface at intervals not exceeding feet and with a coded number .
The coded number must include .
Name of the manufacturer .
Plant location .
Date of manufacture and shift .
Minimum strip thickness .
Cell classification and profile type .
Size The marking must be visible from inside the completed pipeliner .
.A Construction Restore openings .
.A Payment Not Used .B Machine Spiral Wound PVC Pipeliners Grouted .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for installing a continuous spiral wound PVC pipeliner into the interior of an existing culvert and filling the annular space with grout .
The pipeliner must be wound directly into the culvert using equipment that is either self running or static .
Where human entry is feasible the pipeliner may be wound by hand inside the culvert .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals If you use pressure for installing the pipeliner the annular space grouting plan must include .
Manufacturers instructions for the maximum internal pressure .
Maximum differential pipeliner pressures SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES .Bd Quality Assurance The nominal dimensions for the pipeliner must comply with dimensions shown .
.B Materials PVC profile strips must comply with ASTM F or ASTM F. You may use alternative profile types and corresponding minimum properties if authorized .
.B Construction Pipeliner installation must comply with ASTM F or ASTM F. The profile strip may be nonreinforced or reinforced with a continuousprofiled steel strip with interlocking edges .
Sealants and gaskets necessary for effectively interlocking the edges of the profile strip must be preapplied at the time of manufacture .
Lock edges together as the strip is wound into the culvert .
If the profile strip is reinforced mechanically lock the profiled steel band onto the outside of the PVC pipeliner .
For circular culverts wind the profile strip at a fixed diameter .
For noncircular culverts wind the profile strip at a fixed dimension .
Leave an annular space between the pipeliner and culvert wall .
The ends of the pipeliner must be flush with the culvert unless a beveled end is shown .
After grouting and beveling where shown seal the ends of the culvert between the pipeliner and culvert with cement mortar under section .F .
.B Payment Not Used .C Machine Spiral Wound PVC Pipeliners Expandable Diameter .C General Section .C includes specifications for installing a continuous spiral wound pipeliner into the interior of an existing culvert and expanding the pipeliner radially against the culvert .
.C Materials PVC profile strips must comply with ASTM F. .C Construction Pipeliner installation must comply with ASTM F. The pipeliner must be continuous over the entire length of the insertion .
Install PVC strips directly into the culvert from an insertion point and expand the strips radially against the culvert after insertion .
Sealants and gaskets necessary for effectively interlocking the edges of the profile strip must be pre applied at the time of manufacture .
Lock edges together as the strip is wound into the culvert .
Seal the ends of the culvert between the pipeliner and culvert with cement mortar under section .F .
.C Payment Not Used .
CEMENTITIOUS PIPELINERS Reserved ..
RESERVED MODIFY DRAINAGE STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for partially removing adjusting and adding to drainage facilities .
.B Materials Not Used SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
PIPES .A General Modifying pipes includes extending pipes .
Extending pipes must comply with the specifications for new pipe installation .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Existing headwalls or end walls must be removed or moved to a new location .
If headwalls or end walls are to be moved cut the pipe so that it has smooth edges at a point approximately foot behind the headwall or end walls and perpendicular to the centerline of the pipe .
Move the headwall or end wall to the reconstructed location and connect the pipes .
.D Payment Not Used .
INLETS MANHOLES AND RISERS .A General Not Used .B Materials Not Used .C Construction Modify inlet manhole and riser structures by capping .
Excavate and remove structures to a depth of at least foot below the grading plane .
Cap inlet structures with minor concrete .
Where shown round the bottom of structures with minor concrete .
Minor concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Backfill to match the grading plane .D Payment Not Used .
SLOTTED PIPE GRATE Reserved ADJUST DRAINAGE STRUCTURES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for partially removing and either lowering or raising facilities .
Adjust to grade with new materials that are similar in character to the existing materials. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Not Used SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES .B Frames Covers Grates and Manholes Adjust frames covers grates and manholes by lowering before cold planing and raising after paving or surfacing .
Before opening the lane to traffic either complete permanent paving or surfacing or temporarily fill any depressions with HMA .
Where paving or surfacing work is shown do not adjust to final grade until the adjacent pavement or surfacing is complete .
For a structure that is to be raised remove the cover or frame and trim the top of the structure to provide a suitable foundation for the new material .
Instead of using new materials similar in character to those in the existing structure you may use raising devices to adjust a manhole to grade .
Before starting paving work measure and fabricate raising devices .
Raising devices must .
Comply with the specifications for section except that galvanizing is not required Have a shape and size that matches the existing frame .
Be match marked by painting identification numbers on the device and corresponding structure .
Result in an installation that is equal to or better than the existing one in stability support and nonrocking characteristics .
Be fastened securely to the existing frame without projections above the surface of the road or into the clear opening Where manholes are to be lowered remove the facility to .
feet below finished grade or to an authorized depth .
Adjust the manhole using the taper needed to match the finished grade .
If a manhole cover is unstable or noisy under traffic place a coil of asphaltsaturated rope a plastic washer or asphaltic compound on the cover seat .
Before placement obtain authorization for use of the material .
.C Inlet Adjust inlets as shown .
Use minor concrete with at least pounds of cementitous material per cubic yard .
Where inlets are adjusted before placing the uppermost layer of pavement or surfacing limit the work area so that adjusting the inlet and final paving or surfacing is completed within the same work day .
The top of the inlet grate or cover must be protected during paving operations by heavy plywood covers steel plate covers or other authorized methods .
Excess paving material must be removed before rolling .
Where inlets are adjusted after placing the uppermost layer of pavement or surfacing do not adjust the inlet to final grade until the paving or surfacing has been completed immediately adjacent to the inlet. . PAYMENT If adjust inlet is paid by the linear foot adjusting the inlet is measured as the difference in the length between the top of the existing inlet and the top of the adjusted inlet .
If no item is shown for adjust inlet payment for adjusting the inlet is included in the payment for the type of pavement or surfacing shown in the Bid Item List .
If no item is shown for adjust inlet and pavement or surfacing is not involved payment for adjusting the inlet is included in the payment for the type of excavation shown in the Bid Item List .
If no item is described for adjust frames covers grates or manholes payment for adjusting these materials is included in the payment for the type of pavement or type of surfacing in the Bid Item List .
If no item is shown for adjust frames covers grates or manholes and if pavement or surfacing is not involved payment for adjusting these materials is included in the payment for the type of excavation shown in the Bid Item List .
SECTION EXISTING DRAINAGE FACILITIES ABANDON DRAINAGE STRUCTURES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for partially removing and rendering facilities unserviceable in place .
Wherever manholes or drainage facilities are abandoned pipes entering the manhole or drainage facility must be securely closed by a tightfitting plug that is either of the following .
Wall of minor concrete not less than inches thick .
Tight brick wall not less than inches thick with cement mortar joints The bases of manholes or drainage facilities must be broken so that water is prevented from being entrapped .
Demolish the manhole or drainage facility to an elevation that is .
feet below finished grade .
Backfill must comply with section .E .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
MANHOLES Reserved .
CULVERTS AND PIPELINES Reserved .
INLETS Reserved ..
RESERVED SALVAGE DRAINAGE FACILITIES .A GENERAL Section includes specifications for salvaging drainage facilities .
Salvage drainage facilities as shown .
.B MATERIALS Not Used .C CONSTRUCTION Not Used .D PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED DIVISION VIII MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION SLOPE PROTECTION GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing slope protection. . MATERIALS Construct slope protection or slope paving using minor concrete .
Unless otherwise specified fabric must be Class RSP fabric. . CONSTRUCTION Earthwork must comply with section .
If placement of fabric is required place the fabric before placing slope protection slope paving and gabions .
Before placing the fabric the surface of the slope must be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the fabric .
Handle and place the fabric under manufacturers instructions .
Place the fabric loosely on the slope such that it conforms to the surface without damage to the fabric when the cover material is placed .
Join the edges of the fabric with either overlapped joints or stitched seams .
If the fabric is joined with overlapped joints the adjacent borders of the fabric must be overlapped by at least inches .
Overlap in the same direction that the cover material is placed .
If the fabric is joined by stitched seams stitch with contrasting colored yarn .
Use the size and composition of yarn that is recommended by the fabric manufacturer .
Use to stitches per inch of seam .
The strength of a stitched seam must be the same as that specified for the fabric except if the stitched seams are oriented up and down a slope the strength may be reduced to a value that it is at least percent of that specified for the fabric .
Do not operate equipment or drive vehicles directly on the fabric .
If the fabric is damaged and the Engineer determines that it can not be repaired replace the fabric .
If the Engineer determines that the fabric can be repaired then repair it by covering the damaged area with new fabric .
If the repair is made using overlapped joints the overlap must be at least feet. . PAYMENT The Department does not pay for additional fabric used for overlaps .
ROCK SLOPE PROTECTION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing RSP .
Use the class of rock and the method for placement described. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Rock For Method A placement and the class of RSP described comply with the rock gradation shown in the following table SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION Rock Gradation for Method A Placement Rock size Percentage larger thana Class T T T T T ton ton ton ton ton ton ton aFor any class the percentage of rock smaller than the smallest rock size must be determined on the basis of weight .
For all other rock sizes within a class the percentage must be determined on the basis of the ratio of the number of individual rocks larger than the smallest size shown for that class compared to the total number of rocks .
For Method B placement and the class of RSP described comply with the rock gradation shown in the following table Rock Gradation for Method B Placement Rock size Percentage larger thana Class T T T Light Facing No .
No .
No .
ton ton ton ton lb lb lb lb lb aFor any class the percentage of rock smaller than the smallest rock size must be determined on the basis of weight .
For all other rock sizes within a class the percentage must be determined on the basis of the ratio of the number of individual rocks larger than the smallest size shown for that class compared to the total number of rocks .
Rock material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Rock Material Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Apparent specific gravity min California Test .
Absorption max California Test .
Durability index min California Test Notes Durability absorption ratio DAR course durability indexpercent absorption If the DAR is greater than the absorption may exceed .
percent .
If the DAR is greater than the durability index may be less than .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION Select rock such that the shapes provide a stable structure for the required section .
If the slope is steeper than do not use rounded boulders and cobbles .
Angular shaped rock may be used on any planned slope .
Flat or needleshaped rock must not be used unless the individual rock thickness is greater than .
times the length .
.C Fabric Fabric must be RSP fabric that complies with the class shown in the following table Fabric Class Class Largest rock grading class used in slope protection ton or smaller Larger than ton .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Excavate the footing trench along the toe of the slope .
Local surface irregularities of the RSP must not vary from the planned slope by more than foot as measured at right angles to the slope .
At the completion of slope protection work fill voids in the footing trench with excavated material .
Compaction is not required .
.B Placement Method A Do not place rocks by dumping .
Place larger rocks in the footing trench .
Place rocks on the slope such that their longitudinal axis is normal to the face of the embankment .
Place foundation course rocks such that they are in contact with the ground surface .
For rocks above the foundation course place them such that each rock has a point bearing on underlying rocks do not bear them on smaller rocks which may be used for chinking voids .
.C Placement Method B Rocks may be placed by dumping and may be spread in layers by bulldozers or other suitable equipment .
Place rocks such that .
There is a minimum of voids .
Larger rocks are in the toe course and on the outside surface of the slope protection .
PAYMENT If RSP is paid by the ton the payment quantity is the weight determined from scale weighings .
If RSP is paid by the cubic yard the payment quantity is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or ordered .
CONCRETEDROCK SLOPE PROTECTION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing concretedrock slope protection .
Use the class of rock and the method for placement described. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION .B Concrete If colored slope protection is described color the concrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the concrete .
The synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring concrete .
The color of the completed concrete after curing and when air dry must match color no .
of FED STD .
Use the inchmaximum combined aggregate gradation in the concrete .
The water content of the concrete must allow gravity flow into the interstices with limited spading and brooming .
.C Rock Rocks for concretedrock slope protection must comply with the gradation shown in the following table ConcretedRock Gradation Rock size Percentage larger thana Class T T Light Facing Cobble ton ton ton lb lb lb aFor any class the percentage of rock smaller than the smallest rock size must be determined on the basis of weight .
For all other rock sizes within a class the percentage must be determined on the basis of the ratio of the number of individual rocks larger than the smallest size shown for that class compared to the total number of rocks .
Rock for concretedrock slope protection must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Rock Material Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Apparent specific gravity min California Test .
Absorption max California Test .
Durability index min California Test Notes Durability absorption ratio DAR course durability indexpercent absorption If the DAR is greater than the absorption may exceed .
percent If the DAR is greater than the durability index may be less than Select rock such that the shapes provide a stable structure for the required section .
If the slope is steeper than do not use rounded boulders and cobbles .
Angular shaped rock may be used on any planned slope .
Flat or needleshaped rock must not be used unless the individual rock thickness is greater than .
times the length .
.D Weep Tubes Weep tubes must .
Be schedule perforated PVC pipe complying with section .D .
Have a inch nominal diameter SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Excavate a footing trench along the toe of the slope .
Mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
Local surface irregularities of the concretedrock slope protection must not vary from the planned slope by more than foot as measured at right angles to the slope .
At the completion of slope protection work fill voids in the footing trench with excavated material .
Compaction is not required .
.B Placement Method A Placement Method A must comply with section .B .
.C Placement Method B Placement Method B must comply with section .C .
.D Placing Weep Tubes Wrap each weep tube in filter fabric .
Place weep tubes and secure them such that they contact the face of the fabric on the slope and extend at least inches beyond the outer surface of the rock .
If placement of fabric on the slope is not required the end of the tube near the slope must be covered with a cap made of the same material as the weep tube .
Ensure that concrete will not plug the tube and perforations .
.E Placing Concrete The surface of the rock to be concreted must be cleaned of adhering soil and then moistened .
At any one location place the concrete in a continuous operation during a work day .
Deposit concrete by use of chutes tubes buckets pneumatic equipment or other mechanical methods .
Do not allow the concrete to flow more than feet across the slope protection .
Immediately after depositing spade and rod the concrete into place with suitable spades trowels or other suitable means .
The minimum concrete penetration must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Minimum Concrete Penetration Requirements Rock class T T Light Facing Cobble Penetration in After placing the concrete thoroughly brush the rocks to expose the top surfaces .
Outer rocks must project above the concrete by a height of .. times the rock diameter .
After completion of any foot strip do not allow workmen or loads on the surface for at least hours .
Cure the concretedrock slope protection by one of the methods specified for curing concrete .
As an alternative you may cure the concretedrock slope protection by sprinkling a fine spray of water every hours during the daytime for a period of days .
If colored concrete is described and you use the curing compound method apply curing compound no .
. . PAYMENT If concretedrock slope protection is paid by the ton the payment quantity is the weight determined from scale weightings .
If concretedrock slope protection is paid by the cubic yard the payment quantity is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or ordered .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION SMALLROCK SLOPE PROTECTION .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing smallrock slope protection. . MATERIALS Rock must be cobble gravel crushed gravel crushed rock or any combination of these .
If the rock layer is shown as inches thick comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Rock Gradation for inchThick Layer Sieve size Percentage passing inch inch inch inch If the rock layer is shown as inches thick comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Rock Gradation for inchThick Layer Sieve size Percentage passing inch inch inch inch If the rock layer is shown as inches thick comply with gradation requirements shown in the following table Rock Gradation for inch Thick Layer Sieve size Percentage passing inch inch inch inch Granular material must contain at least percent crushed particles when tested under California Test . . CONSTRUCTION Local surface irregularities of the smallrock slope protection must not vary from the planned slope by more than inches as measured at right angles to the slope .
Small rocks may be placed by dumping and may be spread by bulldozers or other suitable equipment .
During spreading do not crack the rock. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for smallrock slope protection is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or ordered .
CONCRETE SLOPE PROTECTION GUTTER LINING DITCH LINING AND CHANNEL LINING .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for shaping slopes preparing the foundation and constructing any of the following SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION .
Concrete slope protection .
Lined gutters .
Ditch linings .
Channel linings .
Support walls .
Cutoff stubs .
Cutoff walls .
Footings .
Aprons Construct slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining using minor concrete or shotcrete .
Reinforcement must comply with section . . MATERIALS Pervious backfill material must comply with section .D .
Expansion joint filler must comply with section .B .
Shotcrete must comply with section .
If colored slope protection is described color the concrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the concrete .
The synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring concrete .
The color of the completed concrete after curing and when air dry must match color no .
of FED STD .
Weep tubes must .
Be schedule perforated PVC pipe complying with section .D .
Have a inch nominal diameter .
CONSTRUCTION Evenly grade the foundation including all surfaces where concrete is to be placed such that no point on the graded surface is above the designated plane .
Wrap each tube in fabric .
Place weep tubes as shown or ordered .
Placing concrete must comply with section .
At each weep tube and drain hole place a securely tied sack that contains cubic foot of pervious backfill .
The sack material must comply with the specifications for fabric in section .C .
Mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
Spread and tamp concrete until it is thoroughly compacted and mortar flushes to the surface .
If the slope is too steep to allow the use of concrete wet enough to flush with tamping tamp the concrete until it is consolidated and immediately trowel on a mortar surface that is inch thick .
The mortar must consist of part portland cement and parts fine aggregate .
After strikingoff to grade handfloat the concrete with floats that are at least inches wide and inches long .
Broom the entire surface with a stiffbristle broom to produce a uniform surface .
Brooming must be done when the surface is set enough to prevent deep scarring and must be accomplished by drawing the broom down the slope leaving marks parallel to the edge of the slope .
The Engineer may direct you to apply a fine spray of water to the surface immediately before brooming .
Edges and joints must be edged with a inchradius edger before the brooming .
Install transverse expansion joints at foot intervals .
Fill the expansion joints with inchthick expansion joint filler .
After placing the concrete fill the footing trenches with excavated material .
Compaction is not required .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION Cure concrete slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining by with one of the methods specified for curing condrete .
If colored concrete is described and you use the curing compound method apply curing compound no. . Construct finish and cure shotcrete slope protection under section . . PAYMENT The payment quantity for concrete slope protection constructed with minor concrete or shotcrete is the product of the area measured along the slope lines of the completed concrete slope protection and the thickness shown for the concrete slope protection .
The Department does not pay for additional concrete placed due to over excavation .
BROKENCONCRETE SLOPE PROTECTION Reserved RESERVED SLOPE PAVING .
GENERAL .A General .A Summary Section .
includes general specifications for constructing slope paving .
Construct slope paving using minor concrete or shotcrete .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Reserved .A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Shotcrete must comply with section .
The aggregate size used in minor concrete must be from to inch .
If colored slope paving is described color the concrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the concrete .
The synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring concrete .
The color of the completed concrete after curing and when air dry must match color no .
of FED STD .
Expanded polystyrene and premolded expansion joint filler must comply with section .
.C Construction .C General Construct concrete curbs before constructing sidewalks or slope paving .
Concrete curbs must comply with section .
Mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
Before applying concrete or shotcrete evenly grade foundations such that no point on the graded slope is above the slope plane shown .
Thoroughly compact foundations .
Foundations must contain enough moisture to provide a firm foundation and to prevent absorption of water from the concrete or shotcrete .
Foundations must be free of surface water .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION Schedule the construction of the slope paving such that the work including placing and finishing concrete or shotcrete and applying curing compound is completed on the same day that the work is started .
If the Engineer determines that the size of the slope paving is too large to be constructed without an intermediate construction joint place a joint at an authorized location .
Complete a section of concrete or shotcrete bounded by permissible construction joints within the same day .
Cure slope paving by the curing compound method using curing compound no. . .C Minor Concrete Construct and finish minor concrete slope paving under section .
Spread and tamp the concrete until it is thoroughly compacted and mortar flushes to the surface .
If the slope is too steep to allow the use of concrete wet enough to flush with tamping then tamp the concrete until it is consolidated and immediately trowel on a mortar surface that is inch thick .
The mortar must consist of part portland cement and parts fine aggregate .
After strikingoff to grade handfloat the concrete with floats that are at least inches wide and inches long .
Broom the entire surface with a stiffbristled broom to produce a uniform surface .
Brooming must be done when the surface is set enough to prevent deep scarring and must be accomplished by drawing the broom down the slope leaving marks parallel to the slope .
The Engineer may order you to apply a fine spray of water to the surface immediately before brooming .
.C Shotcrete Construct and finish shotcrete slope paving under section .
After the shotcrete has been placed to the depth shown check the surface with a straightedge .
Place additional mortar to bring any low spots or depressions up to the proper grade .
The finish of the shotcrete slope paving must be uniform without humps or hollows of more than inch in feet .
.D Payment The payment quantity for slope protection concrete constructed with minor concrete or shotcrete is the product of the area computed from measurements along the slope of the actual areas constructed and the thickness shown for the concrete slope paving The Department does not pay for additional concrete or shotcrete placed due to overexcavation . .
EXPOSED AGGREGATE SLOPE PAVING .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing slope paving with an exposed aggregate finish .
.B Materials Construct exposed aggregate slope paving using minor concrete .
Coarse aggregate must comply with the inch by no .
primary size coarse aggregate specified in section .Cb .
Concrete set retarders must be commercialquality and manufactured specifically for use on the top surface of concrete .
The retarder must effectively slow down the setting time of the cement and fine aggregate matrix long enough to permit exposing the aggregates .
.C Construction Mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
Place and consolidate the concrete such that the coarse aggregate remains uniformly distributed throughout the concrete .
You may apply a concrete set retarder to the surface of the concrete after placing consolidating and finishing of the concrete is complete .
Apply the set retarder under the manufacturers instructions .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION When the mass of the concrete is set enough to allow for removing the matrix of cement and fine aggregate expose the coarse aggregate .
With a water spray coarse brooming abrasive blasting or a combination of these procedures .
Removal methods must not dislodge or loosen the coarse aggregate from embedment in the mortar. . To an approximate depth from to inch .
Exposed aggregate surfaces must be uniform in appearance .
Immediately after the cement mortar has hardened enough to resist further removal clean all cement film and other loose material from the exposed aggregate and all other surfaces with stiff brooms and water .
Cure concrete under section .B except when operations for exposing the aggregate are underway .
You may use the water curing method .
If you remove an area of curing compound during the curing period keep the area continuously wet until the end of the curing period or until you reapply the curing compound .
.D Payment Not Used .
SLOPE PAVING WITH CONCRETE PAVERS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing slope paving using concrete pavers .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals If using premixed mortar submit the manufacturers instructions for the mixing proportions and procedures .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .B General Reserved .B Concrete Pavers Concrete pavers for slope paving must comply with ASTM C for solid units .
The surface exposed to view must have a split face texture .
The nominal size of the concrete pavers must be by by inches .
.B Mortar Hydrated lime must comply with ASTM C Type S. Mortar sand must be commercialquality and free of organic impurities and lumps of clay and shale .
Mortar for laying concrete pavers must consist by volume of part cement from to .
part hydrated lime and from .
to parts mortar sand .
Add enough water to make a workable mortar .
Accurately measure and thoroughly mix each batch of mortar .
Do not retemper mortar more than hour after mixing .
Reduce the amount of lime as necessary to prevent leaching and efflorescence on the finished surface .
You may use a premixed packaged mortar blend of cement lime and sand without color that requires only water to prepare for use as brick mortar or grout .
Packages of the premixed mortar must show the manufactures name brand weight and color identification .
.B Bond Coat The bond coat must be either dryset mortar or latexportland cement mortar .
Organic adhesive must not be used for the bond coat .
Mix the bond coat under the manufacturers instructions .
The consistency of SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION the mixture must be such that ridges formed with the recommended notched trowel do not flow or slump .
You may rework the bond coat provided no water or materials are added .
.B Grout Grout must be suitable for grouting quarry tile and must comply with ANSI Standard A .. Grout must consist by volume of part cement up to part lime parts of sand and an amount of water to provide a grout with a consistency that can be forcibly compressed into joints .
You may use a premixed packaged grout blend of cement lime and sand that is suitable for grouting quarry tile and requires only water to prepare for use as brick grout .
Packages of the premixed grout must show the manufacturers name brand weight and color identification .
.C Construction .C General Joints must be straight and of uniform and equal width .
Protect surfaces of completed masonry concrete and other materials exposed to view from spillage splatters and other deposits of cementitious materials from masonry construction .
Remove these deposits without damage to the materials or exposed surfaces .
Stains efflorescence laitance splashes or spots on the faces of masonry exposed to view must be removed .
Apply cleaning agents under the paver manufacturers instructions to a sample area determined by the Engineer .
Do not continue with cleaning beyond the sample area until the Engineer authorizes the cleaning agent and the cleaning methods .
.C Installation using a Bond Coat Install concrete pavers on a bond coat over a mortar bedding .
Do not use air blown mortar .
Roughen and clean the concrete surfaces against which concrete pavers are to be placed exposing the stone aggregate .
Immediately before placing the paver units flush the concrete surface with water and allow it to dry to a surface dry condition .
Prepare the concrete surfaces to receive a mortar setting bed under the specifications for horizontal construction joints in section .D .
The mortar setting bed must be at least inch thick and be finished parallel to the finished brick surface .
Cure the setting bed for at least hours before placing the bond coat .
Roughen and clean the surfaces of the cured setting bed .
The surface must be free of laitance coatings oil sand dust and loose particles .
Dampen the cured setting bed before placing the bond coat .
Do not soak the setting bed .
Float the bond coat onto the cured setting bed with enough pressure to cover the surface evenly with no bare spots .
The surface area to be covered with the bond coat must be no greater than the area that can be covered with concrete pavers while the bond coat is still plastic .
Comb the bond coat mortar with a notched trowel within minutes before installing concrete pavers .
Do not install the concrete pavers on a skinnedover mortar bond coat .
Backbutter the concrete pavers immediately before installing the units .
Firmly press the concrete pavers into the freshly notched bond coat .
Tap the concrete pavers to a true surface to attain percent coverage of the bond coat with the back of each unit .
Head and bed mortar joints must be inch thick .
Remove spacers strings ropes pegs glue paper and face mounting material before grouting the concrete pavers .
Do not start grouting until at least hours after installing concrete pavers .
Force a maximum amount of grout into the joints between and surrounding the concrete paver units .
Tool the grout to a slightly concave cross section to a depth not more than inch below the finished surface .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION The finished grout must have a uniform color and must be smooth without voids pinholes or low spots .
Keep the concrete pavers continuously damp for at least hours after grouting .
.C Installation on a Mortar Bedding The top surface of the airblown mortar or concrete base must be lightly and evenly scored horizontally and vertically with a metal scratcher having grooves not more than inch apart .
Cure the airblown mortar or concrete base by the water method for at least days .
Lay and embed the concrete pavers in approximately inch thick mortar .
Embedment must be shoved tight such that mortar is flushed into the joints to a depth of approximately inch .
.D Payment Not Used RESERVED GABIONS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing gabion structures .
Gabions consist of wire mesh baskets that are placed and then filled with rock .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of gabion baskets to the job site .
Submit a certificate of compliance for the PVC coating .
Identify any UVresistance additive on the certificate of compliance .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control If ordered verify the unit weight of a rockfilled gabion .
Verify the weight using the smallest standard gabion basket filling method and rock that will be used on the project .
Use certified scales for weighing .
Calculae the unit weight using the theoretical volume of the basket. . MATERIALS .A General The standard sizes for gabion baskets must be either of the following .
Mattress style that are by by inches .
Cubical style that are by by inches The width height or length of a standard basket must not vary more than percent from the standard size shown .
Each gabion must be manufactured with the necessary panels that are properly spaced and secured such that the panels can be rotated into position without additional tying of the rotation joint .
.B Mesh Use the same mesh for each style and size of gabion basket .
The size of wire used to manufacture mesh must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION Wire Size with PVC Coating Gabion basket style USA wire gauge Mesh type Cubical Twisted Welded Mattress Twisted Welded Wire Size without PVC Coating Gabion basket style USA wire gauge Mesh type Cubical Twisted Welded Mattress Twisted Welded Wire must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Wire Material Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tensile strength min ksi ASTM A gauge wire Diameter min in Zinc coating min ozsq.ft ASTM AAM ASTM AAM Class and A . . gauge wire Diameter min in Zinc coating min ozsq.ft ASTM AAM ASTM AAM Class and A . . gauge wire Diameter min in Zinc coating min ozsq .
ft ASTM AAM ASTM AAM Class and A . . Twistedmesh wire must be formed with a nonraveling twist and into a uniform hexagonal pattern .
For PVCcoated wire use gauge size for the selvage wires .
For wire without a PVC coating use gauge size for the selvage wires .
Weldedmesh wires must .
Be formed into the grid pattern shown .
Be welded by resistance welding .
Comply with ASTM A except weld shears must be .. lb minimum for gauge wire .. lb minimum for gauge wire Resistance welding after coating the wire with zinc is allowed if there are no large splashes flakes or flashes of zinc at the weld .
.C PVC Coating If PVC coating is shown coat the mesh wire standard tie wires standard binders internal connecting wires preformed stiffeners and selvage wire .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION A PVC coating must be UV resistant .
A suitable UVresistance additive must be blended with the PVC .
If the gabions are exposed to natural sunlight the color of the PVC coating must be gray and resistant to fading .
Apply the zinc coating before applying the PVC coating .
Application of the PVC coating must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
Evaluate the PVC coating by infrared spectral scan .
The scan must closely match those of tested and accepted materials already on file at the Transportation Laboratory .
The minimum thickness of the PVC coating must be .
inch when measured radially at any cross section transverse to the wire length .
PVC coating will be visually inspected .
There must be no nicks cuts holidays or abraded areas .
Minor cuts nicks and other minor imperfections due to manufacturing are allowed along the selvagewrapped edges of the twisted wire mesh .
You are not required to coat the ends of the wires where they have been trimmed along wire or panel edges during the normal manufacturing processes .
.D Joints Standard tie wire and standard spiral binder wire must comply with the requirements shown in the following table .
Tie Wire and Spiral Binder Wire Material Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tensile strength min ksi ASTM A Tie wire .gauge wire Diameter max in Diameter min in Zinc coating min ozsq ft ASTM AAM ASTM AAM AAM Class and ASTM A . . . Spiral binder wire gauge wire Diameter max in Diameter min in Zinc coating min ozsq ft ASTM AAM ASTM AAM ASTM AAM Class and ASTM A . . . Spiral binders must have a inch separation between continuous successive loops .
If shown you may use alternative fasteners .
For PVCcoated wire alternative fasteners must comply with ASTM AAM tensile Type Class .
For wire without PVC coating alternative fasteners must comply with ASTM A and .
Interlocking fasteners must be Class I Finish with a Class zinc finish coating .
Overlapping fasteners must comply with Class II Finish with a Class zinc finish coating .E Internal Connecting Wire Internal connecting wires must be a minimum size of .gauge .
The wire must comply with the specifications for tie wire in section .D .
You may use preformed stiffeners instead of internal connecting wires .
Preformed stiffeners must comply with the specifications for tie wire in section .D and be installed under the manufacturers instructions .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION .F Fabric If gabions are shown for downdrains use woven tape fabric .
Woven tape fabric must comply with ASTM D have a mass of at least ozsq yd and have a maximum permeability of .
galminutesq ft. .G Rock Rock for filling gabions must comply with the testing and corresponding specifications in section .B .
Rocks for gabion baskets equal to or greater than inches in height must vary in size and comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Rock Gradation for Inch or Larger Baskets Screen size in Percentage passing Rocks for gabion baskets that are inches in height must vary in size and comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table .
Rock Gradation for Inch Baskets Screen size in Percentage passing The unit weight of a rockfilled gabion must be at least lb cu ft. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Areas where gabions are to be placed must be constructed to the lines and grades shown .
If fabric is shown place the fabric on the subgrade backslope and sides of the excavations .
If earth fill is to be placed over the gabions place the fabric on top of the gabions before placing the earth fill .
Gabions must be divided by diaphragm panels such that baskets are inch long cells .
.B Assembly Individually assemble empty gabion baskets and successively join the baskets .
Assemble the individual mesh panels base front ends back diaphragms and lid and successive gabions such that the strength and flexibility along the joints is comparable to a single panel .
Assemble the gabions as empty units .
Rotate panels and diaphragms into position and join them along the vertical edges .
For twisted wire mesh construct joints using alternating double and single half hitches and locked loops made at inch nominal spacing .
Use .gauge standard tie wire .
Do not construct joints with simple spiraling or looping without locking of the tie wire .
For welded wire mesh construct joints using either of the following .
Standard tie wire and alternating double and single half hitches and locked loops in every mesh opening along the joint .
gauge spiral binders with the spiral binder passing through every mesh opening along the joint .
Crimp both ends of the spiral binder and secure it in place .
SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION You may use temporary fasteners to hold panels at gabiontogabion joints .
The temporary fasteners may remain in place .
Use either interlocking fasteners or overlapping fasteners .
Place a fastener at each mesh opening along the joint .
For PVC coated wire the spacing of fasteners must be at least fasteners per inches .
For wire without PVC coating the spacing of fasteners must be at least fasteners per inches .
Set individual gabion baskets in place .
Successively join the basket to the adjacent basket with .
gauge tie wire or gauge standard spiral binder before filling the basket with rock .
In pass the tie wire or spiral binder must secure all selvage or end wires of the panels along the joint .
If forming successive gabiontogabion joints with alternative fasteners use alternative fastener at each mesh opening .
The alternative fastener must contain and secure all wires along the joint .
Join gabion baskets along the front back and ends including the top and bottom of adjacent gabions .
Step and stagger multilayered gabion configurations .
Join each layer of gabion to the underlying layer along the front back and ends .
Join shear key and counterfort gabions to the underlying gabions along the front back and ends .
For transitional gabions fold cut and fasten the gabion baskets as shown or as authorized .
.C Filling Before filling each gabion basket straighten any kinks and folds in the wire and align the baskets .
Place rock in the basket and preserve the alignment .
Avoid bulges and minimize voids .
Exposed rock surfaces must have a smooth and neat appearance .
Sharp rocks must not project through the wire mesh .
Use internal connecting wires or preformed stiffeners to produce a flat smooth external surface .
When filling inchhigh gabions place the rock in inchdeep layers .
When filling inchhigh gabions place the rock in inchdeep layers .
Install internal connecting wires or preformed stiffeners before adding additional layers .
The last layer of rock must slightly overfill the gabion basket such that the lid will rest on rock when the lid is closed .
Lids must be tied along the front end and diaphragms with .gauge tie wire or gauge standard spiral binder .
In pass the tie wire or spiral binder must secure all selvage or end wires of the panels along the lid .
If securing the lid with alternative fasteners use alternative fastener at each mesh opening .
The alternative fastener must contain and secure all wires along the lid. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for gabion is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or the actual volume of gabions placed .
EXISTING SLOPE PROTECTION .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for performing work on existing slope protection .
Work performed on existing slope protection must comply with section .
.B Material Not Used .C Construction Not Used SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION .D Payment Not Used .
REMOVE SLOPE PAVING .A General Section .
includes specifications for removing slope protection .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment The payment quantity for remove slope paving is the area of the slope paving measured before starting removal RESERVED CONCRETE CURBS AND SIDEWALKS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing concrete curbs sidewalks and their appurtenances such as gutter depressions and island paving and curb ramps and driveways .
Steel dowels reinforcing steel and welded wire reinforcement must comply with section . . MATERIALS .A General Concrete for curbs sidewalks and their appurtenances must be minor concrete containing at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
For extruded or slip form curb construction the maximum aggregate size must be from to inch .
The cementitious material content must be at least pounds per cubic yard if a maximum of inch aggregate is used .
Preformed expansion joint filler must comply with ASTM D. Mortar must comply with section .F .
Form oil must .
Be commercial quality or an equivalent coating .
Allow the ready release of forms .
Not discolor the concrete .B Detectable Warning Surfaces A detectable warning surface must be on the Authorized Material List for detectable warning surfaces and must match yellow color no .
of FEDSTD. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Construct contraction joints by scoring concrete with a grooving tool and rounding corners with an edger tool or saw cutting hardened concrete to a depth of at least inch .
Immediately apply curing compound to the exposed surfaces of saw cut joints .
Construct expansion joints at each side of structures and at the ends of curb returns .
Fill expansion joints with inchthick preformed joint filler .
Finish the concrete adjacent to expansion joints with an edger tool .
Do not construct expansion joints within feet of an island nose .
Shape the preformed joint filler to match the surface contour of the concrete .
.B Subgrade Preparation Remove soft or spongy basement material to a depth of inches below the subgrade elevation for curbs gutter depressions island paving and driveways and inches below the subgrade elevation for sidewalks and curb ramps .
Backfill the subgrade with earth sand or gravel to produce a stable foundation .
Apply water to the subgrade and thoroughly compact it before placing concrete .
Verify that the finished surface of the subgrade does not project into the concrete cross section at any point by .
Using a template supported on the side forms for the fixed form method .
Measuring from the offset guide line or survey marks for the extruded or slip form method .C Fixed Form Method Set forms to the required alignment grade and dimensions .
Forms must SECTION CONCRETE CURBS AND SIDEWALK .
Be smooth on the side placed against concrete. . Have a straight upper edge. . Be rigid enough to withstand the pressure of fresh concrete without distortion .
Use enough stakes clamps spreaders and braces to ensure rigidity. . Be clean of debris and old concrete . .
Coated with form oil before placing concrete .
You may use either benders or thin plank forms on curves grade changes or curb returns .
Wet the subgrade and forms immediately before placing the concrete .
Place the preformed joint filler at expansion joints in the correct position before placing concrete against the filler .
Place and compact the concrete without segregation .
.D Extruded and Slip Form Methods Wet the subgrade immediately before placing the concrete .
Feed concrete into the extrusion machine at a uniform rate .
Restrain forward travel of the extrusion machine to produce a wellcompacted mass of concrete requiring no further finishing other than a light brushing .
The brush may be filled with water .
Do not finish the concrete surface with a brush application of grout .
If you use a slip form machine automatically control the alignment grade and cross slope by one of the following methods .
Sensing from preset string lines .
String line control of the alignment and grade and automatic control of the cross slope The slip form machine must have traveling forms rigid enough to produce the required cross section .
The machine must produce a dense homogeneous concrete true to grade and cross section and require minimum handwork .
Consolidate the concrete with internal vibrators or other authorized method .
Use a smaller maximum size of aggregate with an extruded or slip form machine if it is required to produce concrete free from surface pits larger than inch in diameter and with welldefined web marks of water on the surface .
You may construct expansion joints by sawing through the concrete cross section to its full depth .
The width of the cut must provide a tight fit for the joint filler .
Insert preformed joint filler into sawed joints and mortar it in place .
If a joint is cut before the concrete has hardened .
Protect the adjacent surfaces with close fitting firmly supported shields .
Complete the saw cut and insertion of the preformed joint filler before curing the concrete If a joint is cut after the concrete has hardened .
Mortar preformed joint filler in place using heavy trowel pressure .
Cover the exposed portions of the concrete in the vicinity of the saw cut with an additional application of curing compound After the concrete has cured check the joint filler for a tight fit .
If any loose joints are found mortar the joint in place and recheck after the mortar has cured .
Repeat as necessary to achieve a tight fit .
.E Curing Cure concrete using the curing compound method with pigmented curing compound .
Completely coat the exposed faces of the concrete with curing compound. . PAYMENT Not Used SECTION CONCRETE CURBS AND SIDEWALK CURBS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing curbs. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General If curbs are constructed over existing pavement use steel dowels and reinforcing steel or adhesive to anchor the curb to the existing pavement .
Anchor steel dowels in drilled holes with mortar made from equal parts by volume of portland cement sand and water .
You may use anchor bolts instead of anchored steel dowels if authorized .
If adhesive is used remove all dust loose material or oil from the surface of the existing pavement by either wire brushing or blast cleaning .
Construct contraction and expansion joints at right angles to the line of the curb .
Space contraction joints at foot intervals .
For curbs adjacent to existing concrete align the curb joints with the existing concretes pavement joints .
The top and face of the finished curb must be true and straight .
The top surface of the curb must be uniform in width and free from humps sags or other irregularities .
Clean any discolored concrete by abrasive blast cleaning or other authorized method .
Except for curbs on structures you may place curbs with an extrusion machine or a slip form paver if .
Finished curb is true to line and grade .
Concrete contains the maximum quantity of water that maintains the curbs shape without support .
Required surface texture is attained Check the flatness of the top and face of the curb and the surface of the gutter with a foot straightedge .
The surfaces must be flat to within .
foot except at grade changes or curves .
.B Fixed Form Method Set fixed forms the full depth of the back and face of the curb .
The back forms may be constructed with inchthick bender boards .
Cleat the back forms together as required to attain the full depth of the curb .
Use form clamps to prevent interference with finishing activities .
Before removing the forms finish the surface true to grade with a straightedge float at least feet in length .
Operate the straightedge float longitudinally over the concrete surface .
Remove the forms from the face of the curb from to hours after placing the concrete .
Do not remove the forms if the concrete is plastic enough to slump .
After removing the forms immediately use a steel trowel to attain a smooth finish .
The smooth finish must extend to within .
foot of the flow line or to the flow line of a curb with an integral gutter .
After smoothing the curbs face apply a finebrush finish parallel to the line of the curb .
.C Extruded or Slip Form Methods For an extrusion machine use the Departments survey marks to determine the offset guide line for setting the grade for the top of the curb .
The extrusion machine must have a gradeline gauge or pointer that allows continual comparison between the curb placement and the offset guide line .
The machine must be capable of vertical adjustment during forward travel to construct curbs of varying height as determined by the offset guide line .
SECTION CONCRETE CURBS AND SIDEWALK You may operate the extrusion machine on rails or forms set at a uniform depth below the established grade of the top of curb. . PAYMENT Not Used SIDEWALKS GUTTER DEPRESSIONS ISLAND PAVING CURB RAMPS AND DRIVEWAYS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing sidewalks gutter depressionsisland paving curb ramps and driveways .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a year manufacturers replacement warranty against defects in a prefabricated detectable warning surface .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Warranties The year manufacturers replacement warranty for a prefabricated detectable warning surface must cover defects in dome shape color fastness soundoncane acoustic quality resilience and attachment .
The year warranty period starts at Contract acceptance .
.D Quality Control Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Construct expansion joints at .
All returns and opposite expansion joints in the adjacent curb .
foot intervals where there is no adjacent curb Construct contraction joints to create rectangular patterns from to square feet in the surface of sidewalks .
Install a prefabricated detectable warning surface under the manufacturers instructions .
Broom finish the surface of sidewalks gutter depressions curb ramps and driveways .
Make the broom finish perpendicular to the path of travel on surfaces used by pedestrians .
You may apply water to the surface immediately before brooming .
The finished surface must not vary more than .
foot from a foot straightedge except at grade changes .
If placing pavement around or adjacent to manholes pipe inlets or other miscellaneous structures in sidewalk gutter depression island paving curb ramps or driveway areas do not finish the miscellaneous structures to final grade until the pavement is finished beyond the miscellaneous structure .
If using fixed forms strike off and compact fresh concrete until a layer of mortar is brought to the surface .
Finish the surface with a float to grade and cross section and trowel smooth .
Leave forms in place for sidewalks gutter depressions island paving curb ramps and driveways for at least hours after surface finishing .
SECTION CONCRETE CURBS AND SIDEWALK Clean any discolored concrete by abrasive blast cleaning or other authorized method. . PAYMENT Not Used TEXTURED CONCRETE AND COLORED CONCRETE SURFACES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for texturing and coloring concrete surfaces .
Texture concrete by imprinting with stamps tools brooms or other methods to attain the pattern or impressions shown .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit the manufacturers data for the color hardener and curing and finishing compounds for each color of a concrete surface colored by the dryshake method .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control Construct test panels for textured or colored concrete under section .Dc .
.D Department Acceptance The Department accepts textured or colored concrete surfaces based on a visual comparison with the test panel. . MATERIALS Aggregate for textured or colored concrete surfaces must comply with the gradation requirements for fine aggregate .
Aggregate used in grout for textured and colored concrete surfaces must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Aggregate Gradation for Grout Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
Color pigments for the dryshake method must comply with ASTM C. . CONSTRUCTION Protect the surrounding exposed surfaces during the placement finishing and curing of colored concrete .
Screed the concrete to the grade and cross section shown and strike off and compact the concrete until a layer of mortar is brought to the surface .
Wood float the concrete to produce a uniform surface .
For the dryshake method apply the color hardener in applications while the concrete surface is plastic .
Use at least lb of hardener per sq ft of concrete surface .
Wood float the surface after each application of hardener .
Trowel the surface only after final floating .
SECTION CONCRETE CURBS AND SIDEWALK Texture the concrete while it is in the plastic stage .
For a texture that requires a concrete stamp use the stamp under the manufacturers instructions .
Do not texture or grout the grooved area and detectable warning surface on a curb ramp .
Cure the concrete surfaces using the curing compound method with curing compound no. . Place any grout after the initial curing of the textured concrete and removal of curing seal and other deleterious substances .
The method of removal must not stain or discolor areas of textured concrete to remain exposed after grouting .
Spread and consolidate the grout over the textured concrete under the manufacturers instructions .
Remove excess grout with a squeegee and damp burlap rags or other authorized method .
Apply curing seal. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED EXISTING CURBS AND SIDEWALKS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for performing work on existing curbs sidewalks and their appurtenances such as gutter depressions and island paving .
Work performed on existing curbs and sidewalks must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION If you repair any part of a curb sidewalk curb ramp driveway or gutter depression remove and replace the entire section between contraction or expansion joints .
At contraction joints saw cut a true line at least inches deep before concrete removal .
Install a prefabricated detectable warning surface on an existing curb ramp under the manufacturers instructions. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for installing pumping equipment and the control systems .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General If you use the drainage pumps to maintain total pumping capacity before Contract acceptance submit .
Shop drawings for the drainage inlet bulkhead and safeguards .
Maintenance work plan .C Shop Drawings Plans and detail drawings may be by inches .
Submit shop drawings for the pumping equipment including .
System layout .
Piping connections .
Appurtenances .
Other materials required for the equipment installation .
Mounting details and anchorage details Submit shop drawings for the electrical equipment including .
Electrical equipment schematics .
Control diagrams .
Wiring diagrams .
Conductor numbers for control and power conductors Do not use project plan reproductions or the manufacturers standard printed data for electrical layout drawings .
Submit shop drawings for the installation of drainage pump equipment and pumping plant electrical equipment after product data submittals are authorized .
If the drainage pump and pumping plant electrical equipment require changes to the pump plant metal work or other construction details submit revised shop drawings .
.C Product Data Submit at least copies of product data .
Each copy must be bound together and include an index stating equipment names manufacturers and model numbers .
Two copies will be returned .
Product data must include .
Catalog cuts including .. Manufacturers name ..
Catalog or part number ..
Size .. Capacity .. Electrical ratings ..
Finish ..
Maintenance and adjustment requirements ..
Identification symbols described ..
Installation instructions .
Performance data SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .
Installation instructions .C Samples The Engineer may request material samples of submitted equipment .
.C Work Plans .Ca General Reserved .Cb Performance Testing Plan Submit a work plan for performance testing of pumping plant equipment .
The work plan must include methods for .
Blocking pipes at their entrance point into the storage box .
Removing all debris from the pumping plant storage box debris sump and pump sump before testing .
Locating and installing bulkheads in the storage boxes if used .
Performing an operational test including pump controller operation .
Supplying water .
Disposing of water .Cc Maintenance Plan Submit a work plan for maintaining the existing pumping plants total pumping capacity and maintaining the pumping plant as specified in section .E .
The work plan must include .
Pumping plant maintenance procedures and schedule . .
Alternatives for maintaining total pumping capacity as specified in section .E . .
Description of the proposed pumping equipment .
If using alternative or specified in section .E include auxiliary pump curves equipment ratings quantity and power supply . .
Method for water disposal .
.C Maintenance and Operation Manual Submit a maintenance and operations manual before completion of the work .
Submit copy of PDF files on a CD or DVD and copies in print format in ring binders with tabbed dividers .
The manual must include all authorized action submittals for drainage pump equipment and pumping plant electrical equipment .
Organize each binder as follows .
Index .
Part lists .
Operating instructions .
Maintenance instructions .
Wiring schematics with control and power conductor numbers identified .
Certified pump curves Incomplete or inadequate documents are returned for correction and resubmittal .
Submit all paperwork delivered with the pumping plant equipment to the Engineer .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Notify the Engineer at least days before testing .
The pump plant must be complete before testing is performed .
Furnish all water and electrical energy necessary for testing .
If authorized you may use the pumping plant discharge system .
.D Quality Control .Da General Reserved SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .Db Operational Tests Perform the operational tests in the Engineers presence .
The Engineer verifies the pump nameplates before testing .
Fill the pump sump and storage boxes with water .
Fill boxes as required until the operational tests and performance tests are authorized .
If authorized you may add bulkheads in the storage boxes .
Perform operational tests of the pumping plant to demonstrate .
Proper rotation of each pump .
Manual operation of the pumps separately and combined .
Automatic operation of the pumps separately and combined .Dc Performance Tests After acceptance of the operational tests the Engineer will run performance tests on the installed pumping plant equipment under section .Cb .
Performance tests include two minute tests for each pump .
Performance tests must show that each installed drainage pump complies with at least percent of the factory certified performance curve and the design pump rates shown .
Each pump must not load its motor more than the actual full load nameplate amperage regardless of head .
The motor service factor will not be applied .
Remove bulkheads and blocking from pipes after performance testing is complete .
.Dd Drainage Pump Final Inspection If you use the drainage pumps installed under the Contract to maintain the total pumpling capacity for the pumping plant drainage area before Contract acceptance remove and disassemble the pumps after your final use of the pumps .
Remove and disassemble the pumps before Contract acceptance .
The Engineer performs a final inspection of the pumps .
Worn damaged or otherwise unsatisfactory parts must be replaced .
Assemble and reinstall the pumps .
Test the drainage pumps used before Contract acceptance under section .Cb after the Engineers final inspection and before Contract acceptance. . MATERIALS .A General Anchorages must comply with the specifications for concrete anchorage devices in section .C .
.B Delivery Storage and Handling Deliver products to the job site in an undamaged condition in the manufacturers original sealed container or other packaging system .
Packaging must be complete with labels and instructions for handling storing unpacking protecting and installing .
Store and handle products under the manufacturers written instructions and such that you prevent damage deterioration or loss and maintain warrantee requirements. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Painting Painting metal work must comply with section .
Paint uncoated drainage pump equipment including metal work as machinery under section .C .
Paint all wood surfaces under section .
before installation .
SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS Paint the pump number on each drainage pump motor and on each discharge pipe feet above every landing .
The numbers must be stenciled and at least inches tall .
Paint an arrow showing the direction of the drainage pump rotation on each discharge pipe feet above every landing .
The arrows must be stenciled and at least inches long .
Use applications of commercialquality white gloss enamel .
Paint surfaces before they become unreachable because of assembly operations .
Painting must not impair legibility life expectancy or function of the following items .
Brass surfaces .
Nameplates .
Warning plates .
Push buttons .
Operating handles .
Electrical cover plates .
Plastic parts .
Locks Repair exposed nongalvanized threads or damaged galvanizing under section .B .
Clean prime and touch up damaged areas of painted surfaces .
Use the same type of primer paint and color as the damaged finish .
Do not use cold galvanizing aerosol cans for repair or touchup work .
.C Care and Cleaning Do not install pumping plant equipment until the structural portion of the pump sump is substantially complete .
You may install anchors and embedded equipment whenever required by the structural work .
Protect the installed equipment from damage .
Clean equipment enclosures galvanized and noncorrodible metal surfaces and wood surfaces in the pumping plant after installation under section .D .
Remove debris from the pump house pump sump storage boxes and premises at Contract acceptance .
.D Maintenance Instructions Supply an by inch fusedlaminate copy of .
Maintenance instructions in a galvanized sheetmetal frame .
Install the frame on an interior pump house wall. . Control system schematic diagram .
Install the diagram on the inside of a motor control center door .
.E Total Pumping Capacity and Maintenance Requirements The Department will not issue relief from maintenance and protection until Contract acceptance .
For existing pumping plants .
Stage removal activities such that the total pumping capacity is maintained .
Provide pumping plant maintenance Upon completion of pumping plants .
Maintain total pumping capacity .
Provide pumping plant maintenance Furnish electrical energy necessary for maintaining the total pumping capacity and maintenance requirements .
Pumping plant maintenance must include .
Removing dirt and debris from the storage boxes entrance bay pump sump and drainage inlets SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .
Performing adjustments and repairs for proper operation of drainage pump equipment and pumping plant electrical equipment Keep a pump house logbook of pumping plant maintenance activities .
Include the maintenance dates work performed and the name of the employee doing the work .
Maintain the total pumping capacity at the corresponding dynamic head shown .
Use one of the following alternatives to maintain the total pumping capacity .
Stage activities such that the entire pumping plant is complete and able to maintain total pumping capacity. . Furnish an auxiliary pumping system with a capacity equal to the total pumping capacity .
This system must include a power supply controls temporary drainage system sump pumps and discharge piping . .
Combination of the above alternatives .
Dispose of water .
If authorized you may use the pumping plant discharge system .
.F Use of Pumps before Contract Acceptance Section .F applies if you use the drainage pumps installed under the Contract to maintain total pumping capacity before Contract acceptance .
The pumping plant must be complete .
Storage boxes screens pump sumps and pumping plant equipment must be authorized before use .
Drainage water must be settled before entering the pumping plant .
Drainage water must flow through safeguards and drainage inlet bulkheads to remove nonsuspended solids .
Nonsuspended solids include debris soil sand and gravel .
Safeguards include stilling ponds basins check dams and weirs .
Safeguards must .
Intercept the drainage water and effectively stop nonsuspended solids by settling .
Deliver settled water to paved surfaces pipes or other nonerodible channels leading to the drainage inlets .
Be maintained such that the safeguards function as intended Construct bulkheads around drainage inlets discharging to the pump sump and storage boxes .
Drainage inlet bulkheads must consist of burlap sacks filled with pervious material. . PAYMENT Not Used DRAINAGE PUMPING EQUIPMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for installing drainage pumping equipment .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Product Data Submit product data for the following items .
Drainage pumps .
Flexible expansion couplings .
Wall louvers .
Flap valves SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .
Pressure gauges .
Pump house doors The drainage pump data must include .
Pump components .
Representative pump curve showing the motor does not develop more than percent of its nameplate horsepower anywhere on the curve .
Hp kVA kW power factor and voltage .
Starting and running currents .
Thermal and magnetic trip settings .
Starter overloads current setting .
Motor nameplate data including .. Full load speed .. Full load current .. Voltage ..
Locked rotor kVA per rated horsepower or code letter .C Certificates of Compliance Submit certificates of compliance for factory certified impeller balancing and factory certified drainage pump tests .
Certification documents must be in US customary units .
Submit the factory original hard copy and copies as PDF files on CDs or DVDs .
Send to OSD Documents Unit .
The Department will not accept a facsimile copy .
Notify the Engineer of the submittal .
Include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
Factorycertified test documents for each drainage pump must include .
Generated pump curve from the cutoff head to the minimum dynamic head shown .
Show on the pump curve ..
Identified test points used to generate the pump curve .
..
Plot of the design pump rates and dynamic heads shown on the pump curve .
..
Identified and plotted test point horsepower and efficiencies on the pump curve. . Data that confirms the pump develops from to percent of the motor nameplate power at the point the pump requires maximum power. . Motor rpm. . Impeller final diameter .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Regulatory Requirements Drainage pumps must be factory certified under ANSIHI .. Each pump certification must be for the actual motor pump and trimmed impeller combination delivered to the job site .
The impeller balancing must be factory certified under ISO ISO Balance Quality Grade G. at the supplied motor rpm. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Drainage Pumps and Pumping Apparatus .B General Reserved SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .B Drainage Pump Drainage pumps must be submersible endsuction singlestage closecoupled overhungimpeller centrifugal wastewater pumps complying with ANSIHI .. and ANSIHI ..
Pumps must be assembled and tested at the factory .
Do not use a base elbow mounted pump .
Drainage pumps must be coated with the manufacturers standard finish for the intended use .
Drainage pumps must be the rpm and voltage shown and comply with the design pump rates and dynamic heads shown .
Drainage pumps must have cast iron .
Casings .
Brackets .
Volutes with open inlet .
Horizontal pump discharges Drainage pumps must have a base support engineered to allow design flow into the volute and support the assembled weight of the drainage pump .
Base support legs must be bolted to the floor .
Drainage pumps must have replaceable bronze wear rings on the impeller and casing and non magnetic stainless steel external nuts and bolts .
Drainage pump impellers must be .
Dynamically balanced. . Made from ductile iron or bronze. . Nonclog type open or semiopen design for sludge and able to handle solids up to inches . .
Trimmed to develop from to percent of the motor nameplate power at the point of maximum load and still deliver at least the design pump rates and dynamic heads shown . .
Keyed and secured to the shaft .
The impeller balancing must not weaken or deform the impeller .
Drainage pumps must have a stainless steel shaft with factorysealed lubricated roller bearings tandem doublemechanical seals of tungsten carbide or silicon carbide with an oil reservoir and have internal moisture sensors in the oil reservoir .
Motors must be a standard efficiency NEMA code letter A through G phase NEMA Design B motor with cable assembly .
The cable assembly must include a conductor power cable and a conductor control cable .
The motor with cable assembly must be rated for Class Division locations .
Motors must have NEMA Class F insulation builtin thermal protection with lifting eyes or lugs .
The cables must be listed for Extra Hard Service for Class Division locations .
Each cable must include an equipment grounding conductor with green or green with yellow stripe insulation .
The cables must be long enough to be installed from the motor to the enclosure shown without splicing .
Install cable connectors for termination in the junction box .
Each drainage pump must have a motor nameplate and pump identification nameplate .
Attach identical nameplates to the inside of the corresponding starter compartment door on the motor control cabinet .
.B Pumping Apparatus Flap valves must have an iron body with pipe flange frame and bronze mating surfaces .
Fasteners expansion anchors nuts bolts and washers must be Type stainless steel .
Pressure gauges must be a compound gauge complying with ASME B. Grade A and must have .
inch liquid filled dial with stainless steel case and cover. . Reset screw. . inch MPT bottom inlet . .
Range from inches Hg vacuum to psi . .
Gauge guard and gauge cock .
The gauge guard must be a by inch PVC or CPVC body PTFE or Viton diaphragm and rated for to psi .
The gauge cock must be a inch NPT brass ball valve .
SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .C Pump House Doors Louvers and Fans .C General Fabricate pump house doors and frames under ANSISDI A. or ANSINAAMMHMMA .
Hinges must comply with ANSIBHMA A .. Locksets must comply with ANSIBHMA A ..
Door gasketing must comply with ANSIBHMA A .. Thresholds must comply with ANSIBHMA A .. Galvannealed steel sheet must be commercial steel Type B complying with ASTM AAM with at least an A metallic coating complying with ASTM AAM .
.C Pump House Doors The pump house door consists of the door frame and door hardware .
Furnish the factory applied finish coating system for the exterior locations .
The pump house doors must be at least inches thick full flush seamless hollow metal construction .
The doors must comply with ANSISDI A. physical endurance Level A and the following .
Fabricate face sheets vertical stiffeners and top and bottom channels from .inchthick galvannealed steel sheet. . Fabricate the steelstiffened core using vertical stiffeners that extend the fulldoor height .
Install stiffeners not more than inches apart and spot weld to both face sheets no more than inches on center .
Fill the spaces between the stiffeners with glassfiber insulation or mineralfiber insulation. . Top and bottom channels must be continuous and spot welded to both face sheets .
The top channel must be flush and the bottom channel must be inverted . .
Include moisture vents in the bottom channel .
The door frames must .
Be fabricated from .inchthick galvannealed steel sheet by inches in section .
Include galvannealed steel sheet grout guards at least .
inches thick .
Have continuously welded face joints and miter corners that are flush and made smooth .
Include an integral stop .
Include a steel channel or angle stiffener head reinforcement at least .
inch thick for openings wider than inches Floor anchors must be welded to the bottom of jambs and mullions with at least spot welds for each anchor .
There must be at least jamb anchors on each side .
Hinges must be Type A or A heavy weight stainless steel pin knuckle ball bearing and nonremovable pin with set screw .
Hinge fasteners must be supplied by the hinge manufacturer .
Locksets must be series bored operational grade security grade with a nonhanded steel lock chassis and selfaligning trim with concealed through bolts .
Locksets must be function F with knobs chromium roses and a inch steel square corner latchbolt .
Weatherstripping must have a polyurethane seal .
The overhead door drips must have a inch projection and be full width .
The door shoe with rain drips must be mill finished aluminum with a neoprene insert end covers and formed rain drip .
Thresholds must be nominal inches wide mill aluminum with factory non slip finish and span the full width of the opening shown .
.C Wall Louvers Wall louvers must be continuous channel frame with nonvision inverted Y blades .
Wall louvers must .
Have a frame fabricated from gauge electrogalvanized steel .
Have dual gauge security grilles with through bolted screws on the inside .
Have a bronze insect and bird screen in a removable frame fastened on the inside .
Be factory primed and finished with enamel or powder coated epoxy .C Fans Reserved SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .D Pipe Joints and Fittings .D General Reserved .D Steel Pipe Galvanized steel pipe must be standard weight complying with ASTM AAM .
Threaded fittings must be galvanized steel or galvanized malleable iron .
Welded steel pipe must comply with section except that electrically insulated connections must not be used .
Coat pipe under section .B .
Steel pipe must be flanged .
Flanges may be a factory threaded or welded type .
Flange dimensions must comply with ASME B .
Class .
Threaded flanges must be ductile iron complying with ANSIAWWA CA .. Welded flanges must be steel hub slipon type complying with ANSIAWWA C Class D. Galvanize welded flange pipe sections under section .B .
Gaskets must be a full face SBR rubber flange type complying with ASME B .
Class .
Steel flange bolts washers and nuts must be nonmagnetic stainless steel .
.D Ductile Iron Pipe Ductile iron pipe must comply with ANSIAWWA CA ..
Pipe and fitting joints must be a gasketed mechanical joint type complying with ANSIAWWA CA ..
Pipe fittings must comply with ANSIAWWA CA .
and ASME B .
Class .
Pipe and fittings must have an asphaltic coating complying with ANSIAWWA CA .
and an epoxy lining complying with ANSIAWWA CA .. .D Flexible Expansion Couplings Flexible expansion couplings must be gasketed shortsleeve type having .
Mild steel middle ring with pipe stop .
rubbercompounded wedgesection ring gaskets .
mild steel follower rings .
Mild steel bolts to compress the gaskets Galvanize all ferrous parts after fabrication .
Assemble couplings such that a permanent watertight joint is obtained .
.E Bracing and Hardware Brace drainage pumps and other equipment to prevent movement during operation .
The bracing method must comply with California Seismic Hazard Zone requirements in the CBC .
Slots for bolt and Ubolt holes in bracing and clips must be bolt diameters wide .
The slot holes must be parallel to the axis of the member .
Install cut washers under bolt heads and nuts for slotted hole locations .
Galvanize braces frames and other metal hardware under section .B .
Pumping plant metal work must comply with section .
.F Storage Cabinets Storage cabinets must .
Be wall mounted steel and bolted or welded construction .
Have double doors with a single locking handle or magnet catch and padlock staples .
Have adjustable shelves .
Be from to inches wide to inches deep and to inches tall SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .
Be factory primed and finish painted .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Install pressure gauges with gauge guards and gauge cocks .
Mount the gauges vertically .
Furnish specialty tools required for the assembly or adjustment of equipment .
Mount the tools in the storage cabinet .
Install tools too large for the cabinet on adjacent brackets .
.B Pump House Doors Install pump house doors under ANSIBHMA A ..
Check door frames for squareness alignment twist and plumbness before and after installation and adjust if necessary .
The tolerances are inch .
Check the door frame as follows .
Squareness at the door rabbet on a line degrees from the jamb perpendicular to frame head .
Alignment at jambs on a horizontal line parallel to the plane of the wall .
Twist at opposite face corners of jambs on parallel lines and perpendicular to the plane of the wall .
Plumbness at jambs on a perpendicular line from head to floor Fill the space between the door frame and wall with grout .
The grout slump must not exceed inches .
Do not deform or damage frames during grouting .
Remove grout and other bonding materials from exposed surfaces of doors and frames immediately after grout work .
If grout contains an antifreezing agent field apply a bituminous coating to the backside of frames .
Fit the door in the frame and shim as necessary .
Install weatherstripping on the top and sides of the frame .
Install a door shoe on the door .
Install an overhead door drip over the door .
Use weatherproof silicone sealant and adhesive as the threshold bedding sealant .
Furnish a padlock for the pump house door until Contract acceptance .
The Department furnishes padlocks after Contract acceptance. . PAYMENT Not Used PUMPING PLANT ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for installing pumping plant electrical equipment .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit the tollfree telephone number of the designated service organization for manufacturers field services as an informational submittal .
.C Product Data Submit product data for .
Power and metering equipment .
Pump control .
Conduit .
Conductors and cables .
Nameplates and warning plates .
Miscellaneous materials SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Regulatory Requirements Electrical equipment must comply with section and be NRTL certified .
Materials and workmanship must comply with section and the following .
CA Code of Regs et seq. . CA Code of Regs .
et seq. . NFPA Standard for Fire Protection in Wastewater Treatment and Collection Facilities .D Manufacturers Field Services At Contract acceptance provide months of full maintenance for the pump controller by qualified employees of the pump controller manufacturers designated service organization .
Maintenance must include the manufacturers routine preventive maintenance adjustments for proper operation and all required parts and supplies .
.D Field Quality Control A factoryauthorized service representative must inspect test and adjust the pump controller for proper installation operation components and connections .
.D Training Train Department personnel in the programming connection operation troubleshooting and maintenance of the pump controller .
The training must be for at least hours at the job site .
The training instructor must be a factoryauthorized representative of the pump controller manufacturer .
The training must include .
Books manuals and other training material for Department personnel .
Equipment required for the pump controller training .
Handson experience in programming techniques and operation .
MATERIALS .A General All magnetic coils of relays starters and other electrical equipment must be wound for an operating range having a mean equal to the voltage applied .
.B Power and Metering Equipment .B General Reserved .B Service Pedestal Equipment Reserved .B Motor Control Center Equipment Panelboards must be a factoryassembled panelboard interior with metal cover singlephase wire Vac and must have .
pole A main circuit breaker and molded case branch circuit breakers .
Phase neutral and ground buses that are harddrawn copper percent conductivity .
Separate isolated neutral bus .
Ground bus bonded to the cabinet .
Directory frame mounted on the inside of the door SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS Current switches must be selfpowered solid state alternating current sensing switches having the following .
Singlepole normally open contact rated ampere at Vac .
inchdiameter throughhole .
Low range current sensing level from to A . Highrange current sensing level from to A Time meters must be Vac and nonresettable from to .
hours .
Selector switches must .
Be singlepole positionmaintained A Vac rotary types .
Have contacts rated at Vac and percent power factor .
Have an inductive pilot duty rating of .. A make .. A break .. A continuous Pilot lights must be panel mounted Vac highvisibility LEDs with a colored plastic lens and screw cap .
Control relays must be Vac pole doublethrow general purpose relays with a clear plastic case and pin plug base with A contacts .
Control relays must include a matching barrier type contact relay socket with A contacts and screw terminals .
Time delay relays must .
Be Vac electronic ondelay types .
Have doublepole doublethrow doublebreak A contacts having a range from .
to seconds .
Have time delays set for .. TDR seconds .. TDR seconds Intrinsically safe relays must be .
Solidstate completely selfcontained latching types .
NRTL approved for use with Class I Division location sensors .
Vac with singlepole doublethrow .
A contact with ..
Maximum turnon time of milliseconds ..
Maximum output current of mA at Vdc Push buttons must .
Be heavy duty general purpose types .
Have normally open momentary contact rated at Vac and percent power factor .
Have an inductive pilot duty rating of .. A make .. A break .. A continuous Terminal blocks must comply with NEMA ICS and be .
DIN rail mounted or attached to the enclosure .
Rated for A at Vac .
Made from molded plastic .
Equipped with .. Highpressure clamp connectors .. Nameplates screwed to each block or a computer printed plastic label attached with adhesive ..
Identified conductor numbers SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .C Pump Control .C General The automatic operation of the drainage pump must be controlled by the water level monitoring system and pump controller .
.C Water Level Monitoring System The water level monitoring system must be a trapped air level monitoring type that calculates the water depth using air pressure that is converted to an electrical signal .
The system must include an air compressor way solenoid valve pressure transducer polyethylene air tube and a compression bell .
The system must .
Operate from to feet of water head .
Be accurate to .
feet for ambient conditions ranging from to degrees F . Isolate the pressure transducer during the purge cycle of the air column The air compressor must .
Have a Vac hp shaded pole motor with integral overload protection .
Include an aluminum piston with polytetrafluoroethylenesleeved cylinder .
Have a capacity of at least .
cu ftmin at psi .
Be capable of initializing against a psi head The solenoid valve must be a Vac direct acting threeway type having a NEMA Type plastic body and compression connections .
The pressure transducer must output a to mA signal .
The polyethylene air tube must be a .inchthick wall type complying with ASTM D Class A .
.C Pump Controller The pump controller must control the pumps based on the output signal of the water level monitoring system interface with the monitoring system and generate alarms .
The controller must be Vac solid state industrial grade with software stored in nonvolatile memory .
The controller must process the mA signal from the water level monitoring system and operate the pumps as follows .
Alternate pumps for each lead pump operation .
Energize the lead pump at the water level shown .
Energize the lag pump at the water level shown .
Deenergize the lead pump at the water level shown .
Deenergize the lag pump at the water level shown .
If the pump controller energizes both pumps simultaneously energize the lead pump first and then energize the lag pump seconds later The controller must output a Vac signal when the high or low alarms are energized .
The controller must energize the trapped air level monitoring system air compressor to purge the air system .
The purge interval must be adjustable from to hours .
The compressor run time must be adjustable from to seconds .
The controller must have an LED display with inchhigh letters that computes to decimal place and use faceplatemounted gold contact switches for programming .
Do not use software for programming control levels .
The controller must have .
At least output relays with Vac A rated contacts .
LED indicators mounted on plugin bases .
Test push button and potentiometer for system testing System testing must bypass the pressure transducer input to allow manual adjustment of the signal .
SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS The controller must have at least programmable levels each programmable from to feet .
The controller must be capable of programming the following levels for the elevations shown .
High alarm .
Low alarm .
Lead pump on .
Lead pump off .
Lag pump on .
Lag pump off The pump controller must include an internal power supply with .
Vac input with Vdc and current outputs to suit the equipment .
Panel or channel mounting capability .
Convection cooling .
Wiring that is completely enclosed .
Adjustment range of at least percent .
Operational temperature range from to degrees F .D Conduit Conduit and fittings must be Type complying with section .
Flexible conduit and fittings must be Type complying with section .
.E Conductors and Cable .E General Do not rewire manufacturers stock items specified in section .C .
.E Conductors Conductors must comply with section except conductors must be stranded copper and comply with the following .
In enclosures install Type MTW .
In wet underground or outdoor locations install Type XHHW .
For all other locations install Type THHN .E Conductor and Cable Identification Identify conductors by number .
Use one of the following methods .
Clear heatshrinkable tubing sealed over adhesivebacked paper or cloth wraparound markers .
Preprinted white heatshrinkable tubing .F Nameplates and Warning Plates .F General Nameplate and warning plates must be predrilled multilayer multicolor plastic labels with mechanically engraved inscriptions .
Secure plates to equipment using screws or rivets .
Do not use adhesives except on the inside face of enclosure doors .
If authorized you may secure nameplates to an adjacent surface .
.F Nameplate and Warning Plate Identification Nameplate and warning plate inscriptions must be as shown .
Nameplate letters must be white upper case Helvetica and inch in height .
Leave at least a inch black background on all sides .
SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS Equipment control switch nameplate letters must be white upper case Helvetica and inch in height .
Leave at least a inch black background on all sides .
Secure the nameplate to the equipment directly beneath the switch .
Warning plate letters must be white upper case Helvetica and inch in height .
Leave at least a inch red background on all sides .
.G Miscellaneous Materials Enclosures must be minimum NEMA Type .
Floor coverings must comply with ASTM D and be rated for at least volts dielectric strength when tested under ASTM D. Floor covering must be at least inch thick .
Float switches must .
Be Vac A single pole double throw mechanicallyactivated wideangle types .
Have an inert synthetic leakproof shockproof and corrosionresistant casing .
Have a gauge conductor SJOW sealed cable Room lights must .
Be NRTL listed for damp locations .
Be ceiling mounted heavy duty industrial type fixtures .
Have a fiberreinforced polymer housing with steel wireway .
Have a hinged acrylic lens with closedcell gasket and ABS or stainless steel latches .
Include T lamps with an electronic instantstart ballast .
Include the manufacturers emergency battery pack Sump lights must .
Be NRTL listed and labeled for Class Division locations .
Be wall mounted nonmetallic type fixtures .
Have a fiberreinforced polymer housing .
Have a hinged polycarbonate or acrylic lens with nonmetallic latches .
Have nonmetallic lampholders .
Include T lamps with an electronic instantstart ballast Entry lights must be outdoor wallmounted metalhalide luminaire type having a diecast frame with hinged door and piece front and bottom prismaticglass lens .
Indicator lights must .
Be UL listed for wet locations. . Have a vaportight castmetal base with pin socket. . Have an impact and heat resistant colored polycarbonate threaded globe with neoprene gasket .
. . Have a threaded diecastaluminum guard . .
Include a twin tube W Vac compact fluorescent lamp with integral ballast .
Light switches must .
Be NRTL listed specification grade .
Have A Vac silver alloy contacts .
Be suitable for stranded conductor wiring .
Be ivory color Duplex plug receptacles must be NEMA Type R specification grade ivory color and suitable for stranded conductor wiring .
Junction and outlet boxes must comply with NEMA FB .
Boxes must be cast iron with threaded hubs have cast iron covers with gaskets and be at least by by inches .
For weatherproof device boxes use covers with gasketed hinged flaps .
SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS Sump light switches at remote pump station must .
Be singlepole position maintained A Vac rotary switches .
Have contacts rated at Vac and percent power factor .
Have an inductive pilot duty rating of .. A make .. A break .. A continuous Remote pump stations must be deadfront NEMA Type X enclosures having the following .
Hinged interior door and mounting panel on the back .
Push buttons duplex plug receptacle nameplates and sump light switch on the hinged interior door .
Terminal blocks on the mounting panel .
Hasp for a padlock Seal failure relays must be compatible with the drainage pump and be a factory assembled unit having normally open and normally closed contact each rated at Vac .
Seal failure relays must have individual pump leakindicator lights .
Pull boxes must comply with section .
Supporting devices must be corrosion resistant .
Concrete anchorage devices must be Type stainless steel. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not install electrical equipment on unpainted wood panels .
.B Installation .B General Reserved .B Conduit Conductors and Cable Do not install conduits behind ladders or within inches of the ladderrung vertical centerline .
Install flexible conduit with approximately inches of slack between terminations .
Flexible conduits and their fittings are considered a discontinuity and must be shunted by bonding jumpers .
Install bonding jumpers inside the flexible conduit .
Do not use the flexible conduit as the ground .
Install conductors and cables under section .K and as follows .
Pull conductors to prevent damage to the sheath or insulation . .
Install conductors and cables entering equipment and boxes with drip loops to prevent water reaching the currentcarrying parts or other conduits . .
Remove insulation without damaging the conductor. . Identify conductors by number at each termination .
Feeder and branch circuit conductors that are ungrounded must have continuously colorcoded insulation .
Conductors no .
AWG or larger may use colored tape .
If used apply tape at each connection and where accessible .
Ungrounded conductor colorcoding must be as shown in the following table Ungrounded Conductor ColorCoding System Color code VacSingle phase Black blue VacThree phase Black orange blue VacThree phase Black red blue VacThree phase Brown purple yellow SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .B Motor Control Center Use concrete anchorage devices to anchor the motor control center sections to the concrete slab .
Shim each section to make the motor control center level .
The motor control center sections must fit through the pump house doorway or roof access opening .
Any modifications required for installation must be preapproved by the manufacturer and must not change performance .
Install current switches in the starter compartments .
Loop power conductors around the sensing coil multiple times .
.B Panel LP The panelboard directory must list the equipment controlled and the area designation .
The directory must be printed using Times New Roman font and at least point font size .
Place the directory in the panelboard door frame with a transparent protective cover .
.B Miscellaneous Materials Secure hangers brackets supports and electrical equipment to surfaces using .
Concrete anchorage devices into concrete or solid masonry surfaces .
Machine screws or bolts into metal surfaces .
Wood screws into wood construction surfaces .C Conductor Splices Do not splice the drainage pump cables between the pumps and the enclosure shown .
Conductor splices must be made only in fixtures junction boxes and gutters .
Splices must be made using either pressure connectors listed by a NRTL or soldered joints made by soldering irons .
Do not use open flame soldering .
Insulate splices using the following sequence .
Apply halflapped layers of selffusing oil and flameresistant synthetic rubber tape covered by halflapped layers of pressuresensitive adhesive PVC electrical tape at least mils thick. . After taping the splice apply an electrical insulating coating .
The coating must be fast drying resistant to oil acids alkalis and corrosive atmospheric conditions and compatible with the tape. . PAYMENT Not Used BOOSTER PUMPS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for installing booster pumps .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Shop Drawings Submit shop drawings for each booster pump .
.C Product Data Submit product data for the booster pump including the following components .
Pump including pump curve and motor information SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .
Valves .
Pump controller .
Booster pump enclosure .
Pressure gauge .
Appurtenances .C Closeout Submittals Submit closeout submittals as a Maintenance and Operations Manual before completion of the work .
Submit copies as PDF files on CDs or DVDs .
Submit copy as fusedlaminate prints in a ring binder with tabbed dividers .
Organize each manual as follows .
Index .
Parts list .
Operating instructions .
Maintenance instructions .
Pump curve .D Quality Assurance The requirements of section .D do not apply to the booster pump .
Notify the Engineer business days before testing the booster pump .
Test the booster pump in the Engineers presence after connecting the booster pump to the irrigation system .
The discharge water from testing must not cause erosion damage to equipment or plantings or interfere with ongoing work .
The pump must not load the motor to more than the product of the nameplate amperage and service factor .
The flow rate must not vary from the pump curve by more than percent at percent motor speed .
Test each booster pump at the following test points .
Zero flow rate cutoff head .
Maximum flow rate .
Design heads shown .
Steadystate flow for each irrigation controller station Record the following for each test point .
Motor rpm .
Motor voltage .
Motor amperage .
Suction pressure of the pump .
Discharge pressure of the pump After testing run the booster pump through successful complete irrigation controller cycles .
If the booster pump fails testing adjust system components as necessary and retest. . MATERIALS .A General The concrete for the foundation and pad of the booster pump must be minor concrete .
.B Manufactured Units .B General The booster pump must consist of a factory assembled and tested skidmounted system with the following components pump pump controller booster pump enclosure manifold inlet and outlet valves sensors fittings and appurtenances .
The system working pressure must be at least psi .
SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS The booster pump must be listed and labeled by a NRTL .
.B Components .Ba General Reserved .Bb Pumps Pumps must consist of a closecoupled pump and motor .
Pumps must be end suction centrifugal type with mechanical seals coated with the manufacturers standard finish for exterior use and single or multiple stage .
Booster pumps must have a horizontal or vertical configuration .
For horizontal pumps .
Casing must be closegrained cast iron with a replaceable bronze wearing ring .
Impeller must be dynamically balanced made from bronze and keyed and secured to the shaft by a stainless steel washer and cap screw .
Impeller shaft must be either steel with a bronze sleeve or stainless steel with no sleeve For vertical pumps .
Casing must be closegrained cast iron with replaceable stainless steel wearing ring .
Motor pedestal must be closegrained cast iron .
Impeller must be dynamically balanced made from stainless steel and keyed and secured to the shaft by a stainless steel washer and cap screw .
The impeller shaft must be stainless steel Motors must be standard efficiency NEMA code letter G or smaller open drip proof and NEMA Design B .
.Bc Ball Valves Ball valves must have a piece bronze body with full size port chromeplated or brass ball and be rated for at least psi .
.Bd Butterfly Valves Butterfly valves must have a ductile iron body with molded seat liner made from EPDM or PTFE bi directional stainless steel stem locking lever with extended neck and be rated for at least psi .
.Be Pump Controller The pump controller must consist of an enclosure VFD main disconnect circuit breakers motor starter motor protector and a pressure transducer .
The pump controller must keep the pump running when the flow of water fluctuates between the changing of the irrigation controller stations .
The pump controller must have a potentiometer or keypad for adjusting the motor speed .
The enclosure must be a NEMA Type enclosure and rated for the horsepower voltage and phase shown .
The ground bus must be bonded to the enclosure .
The circuit breaker must be rated as shown .
The following equipment must be on the front of the enclosure .
way switch for automatic mode or manual mode. . Main disconnect .
You may use the main breaker as the main disconnect if it is accessible on the front of the enclosure. . Highvisibility pilot lights rated for Vac with a colored plastic lens and screw caps .
Include pilot lights for the following conditions .. Power on .. Run .. No flow The VFD must SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .
Be listed and labeled by a NRTL .
Have percent input impedance at the rated motor horsepower .
Be mounted in the enclosure .
Have a LCD screen with operator interface .
Process the analog input signal from the pressure transducer and ..
Determine water pressure .. Set the pump motor speed ..
Determine noflow conditions When the pressure transducer signal indicates a no flow condition in the manifold the VFD must stop the pump regardless of demand .
The VFD must have an adjustable time delay for the no flow condition .
Upon resumption of flow in the manifold it must reset and resume automatic mode .
The VFD and the way switch must operate the booster pump as follows .
Automatic mode must start and stop the pump based on digital input signals from multiple irrigation controllers .
Manual mode must start the pump regardless of the input signal Pressure transducer must be stainless steel rated for at least psi working pressure and send a mA output signal to the VFD .
.Bf Booster Pump Enclosures The booster pump enclosure and lid must be fabricated from stainless steel or marine grade aluminum .
The lid must have a continuous hinge gas springs or equivalent lid supports and a hasp for padlocking .
Gas springs must use their entire stroke without forcing the lid beyond its fully opened position .
Side louvers must have internal bronze insect screens and be mounted on each end .
The enclosure must include at least thermostatically controlled exhaust fan with bronze insect screens .
.Bg Pressure Gauges Pressure gauges must .
Comply with ASME B. Grade B .
Include a inch glycerin filled dial stainless steel case and cover reset screw and inch NPT bottom inlet .
Read from to psi .Bh Appurtenances Manifolds must be steel pipe or copper pipe .
Steel pipe must comply with ASTM A Grade B .
Copper pipe must comply with ASTM B Type K. The skid must be either steel or aluminum channel with risers as necessary and all welded construction .
Welding must comply with AWS D. for steel construction or AWS D. for aluminum construction .
Fasteners expansion anchors nuts bolts and washers must be Type stainless steel .
Nameplates must comply with section .F .
.B Fabrication Fabricate the booster pump as follows .
Install the inlet and outlet valves inside the booster pump enclosure. . Use threaded or flanged fittings on the pump inlet and outlet connections. . Fabricate the pump so that it is removable without disassembling the manifolds . .
Install pressure gauges in the manifolds on the suction and discharge sides of the pump . .
Install the pressure transducer in the manifold. . Mount the pump controller inside the enclosure . .
Attach the enclosure to the skid .
SECTION PUMPING EQUIPMENT AND CONTROLS .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Support the connected water piping outside the enclosure .
Do not use the booster pump to support the connected piping .
Install a padlock after installing the booster pump .
The Department furnishes a padlock at Contract acceptance .
Place the maintenance and operations manual binder inside the enclosure .
.B Foundation and Pad Pour a concrete foundation and pad where the booster pump is shown .
The foundation must be at least inches wider than the skid on all sides .
Place the pad against the foundation on the door side of the enclosure .
The pad must be the same width as the foundation and at least inches long .
Conduit risers must be located inside the skid footprint .
.C Skid Installation Use concrete anchorage devices to mount the booster pump skid on the foundation .
Use at least sets of tapered steel leveling wedges to level the skid .
Use wedges placed tapertotaper at each point of support .
The steel wedges must remain in place in the completed work .
After suction and discharge piping has been installed and tightened in place level the skid and tighten the concrete anchor hex nuts against the base .
Fill the voids under the base with mortar complying with section .F .
Retighten the mounting bolts after the voids have been filled .
.D Nameplates Install nameplates under section .F .
Install nameplates on .
Pump .
Pump controller .
Switches .
Main disconnect .
Circuit breakers .
Panel lights .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED MISCELLANEOUS METAL GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing miscellaneous metals .
Welding must comply with AWS D .. .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Qualifications Welders and welding operators must be qualified under AWS D .. .D Department Acceptance The following miscellaneous metal materials are inspected at the fabrication site .
Miscellaneous iron and steel .
Miscellaneous metal bridge Notify the Engineer .
When materials listed above have been delivered to the fabrication site .
At least days before starting fabrication .
MATERIALS .A General Materials must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL Miscellaneous Metal Materials Material Requirement Steel bars plates and shapes ASTM AAM A or A AISI or M Grades Steel fastener components for general applications Bolts and studs ASTM A Anchor bolts ASTM F a HS bolts and studs ASTM A Type a HS threaded rods ASTM A Type a HS nonheaded anchor bolts ASTM F Grade Class A a Nuts ASTM A including appendix Xb Washers ASTM F Hardened washers ASTM F Type including S supplementary requirements Components of HS steel fastener assemblies for use in HS joints Bolts ASTM A Type Tension control bolts ASTM F Type Nuts ASTM A including appendix Xb Hardened washers ASTM F Type Circular including S supplementary requirements Direct tension indicators ASTM F Type zinccoated Stainless steel fasteners alloys for general applications Bolts screws studs threaded rods and nonheaded anchor bolts ASTM F or FM Nuts ASTM F or FM Washers ASTM AAM and ASME B.M Gray iron castings Inside a roadbed AASHTO M Outside a roadbed AASHTO M except only AASHTO M Class B is allowed Ductile iron castings ASTM A Grade Carbonsteel castings ASTM AAM Grade Class Malleable iron castings ASTM AAM Grade Cast iron pipe Commercial quality Steel pipe Commercial quality welded or extruded Other parts for general applications Commercial quality aUse hardened washers .
bZinccoated nuts tightened beyond snug or wrench tight must be furnished with a dry lubricant complying with supplementary requirement S in ASTM A .
Remove burrs rough and sharp edges and other flaws .
Straighten warped pieces after fabricating and galvanizing .
.B Galvanizing Galvanize miscellaneous metal materials under the schedules and specifications shown in the following table SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL Galvanizing Schedules and Specifications Material Schedulea Specification Rolled pressed and forged steel shapes plates bars and strip inch thick Except for pregalvanized standard pipe galvanize material after fabrication into the largest practical sections ASTM AAM Steel inch thick Galvanize before or after fabrication Galvanized before fabrication ASTM AAM Coating Designation G Galvanized after fabrication ASTM AAM except the weight of zinc coating must average at least .
ozsq ft of surface area with no individual specimen having a coating weight of less than .
ozsq ft Standard pipe ASTM AAM except the zinc coating for fence pipes and structural shapes except for metal line posts for barbed and woven wire fences must average at least .
ozsq ft of surface area with no individual specimen having a coating weight of less than .
ozsq ft Iron and steel hardware except threaded studs bolts nuts and washers specified to comply with ASTM A A A A F or Fb Galvanize after fabrication ASTM AAM Rail elements backup plates terminal sections and end and return caps of guardrail AASHTO M aFabrication includes shearing cutting punching forming drilling milling bending welding and riveting .
bFor threaded studs bolts nuts and washers specified to comply with ASTM A A A A F or F galvanize under their ASTMs .
Galvanizing is not required for stainless steel monel metal and similar corrosionresistant parts Galvanizing is not required for the following miscellaneous bridge metal .
Portions of plates shapes or other items embedded more than inches in concrete .
Embedded steel pipe ending at or below the surface of encasing concrete .
Items described to receive other finishes Clean welded areas before galvanizing to remove slag or other material that would interfere with the adherence of the zinc .
Galvanize parts of fastener assemblies separately before assembly .
Tapping of nuts or other internally threaded parts to be used with zinccoated bolts anchor bars or studs must be performed after galvanizing and comply with thread dimensions and overtapping allowances in ASTM A .
Repair damaged galvanized surfaces as follows .
Clean by thoroughly wire brushing damaged areas and removing loose and cracked coating . .
Paint cleaned areas with applications of organic zincrich primer from the Authorized Material List for organic zincrich primers .
Do not use aerosol cans .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL .C.H Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Except for finalpayitem miscellaneous metal materials the payment quantity for miscellaneous metal material is the weight determined from scale weighings .
MISCELLANEOUS IRON AND STEEL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for fabricating miscellaneous iron and steel. . MATERIALS .A General Raised pattern plates must be commercial quality .
.B Frames Grates and Covers Grates must be produced from one of the following .
Structural steel complying with either of the following .. ASTM AAM .. ASTM A Grades or .
Ductile iron castings .
Carbonsteel castings Manhole frames and covers must comply with AASHTO M . Galvanize cast iron manhole frames and covers for sidewalks after fabrication and before assembling component parts .
Coat other cast iron items with commercialquality asphalt except machined surfaces of manhole frames and covers for decks .
Drainage inlet frames and grates except those on bridges need not be galvanized or coated with asphalt .
Matchmark frames and grates and frames and covers in pairs before delivery to the job site .
Grates and covers must fit into their frames without rocking. . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT A frame and cover pair is measurement unit .
A frame and grate pair is measurement unit .
MISCELLANEOUS BRIDGE METAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing miscellaneous bridge metal .
Miscellaneous bridge metal consists of .
Structural steel and cast steel portions of bearing plates bars rockers assemblies and other expansion or fixed bearing devices in concrete structures .
Equalizing bolts and expansion joint armor in concrete structures .
Expansion joint armor in steel structures .
Manhole frames and covers frames and grates ladder rungs guard posts and access door assemblies .
Deck drains area drains retaining wall drains and drainage piping not included in bridge deck drainage system SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit a certificate of compliance for anchorage devices .
Submit a work plan for placing the nonskid surface showing .
Application method .
Spread rate of epoxy and grit .
Number of coats .C Bridge Deck Drainage System Submit a certificate of compliance for fiberglass pipe and fittings include laboratory test results .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Test spring latches and other mechanical devices before delivery to the job site they must operate smoothly and properly .
.Db Bridge Deck Drainage System After installing the drainage system and final cleanup of the deck and drainage areas test each drain pipe and facility except short free fall pipes in the Engineers presence by discharging gallons of water into the drain .
The test must demonstrate the proper operation of the drain pipe and facility .
If the test indicates obstructions in the pipe clear the pipe and repeat the test until the drain pipe and facility are unobstructed .
.Dc Nonskid Surface Before applying any nonskid material demonstrate the method of application to the Engineer by preparing a sq ft test sample applied on hardboard at least inch thick .
The nonskid surface must have a total thickness of inch .
.D Department Acceptance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Fabricate the parts shown in the table below from the corresponding materials shown Miscellaneous Metal Parts Part Material Bearing assemblies ASTM AAM Access opening covers Commercialquality sheet steel Access doors Galvanized sheet steel complying with ASTM AAM Coating Designation G Z Springs for deck drain grating latches Commercialquality stainless steel spring wire containing a nominal composition of chromium and nickel Pipe bends Commercialquality tube bends or fabricated bends of equal smoothness .
Do not use miterjoint bends .
Metal parts of anchorage devices except iron castings for CIP inserts Steel or stainless steel Iron castings for CIP inserts Malleable iron or ductile iron SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL Fabricate expansion joint armor from steel plates angles or other structural shapes .
Shape the armor to the section of the concrete deck and matchmark it in the shop .
Cast steel and cast iron must comply with section .
Transition fittings between pipes of different diameters must be .
Smooth and uniform without sags projections or offsets .
At least inches in length for each inch reduction in pipe diameter .
Sealing compound for caulking and adhesive sealing must be polysulfide or polyurethane complying with ASTM C Type S Grade NS Class Use O .
.B Bolted and Threaded Bar Connections HS bolted connections must comply with the specifications for HS steel fasteners and bolted connections in section .
Equalizing bolts must be bolts or threaded bars .
Threaded bars shown as prestressing steel must comply with the specifications for plain bars in ASTM AAM including supplementary requirements .
Nuts must comply with section .H and the st paragraph of section .Bc .
Abrasives used for blast cleaning must comply with section .B .
Thread locking systems must be on the Authorized Material List for anaerobic thread locking compounds and must comply with the requirements thereon .
.C Anchorage Devices .C General Concrete anchorage devices must be on the Authorized Material List for stud mechanical expansion anchors shelltype mechanical expansion anchors resin caspsule anchors or castinplace inserts .
Concrete anchorage devices must be mechanical expansion anchors or resin capsule anchors installed in drilled holes or CIP concrete inserts .
An anchorage device must be a complete system including threaded studs hex nuts and cut washers .
Thread dimensions for externally threaded anchorage devices before zinc coating must comply with ASME B. having Class A tolerances or ASME B.M having Grade g tolerances .
Thread dimensions for internally threaded concrete anchorage devices must comply with ASTM A .
Except for mechanical expansion anchors and iron castings for CIP inserts metal parts of anchorage devices must be hotdip or mechanically galvanized .
.C Mechanical Expansion Anchors Mechanical expansion anchors must be hotdip or mechanically galvanized made from stainless steel or coated with electrodeposited zinc complying with ASTM B .
Mechanical expansion anchors must be the integral stud type or the shell type with internal threads and an independent stud .
Do not use selfdrilling mechanical expansion anchors .
When tested under California Test mechanical expansion anchors must withstand the application of a sustained tension test load of at least the values shown in the following table for at least hours with a movement of at most .
inch SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL Mechanical Expansion Anchor Sustained Tension Test Load Stud diameter inches Sustained tension test load pounds a aMaximum stud diameter allowed for mechanical expansion anchors .C Resin Capsule Anchors When tested under California Test resin capsule anchors must withstand the application of a sustained tension test load of at least the values shown in the following table for at least hours with a movement of at most .
inch Resin Capsule Anchor Sustained Tension Test Load Stud diameter inches Sustained tension test load pounds .C CastinPlace Concrete Inserts CIP concrete inserts must be ferrule loop or cast iron .
Iron castings for CIP inserts must be mechanically galvanized .
When tested under California Test CIP inserts must withstand the minimum ultimate test loads shown in the following table CIP Insert Ultimate Tension Test Load Stud diameter inches Ultimate tensile load pounds .D Bridge Deck Drainage System .D General Reserved .D Pipe Connections and Joints Selftapping screws for sleeve connections must .
Be stainless steel with hexheads .
Be installed in holes drilled to fit the screws .
Comply with ASTM A Type for a project in a nonfreezethaw area SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL .
Comply with ASTM A Type for a project in a freezethaw area Drain pipe joints must be watertight smooth and free from projections or offsets over inch on the inside .
Mechanical couplings in piping must be gasketed shortsleeve type consisting of .
Mild steel middle ring with pipe stop .
rubber compound wedge section ring gaskets .
mild steel follower rings .
Mild steel bolts to compress the gaskets .D Fiberglass Pipes and Fittings You may use fiberglass pipes and fittings with the same diameters and minimum bend radii as shown instead of welded pipe .
Fiberglass pipe and fittings must .
Comply with ASTM D . Have a minimum shortterm rupture strength of psi For joining pipe and fittings use the adhesive type recommended by the manufacturer .
Fiberglass pipe not enclosed in a box girder cell or encased in concrete must be made from UVresistant resin pigmented with concretegray color or be coated with a concretegray resinrich exterior coating .
Do not use paint .
Fiberglass pipe with UV protection must withstand at least hours of accelerated weathering when tested under ASTM G with UVB lamps .
The resting cycle must be hours of UV exposure at degrees F and then hours of condensate exposure at degrees F. After testing the pipe surface must show no fiber exposure crazing or checking and only slight chalking or color change .
.D PVC Pipes and Fittings For drainage pipe NPS or smaller encased in concrete or enclosed in a box girder cell and exposed for at most feet within the cell you may use PVC pipe and fittings with the same diameters and minimum bend radii shown instead of welded pipe .
PVC pipe and fittings must be schedule complying with ASTM D. .E Bearing Devices Reserved .F Nonskid Surface Epoxy must comply with section .C .D or .G .
Grit must be .
Commercialquality aluminum oxide silicon carbide or almandite garnet grit particles .
Screen size no .
or no . .
Applied uniformly at a rate of at least .
pounds per square foot of surface area. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Straighten warped sections of expansion joint armor before placing .
Secure the expansion joint armor in the correct position during concrete placement .
.B Bolted and Threaded Bar Connections Where cleaning is described clean nuts bolts threaded bars and plate washers under SSPCSP or SSPCSP before painting .
Surfaces blast cleaned under SSPCSP must have a dense uniform angular anchor pattern of at least .
mils when measured under ASTM D. Paint blastcleaned surfaces the same day blast cleaning is performed unless otherwise authorized .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL Reclean surfaces that rust or become contaminated before paint is applied .
Paint surfaces with applications of organic zincrich primer from the Authorized Material List for organic zincrich primers .
Do not use aerosol cans .
For threads engaged by nuts apply the nd application to the nuts and threads after installation .
.C Anchorage Devices Install mechanical expansion anchors resin capsule anchors and CIP inserts under the manufacturers instructions .
If the manufacturers instructions do not include torque requirements tighten nuts used to attach equipment or fixtures to anchorage devices to the installation torque requirements shown in the following table Torque Requirements Stud diameter inches Installation torque requirements ftlb Shelltype mechanical expansion anchors Integralstudtype mechanical expansion anchors Resin capsule anchors and CIP inserts Install concrete anchorage devices such that the attached equipment or fixtures bear firmly against the concrete .
Install shelltype mechanical expansion anchors such that the top surface of the anchor body remains to inch below the concrete surface after expansion .
After installation of shelltype mechanical expansion anchors and before mounting equipment or fixtures demonstrate to the Engineer that the expansion anchors are firmly seated within these tolerances .
.D Bridge Deck Drainage System Securely cover deck drain grates and other grating openings to prevent intrusion of debris until after final cleanup of the deck and drainage areas .
Provide a transition section where a pipe under a walkway or other improved area must be of a smaller diameter than the downdrain pipe .
Couplings used to connect PVC or fiberglass pipe to steel must be threaded or flanged .
For PVC or fiberglass pipe do not use the sleeve connections shown .
If fiberglass pipe is used support spacing for fiberglass pipe must be the same as shown for welded steel pipe .
Each pipe support must have a width of at least inches .
If PVC pipe is used pipe support spacing for PVC pipe must be at most feet .
.E Bearing Devices Bearing assemblies or masonry plates placed on mortar pads must comply with section .C .
Set bearing plates level .
Set rockers and expansion devices to comply with the temperature at the time of erection or to the specified setting .
.F Nonskid Surface Where a nonskid surface is shown on steel plates apply an epoxy mixed with grit .
The finish color of the nonskid surface must be light gray .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL Before applying epoxy and grit to a galvanized surface prepare the surface under section ..
If authorized you may use a commercialquality nonskid surface made of a component UVresistant epoxy and grit if the quality is equal to the epoxygrit mixture specified. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for miscellaneous metal does not include the weight of epoxy and grit for a nonskid surface .
PUMPING PLANT METAL WORK .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for installing pumping plant metal work .
Pumping plant metal work consists of fabricated and cast metal parts used for constructing pumping plants including metal parts in the pumphouse outside stairway storage box and discharge box and and the roadwaytype inlet frames and grates at the pumping plant site .
Pipe handrailing must comply with section .. . MATERIALS Concrete anchorage devices must comply with section .C .
Except in walkway areas cast iron manhole covers and frames and cast iron grates and frames must be dipped in commercialquality asphalt .
Manhole covers and frames for pumping plant discharge boxes must be watertight and certified by the manufacturer to be rated to the pressure shown. . CONSTRUCTION Provide heavyduty galvanized steel safety padlock hasp and staple assembly .
The assembly must be securely attached to door and frame and have .
Vertical staple consisting of a rod with a diameter of at least inch .
Slotted leaf at least inches in length .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for pumping plant metal work does not include metal parts installed under section and roadtype inlet frames and grates paid for as a separate bid item .
CATTLE GUARD .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing cattle guards .
Earthwork for cattle guards must comply with section .
Concrete foundations and drain holes for cattle guards must comply with section .
Bar reinforcement must comply with section .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit design details for the equivalent cattle guard design if used .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved SECTION MISCELLANEOUS METAL .
MATERIALS You may use an equivalent cattle guard design consisting of a prefabricated rail assembly and wings supported on a concrete foundation .
The Engineer may authorize minor variations in dimensions to allow the use of the fabricators standard methods of fabrication .
The equivalent design cattle guard must support HS live loading .
Weld using low hydrogen electrodes. . CONSTRUCTION If a cattle guard is installed at an existing fence attach the cattle guard to the fence .
The completed cattle guard must bear uniformly on the foundation .
The finished grade must not vary more than inch from the adjacent roadway surface .
Make any adjustment to the roadway surface needed to comply with this tolerance. . PAYMENT Not Used RIGID FALL PROTECTION Reserved ISOLATION CASINGS Reserved TIE ROD ASSEMBLIES Reserved RESERVED WELLS GENERAL Reserved WATER WELLS Reserved EXPLORATION HOLES Reserved MONITOR WELLS Reserved REHABILITATE EXISTING WATER WELLS Reserved DESTROY WELLS Reserved RESERVED LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE RESERVED INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing incidental bid items that are not closely associated with other sections. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used SURVEY MONUMENTS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for constructing survey monuments .
Work performed on existing monuments must comply with section . . MATERIALS Concrete must be minor concrete with a maximum inch aggregate .
The Department furnishes the survey marker disks .
The frames and covers must be fabricated from cast steel or gray cast iron .
The frames covers and hardware must comply with section .
The covers must fit into the frames without rocking .
Granular material must be gravel crushed gravel crushed rock or any combination of these and must not exceed inches in greatest dimension. . CONSTRUCTION You may cast the monuments in place in neat holes without the use of forms unless forms are shown .
Thoroughly consolidate the concrete and cure it by the water method .
Locate the monument such that the point being referenced falls within inch from the center of the disk when the disk is placed in the center of the monument .
Place the survey marker disk before the concrete reaches its initial set .
Firmly embed the disk in the concrete .
If base and surfacing are not shown around a monument fill any space around it with earth .
Water and tamp the earth into place .
Unless the surplus excavated material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the Engineer. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED MISCELLANEOUS COATINGS .
GENERAL .A General Section .
includes general specifications for applying miscellaneous coatings to new and existing installations .
SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION Apply miscellaneous coatings under the specifications for coating structural steel in section .
.B Materials Water for rinsing must comply with the specifications for water for pressure rinsing in section .A .
.C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used .
PAINTING TIMBER .A General Section .
includes specifications for preparing and painting timber installations .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction .C General Reserved .C Surface Preparation Remove cracked or peeled paint loose chalky paint dirt and other foreign material immediately before painting .
The moisture content of the timber must be not more than percent at the time of initial paint application .
.C Application Paint new timber with coat of wood primer followed by coats of exterior paint .
You may apply the st coat before erection if authorized .
Paint previously painted timber with coats of exterior paint .
Prime bare wood with coat of wood primer .
After the timber is in place putty the cracks checks nail holes and other depressions flush with the surface .
Let dry before applying the st coat of exterior paint .
.D Payment Not Used .
PAINTING CONCRETE .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for preparing and painting concrete surfaces .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit the coating manufacturers application instructions at least days before use .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Coatings for concrete must be white .
.C Construction .C General Do not paint new concrete until it is at least days old .
SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION .C Surface Preparation Prepare concrete surfaces under SSPCSP NACE no. . Pressure rinse prepared surfaces before applying coating .
Surfaces must be thoroughly dry at the time of painting .
You may use artificial drying methods if authorized .
.C Application Apply at least coats under the manufacturers instructions and SSPCPA .
.D Payment Not Used .
STAINING CONCRETE AND SHOTCRETE .A General .A General .Aa Summary Section .
includes specifications for preparing and staining concrete and shotcrete surfaces .
.Ab Definitions Reserved .Ac Submittals Submit the stain manufacturers product data and application instructions at least days before starting staining activities .
.Ad Quality Assurance .Adi General Reserved .Adii Test Panels Stain the authorized test panel complying with section .Dc or section .D .
The test panel must be .
Stained using the same personnel materials equipment and methods to be used in the work .
Accessible for viewing .
Displayed in an upright position near the work .
Authorized for staining before starting the staining work If ordered construct additional test panels until a satisfactory color is attained .
The preparing and staining of additional test panels is change order work .
The Engineer uses the authorized stained test panel to determine the acceptability of the stained surface .
Dispose of the test panels after the staining work is complete and authorized .
Notify the Engineer before disposing of the test panels .
.A Materials .Aa General Reserved .Ab Stain Stain must .
Contain dilute acid that penetrates and etches the surfaces .
Be a waterbased solution of inorganic metallic salts .
Be a commercialquality product designed specifically for exterior applications .
Produce abrasionresistant color deposits SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION .Ac Sealer Reserved .Ad Sealing Compound Reserved .A Construction .Aa General Seal the joints between surfaces to be stained and adjacent metal with sealing compound before applying the stain .
.Ab Surface Preparation Test surfaces for acceptance of the stain before applying the stain .
Clean surfaces that resist accepting the stain and retest until passing .
Before staining the surfaces must be .
At least days old .
Prepared under SSPCSP NACE no . .
Thoroughly dry .Ac Application Apply the stain under the manufacturers instructions .
Apply the stain uniformly to avoid excessive rundown .
Work the stain into the concrete using a nylon bristle brush in a circular motion .
After the last coat of stain has dried rinse the stained surfaces with water and wet scrub them with a stiff bristle nylon brush until the rinse water runs clear .
Collect all rinse water .
Protect adjacent surfaces during staining .
Drips puddles or other irregularities must be worked into the surface .
.A Payment Not Used .B Sculpted Shotcrete and Textured Concrete .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for preparing and staining sculpted shotcrete and textured concrete surfaces .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals .Bci General Reserved .Bcii Contractor Qualifications Submit the following documentation of the staining subcontractors experience at least days before the prestaining meeting .
Summary of the staining subcontractors experience that demonstrates compliance with section .Bdii . .
List of at least projects completed in the last years that demonstrate the staining subcontractors ability to stain textured concrete or sculpted shotcrete surfaces similar to the surfaces for this project .
For each project include .. Project description .. Name and phone number of the owner .. Staining completion date SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION .. Color photos of the completed stained surface .Bciii Application Plan Submit an application plan at least days before the prestaining meeting .
The application plan must include details for preparing and staining the surfaces to achieve the required color including .
Number of applications that will be used to apply the stain .
For each application of the stain a description of ..
Manufacturer color finish and percentage strength mixture of the stain that will be applied .. Methods and tools that will be used to apply the stain .
Methods for protecting adjacent surfaces during staining .
Rinse water collection plan for containing all liquid effluent and residue resulting from preparing and staining the surfaces .Bd Quality Assurance .Bdi General Reserved .Bdii Contractor Qualifications The staining subcontractor must .
Have experience staining textured concrete or sculpted shotcrete surfaces to simulate the appearance of natural rock formations or stone masonry .
Have successfully completed at least projects in the past years involving staining of concrete or sculpted shotcrete surfaces similar to the surfaces for this project .Bdiii Prestaining Meeting Before starting staining activities conduct a meeting to discuss the application plan .
Meeting attendees must include the Engineer and all staining subcontractors .
.B Materials Not Used .B Construction Not Used .B Payment The payment quantity for prepare and stain concrete or prepare and stain shotcrete is the area measured along the stained vertical or sloped wall face. . ROCK STAINING .A GENERAL .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for preparing and staining rock .
Preparing and staining rock includes preparing and staining the exterior surface of landscape boulders damaged or scarred native rock rock energy dissipaters rock slope protection and gabion surfaces .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit a work plan describing the methods to control overspray and spillage and protect adjacent surfaces .
Submit the stain manufacturers product data including the product sheet and the application instructions .
SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION .A Quality Assurance .Aa General Reserved .Ab Test Plot Apply the stain to a rock test plot of at least by feet at a location designated by the Engineer .
Notify the Engineer at least days before staining the test plot .
Prepare and stain the test plot with the same personnel materials tools equipment and methods to be used in staining the final surfaces .
Separate test plots are required for staining rock slope protection and native rock .
If ordered prepare and stain additional test plots .
The preparing and staining of additional test plots is change order work .
Obtain authorization of the test plot before starting the staining work .
The Engineer uses the authorized test plot to determine the acceptability of the staining work .
If the test plot is not incorporated into the work dispose of it after the staining work is complete and authorized .
Notify the Engineer before disposing of the test plot .
.B MATERIALS .B General Reserved .B Stain Reserved .C CONSTRUCTION .C General Reserved .C Preparation Before applying the stain .
Identify and obtain authorization for the areas to be stained .
Remove oils dirt and other contaminants from the surfaces to be stained .
Dry all surfaces to be stained .C Application Stain the exposed surfaces under the manufacturers instructions to achieve a color consistent with the color of the authorized test plot .
Control overspray and protect adjacent surfaces .
Keep stained surfaces dry for at least days after the application of the stain .
.D PAYMENT The payment quantity for rock stain is the area measured along the slope face. . ANTIGRAFFITI COATING .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for applying a sacrificial antigraffiti coating to surfaces .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit the manufacturers application and removal instructions at least days before starting work .
SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION .A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Antigraffiti coating must .
Be a nontoxic sacrificial nonflammable waterbased coating designed for protecting concrete from graffiti .
Be compatible with the concrete surface treatment .
Have a clear matte finish when dry .
Be removable with a hot pressure washer .C Construction Test surfaces for acceptance of the coating before applying .
Clean surfaces that resist accepting the coating and retest until passing .
Apply the antigraffiti coating under the manufacturers instructions in at least even coats .
.D Payment Not Used .
STAINING GALVANIZED SURFACES Reserved .
PAINTING ELECTRICAL MATERIAL .A General Section .
includes specifications for preparing and painting electrical material .
.B Materials Polymeric coating for steel service equipment enclosures must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Coating hardness min ASTM D HB Salt spray resistance hours ASTM B Adhesion Method B min ASTM D The steel service equipment enclosure finish coat color must match color no .
of FEDSTD .
.C Construction .C General Clean and paint electrical material .
The coating must be free from flow lines streaks blisters and other defects that would impair serviceability or detract from the general appearance .
Prepare and finish conduit and conduit fittings above ground as specified for the adjacent standard or post .
Stencil the equipment number neatly on the standard or adjacent structure .
Obtain the number from the Engineer .
.C Traffic Signal Faces and Fittings Finish the interiors of the metal signal visor louver and the front face of backplates with applications of lusterless black exteriorgrade latex paint formulated for application to properly prepared metal surfaces .
Painting is not required if the equipment has a good factory finish .
Apply coats of lusterless dark olive green exteriorgrade latex paint formulated for application to properly prepared metal surfaces to the following electrical equipment SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION .
Signal section .
Signal head mounting brackets and fittings .
Outside of visor .
Pedestrian push button housing .
Pedestrian signal section and visor .
Back face of back plate The color must match color chip no .
filed at METS .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED PARKING BUMPERS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing parking bumpers .
Section does not apply to concrete for parking bumpers .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit product data for parking bumpers .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Parking bumpers must be steelreinforced PC units .
The concrete must be air entrained and have a minimum compressive strength of psi .
Each unit must be from to inches high from to inches wide and from to feet long .
All units for a project must be the same size .
Each unit must have chamfered corners transverse drainage slots on the underside and at least factoryformed or drilled vertical holes through the parking bumper for anchoring it to the substrate .
The units must be free of pockets sand streaks honeycombs and other obvious defects .
Corners must be uniform straight and sharp .
The mounting hardware must be galvanized steel. . CONSTRUCTION Verify that pavement is in suitable condition to start installation under the manufacturers instructions .
Start installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected .
Install parking bumpers under the manufacturers instructions. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED RESETTING AND RELOCATING MAILBOXES .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for resetting and relocating mailboxes .. Reset and relocate newspaper boxes as specified for mailboxes .
SECTION INCIDENTAL CONSTRUCTION .
MATERIALS Each new post must be redwood complying with the specifications for roadway sign posts in section . . CONSTRUCTION During construction .
Move each mailbox to clear the way for your activities .
Each mailbox must be accessible for delivery at all times . .
Install each mailbox on a post set in the ground or on an authorized temporary support .
When construction is complete install each mailbox on a new post .
Place each post in a hole .
Backfill the space around the post with earth placed in layers about inches thick .
Moisten and thoroughly compact each layer. . PAYMENT Resetting or relocating mailbox on post is measurement unit .
Resetting or relocating mailbox and or more newspaper boxes on post is measurement unit .
Resetting or relocating newspaper box on post is measurement unit .
The measurement units for resetting or relocating multiple mailboxes on post are the number of mailboxes on the post .
The number of measurement units equals the number of units shown to be reset or relocated regardless of the number of moves required .
OBLITERATING ROADS AND DETOURS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for obliterating roads and detours. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION If a part of the surfacing is to remain in place make a fulldepth saw cut to a true line along the edge of the surfacing before obliteration .
Obliterate a road or detour by doing one of the following .
Placing an earth cover at least inches thick .
Plowing pulverizing or scarifying to a minimum depth of inches or to the bottom of the impermeable underlying base whichever is the greater depth If you obliterate by placing an earth cover scarify the existing base and surfacing for its full depth and break up the base and surfacing such that the material contains no lumps larger than foot in greatest dimension before the earth cover is placed .
If you obliterate by plowing pulverizing or scarifying break the bituminous material into parts at most inches in greatest dimension and mix with an equal quantity of underlying material .
After obliteration grade the area such that it blends with the surrounding terrain and is well drained. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED RESERVED FENCES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing fences. . MATERIALS A temporary fence must comply with the plan details and specifications for a permanent fence of the same type except .
Used materials may be incorporated in the fence if the materials are good sound and suitable for the intended purpose .
Materials may be commercial quality if the dimensions and sizes of the materials are equal to or greater than the dimensions and sizes shown or specified in section .
Post must be either metal or wood .
The Department does not require .. Galvanizing or painting of steel elements ..
Treating wood with a wood preservative ..
Concrete footings for metal posts For concrete for a metal post or brace footing or for a deadman use .
Commercialquality aggregates and cementitious material .
At least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard A reinforcing bar must comply with ASTM AAM. . CONSTRUCTION Remove earth trees brush and other obstructions that interfere with fence construction .
Connect new fences to existing fences .
Measure post spacing parallel to the ground slope .
Place each post in a vertical position except where the Engineer orders you to set the post perpendicular to the ground surface .
Place a corner post with a brace for each direction of strain at each junction with an existing fence .
Fasten the wire in the new and existing fences to each post .
If ordered at a structure connect the new fence to the structure such that stock can pass freely through or under the structure otherwise install an end post and connect the fence to it .
Crown each concrete footing to shed water .
After constructing a fence uniformly spread the surplus excavated material along the adjacent roadway where designated by the Engineer. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for fence is the length measured .
Parallel to the ground slope .
Along the fence The payment quantity does not include the width of openings .
BARBED WIRE AND WIRE MESH FENCES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing barbed wire and wire mesh fences .
.B Definitions alignment angle Change in a line where the angle of deflection is less than SECTION FENCES .
degrees for a steel post barbed wire or wire mesh fence .
degrees for a wood post barbed wire or wire mesh fence corner Change in a line where the angle of deflection exceeds .
degrees for a steel post barbed wire or wire mesh fence .
degrees for a wood post barbed wire or wire mesh fence fence Type BW Barbed wire fence consisting of lines of barbed wire .
fence Type WM Wire mesh fence consisting of wire mesh fabric and lines of barbed wire .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Metal Posts and Braces Line posts must comply with ASTM A except packaging of posts is not required .
Each post must be Class B steel .
You may omit the anchor plate if the post is set in a concrete footing with a minimum cross sectional dimension of inches and a depth equal to the full penetration of the post .
Each end latch pull and corner post must have .
Minimum resisting section modulus of .
cubic inch in any direction .
Length of at least feet .
Weight of at least .
lbft Each brace and brace post must have .
Length of at least feet .
Weight of at least .
lbft .C Wood Posts and Braces .C General Each wood post and brace must be treated except where untreated wood is specified .
Each wood line post to be driven must be machine pointed at the small end .
Sweep must not exceed .
foot in feet .
.C Untreated Each untreated wood post and brace must be .
Redwood cedar Douglas fir or Southern yellow pine .
Straight and free from loose or unsound knots shakes over the post thickness or other defects that would make it unfit structurally for the intended purpose Post knots must be sound tight well spaced and not over inches on any face .
Each untreated wood line post and brace may be split material and must have .
Length of at least feet .
Perimeter of at least inches .
Each crosssectional dimension of at least inches SECTION FENCES Each untreated wood end corner and brace post must be sawed or hewed and have .
Length of at least feet .
Nominal size of at least by inches .C Treated Each treated wood post and brace must be .
Douglas fir HemFir Southern yellow pine .
Round or sawed rectangular .
Free of heart center Each Douglas fir HemFir and Southern yellow pine post and brace must be graded under section .
Each sawed post and brace must be of the minimum grade and species shown in the following table Grades and Species Nominal size Minimum grade Species by inch Construction light framing Douglas fir No .
structural light framing HemFir No .
structural light framing Southern yellow pine by inch Select structural posts and timbers No .
Douglas fir Select structural posts and timbers HemFir No .
timbers Southern yellow pine Each round post and brace must be free from .
Decay .
Shakes over the post diameter .
Splits longer than the thickness or diameter of the post .
Loose or unsound knots .
Multiple crooks .
Other defects that would weaken the post or brace or otherwise make it structurally unsuitable for the intended purpose Pressure treat each post and brace under section and AWPA U Use Category UCA Commodity Specification A or B .
Treat posts after pointing .
Instead of the imprint specified in section the treating plant may hammer stamp either end of a treated post and brace with the symbol or name of the company performing the treatment .
For each round post and brace .
Peel to remove the outer bark and inner cambium bark except minimal strips of inner bark may remain if not over inch wide or over inches long .
Trim knots flush with sides .
Remove spurs and splinters .
Cut ends square Each line post and brace must be feet long .
Any other post must be feet long .
Each length may be at most inch shorter and inches longer .
The small end of each round line post and brace must have a crosssectional dimension between and inches .
The small end of any other round post must have a crosssectional dimension between and inches .
The taper from end to end of each round post and brace must not exceed inches .
SECTION FENCES Each sawed rectangular line post must have a nominal size of at least by inches .
Any other sawed rectangular post must have a nominal size of at least by inches .
.D Barbed Wire Barbed wire must .
Comply with ASTM A .
Have point barbs .
Be one of the following .. gauge Class .. gauge Class .. gauge Class Vertical stays must .
Comply with ASTM A .
Be gauge .
Have a Class zinc coating .E Wire Mesh Wire mesh must .
Comply with ASTM A Type Z Grade Class .
Be inches wide .
Have horizontal wires with vertical stays spaced inches apart The top and bottom wires must be gauge .
The intermediate wires and vertical stays must be gauge .
.F Tension Wires Hardware and Grounding Materials Tension wire must be gauge galvanized wire complying with ASTM A. Galvanized bolts and nuts for attaching braces and straps to metal posts and galvanized devices for holding barbed wire and wire mesh in position must be commercial quality .
Each staple used to fasten barbed wire and wire mesh fabric to wood posts must .
Comply with ASTM F . Be at least inches long .
Be manufactured from gauge galvanized wire Wire ties used to fasten barbed wire and wire mesh to metal posts must be at least gauge galvanized wire complying with ASTM F. Clips and hog rings used for metal posts must be at least gauge galvanized wire complying with ASTM F. Wire used to tie the lower line of barbed wire to the top wire of wire mesh must be gauge galvanized wire .
Each ground rod must .
Be galvanized or coppercoated steel .
Be feet long .
Have a diameter of at least inch Conductor must be no .
solid copper or equal .
.G Gateways Fence materials and end post bracing must comply with the specifications and plans for the fence type in which the gateway is constructed .
Except for the length end bars must comply with the line post specifications and plans .
SECTION FENCES Vertical stays for gateways must be .
Pretwisted .
.gauge galvanized wire .
Evenly spaced between end bars at inch maximum intervals Wire loops must be gauge galvanized wire .
The chain for the latching device must be commercialquality shortlink steel coil chain .
The latching bar for the latching device must be commercialquality steel pipe .
Bolts and nuts for attaching the chain to the end posts and latching bar must be commercial quality and galvanized. . CONSTRUCTION Excavate high points that interfere with placing the fence fabric to the clearance shown .
Brace adjacent line posts at alignment angles with diagonal tension wires unless impractical .
If impractical brace as specified for bracing corner posts .
Set each metal diagonal brace and metal corner end latch gate and pull post in a concrete footing .
You may drive metal line posts .
Set solid each wood line post one of the following ways .
Drive it into place . .
Install it firmly in a drilled hole of the same dimension as the post . .
Install it in a drilled or dug hole larger than the dimension of the post backfill around the post and compact the backfill .
Install each wood post that is not a line post in a drilled or dug hole larger than the dimension of the post backfill around the post and compact the backfill .
Install each round post in a drilled hole butt end down .
Attach the wire mesh and barbed wire to each post .
Securely fasten tension wires to wood posts .
Make a single or double loop around each post at each attachment point and staple the wire to the post .
Use wire ties hog rings or wire clips to fasten the wires to the metal posts .
Connect each wood brace to its adjacent post with a byinch steel dowel .
Twist the tension wires until the installation is rigid .
Stretch barbed wire and wire mesh fabric and fasten to each wood or steel end corner or gate post .
Apply tension according to the manufacturers instructions using a mechanical stretcher or other device designed for such use .
If no tension is specified by the manufacturer use lb for the required tension .
Evenly distribute the pull over the longitudinal wires in the wire mesh such that no more than percent of the original depth of the tension curves is removed .
Do not use a motorized vehicle truck or tractor to stretch the wire .
Attach barbed wire and wire mesh fabric to the privateproperty side of posts .
On curved alignments place the wire mesh and barbed wire on the face of the post against which the normal pull of the wire mesh and wire will be exerted .
Terminate the wire mesh and barbed wire at each end corner pull and gate post in the new fence line .
Attach wire mesh and barbed wire to each wood or steel end corner pull or gate post by wrapping each horizontal strand around the post and tying it back on itself with at least tightlywound wraps .
At line posts fasten the wire mesh to the post at the top and bottom and at intermediate points not exceeding inches apart .
Fasten each line of barbed wire to each line post .
Use wire ties or clips to fasten the wires to metal posts under the post manufacturers instructions .
Drive staples crosswise with the grain of the wood and pointed slightly downward .
Drive staples just short of actual contact with the wires to allow free longitudinal movement of those wires and to prevent damage to the wires protective coating .
Secure all wires to posts to maintain horizontal alignment .
SECTION FENCES Two splices per feet of fence in barbed wire and wire mesh are allowed .
Use commerciallyavailable galvanized mechanical wire splices or a wire splice created by tying off wire .
Install mechanical wire splices with a tool designed for that purpose under the manufacturers instructions .
Tie off the wire as follows .
Carry the ends of each wire inches past the tiedoff knot location and wrap them around the wire for at least turns in opposite directions . .
Remove the splice tool and close the space by pulling the end of the wires together. . Cut the unused ends of the wire close and neat .
Fence fabric and fence wires of fences using wood line posts must be grounded .
Ground by substituting a metal fence post for a wood post at intervals of at most feet with at least metal post in any length of fence over feet between openings .
With wire tightly fasten each line of barbed wire and alternate longitudinal wires of the fence to the metal post .
Where an electric transmission distribution or secondary line crosses a woodpost fence ground the fence with a ground rod installed directly below the crossing point .
Drive the rod vertically until the top is inches below the ground surface .
Connect the ground rod to the fence with a conductor .
The connections must be either brazed or fastened with authorized noncorrosive clamps .
Where a power line runs parallel or nearly parallel to and within feet of the wood post fence ground the fence with a ground rod at each end post or at intervals of at most feet .
If you can not reach the specified vertical ground rod penetration install an authorized equivalent grounding system .
After you attach fencing to untreated wood posts cut off any long post that makes the fence look nonuniform. . PAYMENT Not Used CHAIN LINK FENCES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing chain link fences .
.B Definitions corner Change in a line where the angle of deflection exceeds degrees .
diamond count Number of mesh openings in each height of chain link fence .
fence Type CL Chain link fence .
Type CL is followed by a number representing the width in feet of the fence fabric .
The number is shown in the bid item description .
fence Type CL slatted Chain link fence with wood or plastic slats inserted vertically in the chain link fabric .
posts and braces Framework that supports the metal fabric for chain link fence .
Posts and braces include round and rollformed cross sections used as line end latch or corner posts and braces .
.C Submittals If you use the protective coating system specified in section .B submit a certificate of compliance for the system .
Submit a certificate of compliance for posts and braces that includes the information specified in ASTM F section Quality Control Provisions .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved SECTION FENCES .
MATERIALS .A General Galvanize or coat ferrous materials .
Do not use materials imperfectly galvanized or coated or with serious abrasions .
For barbed wire on a chain link fence comply with section .D .
.B Posts and Braces The base metal for posts and braces must be commercialquality weldable steel complying with AASHTO M Type except for the protective coating requirements .
Posts and braces must comply with the strength requirements in ASTM F . Group IA regular grade for round posts .
Group IIL for rollformed posts and braces Galvanize posts and braces under section .B except instead of galvanizing tubular posts and braces may have a protective coating system complying with the following .
Exterior surfaces of tubular posts and braces must have a combination coating consisting of hotdip galvanized primer followed by a chromate conversion coating and then a finish coat of clear cross linked organic coating .
For this combination coating .. Thickness of the zinc coating must be at least .
mil as determined from the average results of at least samples and at least .
mil on an individual sample .. Chromate conversion coating must be at least gsq in .. Total thickness of the combination coating must be at least .
mils ..
Exterior clearcoated surface of the pipe must have demonstrated the ability to resist hours of exposure to salt fog with a maximum of percent red rust when tested under ASTM B .. Clear finish coat must not have any film cracking after hours of exposure in an artificial weathering device under one of the following ASTM G cycles or Carbon Arc artificial weathering device ASTM G cycles or Xenon Arc artificial weathering device .. Clear finish coat must not have blistering or cracking after hours of exposure to percent relative humidity under ASTM D . Interior surfaces must have a zinc coating or a crosslinked organic coating containing a corrosion inhibitor .
For these coatings ..
Coating thickness must be at least .
mil ..
Interior coated surface must have demonstrated the ability to resist hours of exposure to salt fog with a maximum of percent red rust when tested under ASTM B Obtain authorization of the protective coating system before you use it .
Any change to the protective coating system is a new system that requires authorization .
Each post length must be at least the depth of the concrete footing plus the height of the fabric less inches .
The length does not include any top fixture or other top tension wire support integral with the post .
Each post must have provisions to securely hold the top tension wire in position and allow for post removal and replacement without damaging the wire .
Fit each tubular post with a rainproof top .
Post tops extension arms stretcher bars and other fittings and hardware must be .
Steel or malleable or wrought iron .
Galvanized after fabrication under section .B .C Fabric Chain link fabric must comply with AASHTO M for Type I fabric with a Class C coating or ASTM F Class unless vinylclad fabric is described in the fence bid item in which case the fabric must comply with AASHTO M for Type IV fabric with a medium or dark green Class A coating .
SECTION FENCES The wire for the fabric must be .
gauge for a fence inches or less in height .
gauge for a fence over inches in height and for a slatted chain link fence Chain link fabric for nonslatted fence must have the diamond count corresponding to the fabric height shown in the following table Diamond Counts Fabric height inches Diamond count Chain link fabric for slatted fence must have inchvertical and inchhorizontal mesh .
Knuckle finish fabric on the top and bottom edges .
.D Tension Wires Hog Rings Turnbuckles Truss Tighteners Truss Rods and Stretcher Bars and Bar Bands Tension wire must be commercialquality gauge coil spring steel .
Tie wires and hog rings must be at least gauge steel .
Post clips must be at least gauge steel .
Galvanize tension and tie wires hog rings and post clips under ASTM A coating Class .
Turnbuckles and truss tighteners must be .
Commercialquality steel malleable iron or wrought iron .
Galvanized under section .B .
Equal in tensile strength to the truss rod Truss tighteners must have a strap thickness of at least inch .
Each truss rod must be steel and have a diameter of at least inch .
Each stretcher bar must be at least by inch .
Each stretcher bar band must be at least by inch .
.E Slats Slats must be wood or plastic .
Wood slats must be one of the following .
Clear redwood .
Mediumweight wood produced from the species Shorea Meranti Each wood slat must have .
Thickness of at least inch .
Width about inch .
Length enough to fill the vertical openings of the fabric Each plastic slat must .
Be a HDPE with UV inhibitors .
Have a flat tubular cross section with .. Wall thickness of about .
inch ..
Depth of about .
inch .. Width of about .
inches ..
Length equal to the fence height SECTION FENCES The plastic slat material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Plastic Slat Material Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Melt index ASTM D . Density ASTM D . Low temperature brittleness F ASTM D Tensile strength psi ASTM D . CONSTRUCTION Brace each end latch and corner post to the nearest line post with either of the following .
Diagonal brace used as a compression member .
Horizontal brace used as a compression member and truss rods used as tension members Brace each gate post to the nearest line post with a horizontal brace used as a compression member and truss rods used as tension members .
Equip each steel truss rod with a turnbuckle or truss tightener .
Brace line posts horizontally and truss in both directions at intervals of at most feet unless the fabric is installed by stretching with equipment .
Fasten chain link fabric on the side of the posts designated by the Engineer .
Stretch and securely fasten the fabric to the posts .
Fasten the top and bottom edges of the fabric to the tension wires .
Stretch the tension wires tight .
Install the bottom tension wire on a straight grade between posts by excavating high points of the ground .
Do not fill in low points .
Fasten the fabric to end latch corner and gate posts with stretcher bars and stretcher bar bands at foot intervals except the fabric may be fastened to end and corner posts by threading through loops formed on the posts .
Fasten the fabric to line posts with tie wires or post clips and to tension wires with tie wires or hog rings .
Space the fasteners at about inches on line posts and about inches on tension wires .
Give wire ties at least complete turn .
Close each hog ring with the ends overlapping .
Wrap tension wires around terminal posts .
The top of the fabric to the top tension wire must be at most inches .
If supporting arms for barbed wire are shown extend each arm upward from the top of the fence at an angle of about degrees .
Fit it with clips or other means for attaching lines of barbed wire .
Attach the top outside wire to the supporting arm at a point about inches above the top of the chain link fabric and inches out from the fence line .
Attach the other wires to the arm spaced evenly between the top of the fence and the top outside wire .
For a chain link fence with slats install slats vertically in the mesh openings such that the slats fit snugly .
Fasten them in a way that prevents easy removal or displacement. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED GATES .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing gates in fences .
Constructing a gate in an existing fence includes removal of the fence .
SECTION FENCES .B Definitions gate unit for a barbed wire or wire mesh fence gate with fittings hardware and gate posts with braces .
gate unit for a chain link fence gate with fittings hardware and gate and latch posts with braces .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Each drive gate for a chain link fence must be the length shown in the bid item description .
Each drive gate for a barbed wire or wire mesh fence must be at least inches and at most inches high .
Each walk gate must be feet wide .
A gate greater than feet in length must have vertical stays such that no panel exceeds feet in length .
A gate frame must be made with pipe at least inch in diameter .
Interior vertical stays must be made with pipe at least inch in diameter .
Pipe must comply with the specifications for posts and braces in section .B .
Each gate frame panel must be cross trussed with adjustable truss rods at least inch in diameter .
Fasten and reinforce each corner of a gate frame with a malleable iron or pressed steel fitting or by welding .
Each pressed steel fitting must .
Have a nominal thickness before galvanizing of at least .
inch .
Be fastened to develop the strength of connected members Welds must be smooth and develop the strength of the connected member .
Galvanize fittings latches rods and other gate hardware under section .B .
Fabric for gates in a barbed wire or wire mesh fence must comply with the specifications for nonslatted chain link fence in section .
Fabric for gates in chain link fences must comply with the specifications for the fabric for the fence in which the gate is installed .
Attach chain link fence fabric to the gate frame using stretcher bars and tie wires as specified for fence construction .
Space tension connectors at foot intervals .
For a chain link walk gate installed in an existing fence the gate mounting hardware must not contain openend slots for the fastening bolts .
Each gate must have a combination steel or malleable iron catch and locking attachment that does not rotate around the latch post. . CONSTRUCTION Hang each gate with at least steel or malleable iron hinges at least inches in width such that the gate is securely clamped to the gate post and permits the gate to be swung back against the fence .
The bottom hinge must have a socket to take the ball end of the gate frame .
Construct a center rest with a catch and stops to hold gates open .
SECTION FENCES For a walk gate constructed in an existing fence remove a line post and install the gate such that the gate is centered on the hole of the removed post .
When not working on the walk gate close the opening made in the existing fence with existing fence fabric or foot chain link fabric. . PAYMENT The gate payment quantity is the quantity of gate units .
RESERVED EXISTING FENCES .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for performing work on existing fences .
Work performed on existing fences must comply with section .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment The bid items for work performed on existing fences and gates are measured as specified for the construction of new fences and gates. . RECONSTRUCT FENCES .A General Section .
includes specifications for reconstructing fences .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Prevent livestock from escaping during fence reconstruction .
At the junction of the reconstructed fence and cross fence place corner posts with braces and join the fences .
Install gates to be reused at the locations designated by the Engineer .
If the amount of fence to be disassembled exceeds the amount needed for reconstruction dispose of the excess fencing .
.D Payment Not Used .
SALVAGE FENCES .A General Section .
includes specifications for salvaging fences .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Package salvaged chain link fabric in feet segments per pallet .
Group salvaged end and corner posts in assembly per bundle .
.D Payment Not Used SECTION FENCES ..
RESERVED RESERVED DIVISION IX TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for fabricating installing and placing miscellaneous traffic control devices .
Traffic control devices must comply with the California MUTCD. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used DELINEATORS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing delineators .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for .
Metal target plates .
Enamel coating .D Quality Assurance When tested under California Test the enamel coating on a metal target plate must have satisfactory resistance to weathering humidity salt spray and chemicals .
The enamel coating must have .
Satisfactory adherence and impact resistance .
Pencil lead hardness of at least HB .
degree specular gloss of at least percent .
Excitation purity of no more than percent .
As received .
After hours in an artificial weathering device when tested under ASTM G Table X .
Cycle .
Daylight luminous directional reflectance Y value of at least The Department may sample metal target plates for testing as shown in the following table Metal Target Plate Sampling Production stage Lot size Sample size Finished target plates Less than target plates target plates Flat sheet stock sq ft or lessa Five byinch specimens Coil stock lb or less Two byinch specimens or one by inch specimen aFlat sheet stock must be identifiable with parent coil stock .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES The Department rejects the entire lot if any sample does not comply with section or zinccoated steel sheets show any evidence of damage to or removal of the zinc coating .
If the Department chooses to resample the sample quantity may be twice the number shown in the table titled Metal Target Plate Sampling. . MATERIALS .A General A delineator must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
A delineator consists of a post and target plates .
.B Wood Posts Wood posts must comply with section .C .
.C Metal Posts The steel for a metal post must comply with ASTM AAM .
A metal post must be galvanized under section .
.D Flexible Posts A flexible post must be .
White except where shown as yellow .
Free from burns discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects that affect appearance or serviceability .E Target Plates Galvanize steel sheets under section .
Zinccoated steel sheets must comply with ASTM AA M Commercial Steel Types A B and C. The nominal thickness of a zinccoated steel sheet must be at least .
inch .
Prepare zinccoated surfaces to produce optimum adherence of the enamel coating without damaging or removing the zinc coating .
An aluminum target plate must be aluminum alloy H. You may use other alloys having equivalent properties if authorized .
The nominal thickness of an aluminum sheet must be at least .
inch .
Prepare the aluminum sheets for the enamel coating by cleaning to remove contaminants and uniformly applying an acidchromatefluoride acidchromatefluoride phosphate or equivalent chemical anticorrosion conversion coating .
Cut each target plate to size and shape and punch the mounting bolt holes .
The surfaces and edges of each target plate must be free from fabrication defects .
Coat the pretreated metal target plate with an opaque white coating on both sides using a coat or coat system .
When tested under California Test the dry film for the .
coat system must be uniform and have an average thickness of at least .
mil with no individual measurement less than .
mil .
coat system must consist of .
to .milthick primer and have an average thickness of at least .
mil including primer and top coat with no individual measurement less than .
mil For a coat painting system fabricate the zinccoated steel target plate including shearing cutting and punching before starting the enameling process .
The enamel coating on a metal target plate must be the product of a commercial manufacturer .
Apply the enamel coating by spray dip roller continuous roller coating or other authorized method .
The coating must be smooth and substantially free from flow lines paint washout streaks blisters and other defects that might impair serviceability or detract from the general appearance .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES A finished metal target plate must be free from dents and defects .
The maximum edgetoedge surface deviation from a horizontal plane must not exceed inch .
.F Hardware Attach a target plate with either inch galvanized steel or aluminum nuts and bolts or inch blind aluminum rivets and washers .
.G.L Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Drive the post in place where soil conditions allow if the driving method does not damage the post .
Drill pilot holes if ground conditions are such that the post can not be driven without being damaged .
Install the target plates after the post is set in place .
After setting the post fill any space around it with rockfree earth .
Thoroughly tamp and water the fill material such that it holds the post securely in position .
Unless the surplus material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the Engineer .
Before Contract acceptance spot paint any exposed areas where the paint is damaged and clean any exposed areas that are soiled. . PAYMENT Not Used PAVEMENT MARKERS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for placing pavement markers .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for each type of pavement marker used .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General A pavement marker must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Pavement markers must be packaged in a way that prevents damage .
Each package must be marked with .
Manufacturers name .
Type .
Color .
Quantity .
Lot number .
Date of manufacture Protect pavement markers from moisture during shipment to the job site and when stored at the job site .
.B Nonreflective Pavement Markers .B General A nonreflective pavement marker must be a ceramic or plastic type .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES The marker must be free from defects that affect adhesion appearance performance or any combination thereof .
The top bottom and sides of the marker must be free from objectionable marks or discoloration .
The top surface of the marker must be convex with a gradual change in curvature .
The bottom surface must be flat within a .inch tolerance .
The bottom of the marker must have areas of integrallyformed protrusions or indentations .
The protrusions must project approximately .
inch from the bottom surface .
The face of the protrusions must be parallel to the bottom of the marker .
.B Plastic Nonreflective Pavement Markers Types A and AY plastic nonreflective pavement markers must be polypropylene or ABS plastic and comply with the requirements shown in the following table Plastic Nonreflective Pavement Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Luminance factor Type A white markers only top surface min California Test Yellowness index Type A white markers only top surface max Type AY markers only .
The chromaticity coordinates must be within a color box defined under California Test .
Pass Compressive strength min lb Artificial weathering hours exposure white markers only yellowness index max A plastic nonreflective pavement marker must not be coated with any substance that interferes with the adhesive bond .
.B Ceramic Nonreflective Pavement Markers A ceramic nonreflective pavement marker must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Ceramic Nonreflective Pavement Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Bond strength min psi California Test Glaze thickness min in .
Hardness min Moh Luminance factor Type A markers only glazed surface min Yellowness index Type A markers only glazed surface max Type AY markers only .
The chromaticity coordinates must be within a color box defined under California Test .
Pass Compressive strength min lb Water absorption max .
.C Retroreflective Pavement Markers The exterior surface of a retroreflective pavement marker must be smooth and contain or retroreflective faces of the specified color .
The base of the marker must be rough textured and free from gloss and substances that could reduce the adhesive bond .
The base must be flat within a .inch tolerance .
A retroreflective pavement marker must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES Retroreflective Pavement Marker Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Bond strength min psia California Test Compressive strength min lbb Compressive strength recessed markers min lb Abrasion resistance specific intensity minimum requirements after abrasion Pass Water soak resistance No delamination of the body and lens system or loss of reflectance Reflectance Specific intensity Clear Yellow Red incidence angle min .
. . incidence angle min .
. . year after placement .
. . aThe marker body or filler material must not fail before reaching psi under the bond strength test .
bThe marker must not deform more than .
inch at a load of less than lb and delamination of the shell and filler material must not exceed .
inch regardless of the compressive load required to break the marker .
.D Hot Melt Bituminous Adhesive Standard hot melt bituminous adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Penetration g seconds F dmm ASTM D Softening point min F ASTM D Flash point COC min F ASTM D Filler content percent by weight insoluble in trichloroethane ASTM D Brookfield thermosel viscosity no .
spindle rpm F centipoise ASTM D Flexible hot melt bituminous adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Penetration g seconds F max dmm ASTM D Softening point min F ASTM D Ductility inmin F min in ASTM D Ductility .
inmin F min in Flexibility California Test No breaks or cracks Brookfield thermosel viscosity no .
spindle rpm F centipoise ASTM D Bond strength to concrete min psi California Test Bond strength to retroreflective pavement marker min psi California Test The filler material must be Type PC Grade III calcium carbonate complying with ASTM D. The fineness of the filler material must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table Sieve size Percentage passing No .
No .
No .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .E Epoxy Adhesive The epoxy adhesive must be either rapid set or standard set. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Establish the alignment for placing pavement markers .
Do not place pavement markers over longitudinal or transverse joints in the pavement surface .
Place pavement markers when the pavement surface is dry .
Before placing pavement markers remove undesirable material from the pavement surface including dirt curing compound grease oil loose or unsound layers and paint .
Regardless of the pavements age or type clean the surface by abrasive blast cleaning except where you apply hot melt bituminous adhesive on clean asphalt concrete or on a new clean seal coat .
Apply pavement markers to the pavement with bituminous adhesive flexible bituminous adhesive standard set epoxy or rapid set epoxy adhesive except .
Apply pavement markers in pavement recesses with flexible bituminous adhesive .
Do not use epoxy adhesive to apply plastic nonreflective pavement markers Comply with the manufacturers installation instructions for the type of adhesive used .
Completely cover the pavement surface or bottom of the pavement marker with the adhesive without leaving any voids .
Place the marker into position and firmly apply pressure until contact is made with the pavement .
Apply enough adhesive such that it protrudes around the markers edges after pressing it into place .
Place retroreflective pavement markers such that each retroreflective face is perpendicular to a line parallel to the roadway centerline .
The Engineer determines when the adhesive has set long enough for newly installed pavement markers to bear traffic .
.B Hot Melt Bituminous Adhesive If using hot melt bituminous adhesive place pavement markers on asphalt concrete or a new seal coat after the surface or seal coat has been open to traffic for at least days and when the pavement and ambient air temperatures are above degrees F. Indirectly heat hot melt bituminous adhesive in an applicator with continuous agitation or recirculation .
Do not heat hot melt bituminous adhesive above the manufacturers maximum safe heating temperature .
Place pavement markers immediately after applying hot melt bituminous adhesive .
Remove any adhesive from the markers exposed lenses using a soft rag moistened with the manufacturers instructed solvent .
.C Epoxy Adhesive If using epoxy adhesive place pavement markers on asphalt concrete or a new seal coat after the surface or seal coat has been open to public traffic for at least days and at the pavement and ambient air temperatures complying with the epoxy adhesive manufacturers instructions .
Use automatic mixing equipment for the epoxy adhesive .
The equipment must .
Have positive displacement pumps .
Properly meter the components of the epoxy adhesive in the specified ratio of percent by volume of either component The voids in an undisturbed sample of cured mixed epoxy adhesive obtained from the extrusion nozzle of the mixing equipment must not exceed percent .
At the start of each day check the ratio of the components in the presence of the Engineer by disconnecting the mixing heads or using suitable bypass valves and filling suitable containers with SECTION MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES the unmixed components .
The mixing head must properly mix the components until black or white streaks are not visible in the mixed material .
Apply epoxy adhesive and place pavement markers before the epoxy starts to thicken .
Apply enough epoxy such that it flows and protrudes around the markers edges when a slight pressure is applied to the marker .
.D Pavement Recesses Locate pavement recesses along the line or lines of new or existing stripes .
Do not construct recesses on existing structures .
The equipment used for recess construction must be power operated mechanical and capable of removing pavement to the dimensions shown .
Remove residue with a vacuum before it is blown by traffic or wind .
Do not allow the residue to flow across the pavement or into gutters or drainage facilities. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED EXISTING PAVEMENT MARKERS AND DELINEATORS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for performing work on existing pavement markers and delineators .
Work performed on existing pavement markers and delineators must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Not Used .B Remove Pavement Markers Remove pavement markers and the underlying adhesive by methods that cause the least possible damage to the pavement or surfacing .
When removing ceramictype pavement markers use screens or other protective devices to contain fragments .
Remove fragments from the removal work before opening the lanes to traffic .
.C Reserved .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED SIGNS AND MARKERS GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for fabricating and installing sign panels and markers and constructing roadside signs .
Signs and markers must comply with the California MUTCD California Sign Specifications and the FHWA publication Standard Highway Signs and Markings .
For the California Sign Specifications go to the Departments Traffic Operations website. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used SIGN PANELS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing sign panels .
Furnishing sign panels includes fabricating and installing sign panels .
.B Definitions background Dominant sign color .
legend Letters numerals tildes bars arrows route shields symbols logos borders artwork and miscellaneous characters that are intended to convey specific meanings on traffic signs .
.C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for .
Aluminum sheeting .
Retroreflective sheeting .
Screenedprocess colors .
Nonreflective opaque black film .
Protectiveoverlay film Upon request submit test samples of sign panels and materials at various stages of production .
The samples must be at least by inches and include the background material and legend .
At least days before starting sign fabrication submit at least copies of your QC plan for sign panels .
The QC plan must include .
Contact information for the person responsible for sign QC .
Acceptance criteria for incoming raw materials at the fabrication plant .
Type method and frequency of QC testing at the fabrication plant .
Types and brand names of retroreflective sheeting .
List of the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers approved process colors protective overlay film and black nonreflective film including the manufacturers name and product name for each item .
Manufacturers installation and splicing instructions for the retroreflective sheeting .
Manufacturers instructions for cleaning each product .
Method of packaging transporting and storing signs SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS .D Quality Assurance The Department may inspect signs at the fabrication plant or the job site .
The Department rejects formed panel signs with holes that are slanted or incorrectly spaced .
The Engineer will reject damaged signs defective signs and signs with spelling errors before or after installation .
The Department rejects a laminated panel if a .inchthick by inchwide feeler gauge can be inserted to a depth of more than inch between the extruded aluminum frame and the aluminum sheeting .
If instrumental testing under ASTM D is disputed the Engineers visual inspection will determine the color of the retroreflective sheeting screened process colors and film. . MATERIALS .A General A sign panel must be produced at a fabrication plant .
The sign must be imprinted with the following information .
Phrase Property of the State of California .
Sign fabricators name .
Month and year of fabrication .
Type of retroreflective sheeting .
Sheeting manufacturers identification and lot number for the retroreflective sheeting The sign information must .
Be imprinted in inch uppercase letters and numerals on the back lower right of each sign panel such that it will not be blocked by a sign post or mounting frame .
Be imprinted at the fabrication plant by diestamping on aluminum panels or by an equivalent method for fiberglassreinforced plastic signs such as affixing a diestamped aluminum tag .
Not be painted screened inked or engraved .
Be imprinted such that it does not damage the face of the sign For a sign composed of multiple panels the legend must be placed across joints such that it does not affect the size shape spacing and appearance of the legend on the assembled sign .
For a formed panel sign the retroreflective sheeting for the background and legend must be wrapped around the interior vertical edges of each panel .
A sign with a protectiveoverlay film must be marked at the fabrication plant with a inchdiameter dot .
The dot must be placed on the lower border of the sign before applying the protectiveoverlay film .
The fabricator determines the application method and exact location of the dot except the dot must not be placed on the legend or near bolt holes .
The dot must be black if placed on a white border and white if placed on a black border .
The exposed portion of the mounting hardware on the sign face including rivets used to attach sheeting to framing members must have a factory or fieldapplied finish that closely matches the color of the background and legend of the sign face .
The face of a fabricated sign must be uniform flat smooth and free from defects scratches chips wrinkles gel hard spots streaks extrusion marks and air bubbles .
The front back and edges of sign panels must not have bends router chatter marks burns sharp edges loose rivets delaminated skins excessive adhesive overspray or aluminum marks .
Protect transport and store sign panels fabricated with screenedprocess colors under the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions .
Transport sign panels such that the faces of the panels are protected from damage and weather .
Ship panels on pallets in crates or in tier racks .
Ship panels vertically on edge not stacked horizontally .
Place padding and protective materials between the panels as necessary .
Keep panels dry during transit .
Do not store sign panels directly on the ground .
Keep sign panels dry at all times and store the panels SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS .
In a dry environment .
On edge vertically whether indoors or outdoors .
In enclosed climatecontrolled trailers or containers in areas of high heat and humidity .
Indoors whenever the panels will be stored more than days .B Aluminum Sheeting A sign panel must be fabricated from aluminum sheeting of an alloy and temper complying with ASTM B .
The aluminum sheeting must be pretreated for corrosion resistance as specified in ASTM B .
The surface of the sheeting must be cleaned deoxidized and coated with a light tightlyadherent chromate conversion coating free from powdery residue .
The conversion coating must be Class with a weight from to mgsq ft and an average weight of mgsq ft. After the cleaning and coating process the aluminum sheeting must be protected from exposure to grease oils dust and contaminants .
The aluminum sheeting must be free from buckles warps dents cockles burrs and other defects resulting from fabrication .
The base plate for standard route markers must be die cut .
.C Retroreflective Sheeting Retroreflective sheeting used for the background and legend must comply with ASTM D and must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Type III IV VIII IX and XI retroreflective sheeting must have Class or adhesive backing .
Type II retroreflective sheeting may have Class or adhesive backing .
The adhesive backing must be pressure sensitive and fungus resistant .
Retroreflective sheeting must be applied to sign panels at the fabrication plant under the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions without appreciable stretching tearing or other damage .
The orientation of the legend must comply with the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions .
The retroreflective sheeting on a sign panel with a minor dimension of inches or less must be a single contiguous sheet without splices except for the splices produced during the manufacture of the retroreflective sheeting .
A sign panel with a minor dimension greater than inches may have horizontal splice in the retroreflective sheeting other than the splices produced during the manufacture of the retroreflective sheeting .
Unless the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions require a different method splices in the retroreflective sheeting must overlap by at least inch .
The retroreflective sheeting on either side of a splice must not exhibit a color difference under incident and reflected light .
.D Process Colors and Film The type of material recommended by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer must be used for .
Screenedprocess colors .
Nonreflective opaque black film .
Protectiveoverlay film The fabricator must perform all patterns layouts and setups necessary for the screening process .
The fabricated surface of the applied screenedprocess color must be flat and smooth .
Colored retroreflective sheeting must be used for the background except signs with green red blue or brown backgrounds may use reversescreenedprocess color on white retroreflective sheeting for the background color .
The coefficient of retroreflection for reversescreenedprocess colors used on white retroreflective sheeting must be at least percent of the coefficient of retroreflection specified in ASTM D for the corresponding colored retroreflective sheeting .
The legend must be a black screenedprocess color or nonreflective opaque black film .
SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS Screenedprocess colors and nonreflective opaque black film must have outdoor weatherability characteristics equivalent to those specified for retroreflective sheeting in ASTM D. Nonreflective opaque black film must be a vinyl or acrylic material .
Cured screenedprocess colors must not peel off if transparent cellophane tape with a tensile breaking strength of at least lbin width measured under ASTM DDM is applied over the color and removed in a single quick motion at a degree angle to the signs face .
.E SingleSheet Aluminum Panels The aluminum sheeting for framed and unframed panels must be aluminum alloy T or H. A singlesheet aluminum panel must not have a vertical splice in the aluminum sheeting .
A panel with a depth greater than inches may have horizontal splice in the sheeting .
For a framed panel the framing members must be aluminum channel or rectangular aluminum tubing .
The lengths of the framing members must be within inch of the lengths shown .
Aluminum channels or rectangular aluminum tubing must be welded together using the inert gasshielded arc welding process and E aluminumelectrode filler wires .
The filler diameter must be equal to the wall thickness of the smallest welded channel or tubing .
The aluminum sheeting must be attached to the frame with inchdiameter rivets .
The rivets must be placed at least inch from the web channel edges .
The rivets must be made of aluminum alloy and be anodized or treated with a conversion coating to prevent corrosion .
A fabricated singlesheet aluminum panel must be within inch of the dimensions shown .
The panel must be flat to within inft of the panel dimensions as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel .
.F FiberglassReinforced Plastic Panels A fiberglassreinforced plastic panel must .
Be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Comply with ASTM D . Be weatherresistant Grade II thermoset polyester laminate The plastic must .
Be acrylic modified and UV stabilized for outdoor weatherability . .
Contain additives designed to suppress fire ignition and flame propagation .
When tested under ASTM D the extent of burning must not exceed inch. . Be stabilized to prevent the release of solvents and monomers .
The front and back surfaces of the laminate must be clean and free from contaminates and releasing agents that could interfere with the bonding of the retroreflective sheeting .
The color of the panel must be uniform gray Munsell color notation N. to N. as specified in ASTM D. The panel must be cut from a single piece of laminate .
Mounting bolt holes must be predrilled .
Predrilled bolt holes panel edges and the front and back surfaces of the panel must be true and smooth .
The panel surface must not have visible cracks pinholes foreign inclusions warping and wrinkles that might affect performance .
The panel must be .
At least .
inch thick .
Flat to within inft of the panel dimensions as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel .
Within inch of the dimensions shown SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS .G Laminated Panels .G General A laminated panel must have a honeycomb core and extruded aluminum frame laminated between sheets of aluminum to produce a flat rigid panel .
The face sheet must be a single contiguous sheet of .inchthick aluminum sheeting alloy T or H. The back sheet must be a single contiguous sheet of .inchthick aluminum sheeting alloy H. The core material must be .
lbsq ft phenolicimpregnated kraft paper that .
Is impregnated with percent phenolic resin .
Has inch honeycomb cell size .
Is fungus resistant under MILSTDB The adhesive used to laminate the face and back sheets to the honeycomb core and extruded aluminum frame must produce a bond that is strong permanent and resistant to oil and water .
The panel must withstand a wind load of lbsq ft with a bending safety factor of .
when tested for the simple span lengths shown in the following table Panel type Nominal panel thickness Simple span length A inch B inch inches H inches The tensile strength of the panel must be at least lbsq in when tested under ASTM C and C Cycle B after aging .
Instead of spraying with hot water the specimen must be immersed in water at degrees F. An individual laminated panel must not exceed feet in length and feet in depth .
An individual panel must be fabricated as a single unit without horizontal and vertical joints splices or seams .
Use panels for signs exceeding feet in depth .
You may use panels to avoid placing the legend over a horizontal joint if authorized .
Welds are not required on the side of the framing members where the face and back sheets will be placed .
After lamination inchdiameter rivets must be placed at each corner of the perimeter frame through the face and back sheets .
The rivets must be made of aluminum alloy and be anodized or treated with a conversion coating .
Sealant must be placed at the corners of the perimeter frame to prevent water intrusion .
The face of a fabricated panel must be flat to within inft of the panel dimensions as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel .
Wherever the panels adjoin the gap between the adjoining edges must not deviate by more than inch from a straightedge placed from corner to corner .
Nonadjoining edges must not deviate by more than inch from a straightedge placed from corner to corner .
The face and back sheets must be flush with the perimeter frame .
All panel edges must be smooth .
A panel must be from to inch of the dimensions shown .
The difference in the length between adjoining panels of multiplepanel signs must not be greater than inch .
.G Roadside Laminated Panels A laminated panel for a roadside sign must be Type B or Type H. For a Type B panel SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS .
Channel edges must be welded together to form the perimeter frame .
Vertical tube spacers must be welded to the frame For a Type H panel .
Channel edges must be screwed to the tube channel edges with selftapping hex head stainless steel screws to form the perimeter frame. . Centerline panel tube must be welded to the perimeter frame along the horizontal centerline of the panel .
The centerline panel tube must be a single contiguous extrusion without joints. . Vertical tube spacers must be welded to the perimeter frame and to the centerline panel tube .
.G Overhead Laminated Panels A laminated panel for an overhead sign must be Type A .
An individual panel must not exceed feet in length or feet in depth .
If a panel length is not shown for a sign exceeding feet in length the Engineer determines the length .
The channel edges must be screwed to the modified H sections with selftapping hex head stainless steel screws to form the perimeter frame .
Aluminum mounting clamps for A hardware must be cast aluminum alloy with a tensile strength of at least kipssq in .
The installed bolt torque must not exceed inlb .
.H Formed Panels A formed panel must be fabricated from a single contiguous sheet of .inchthick aluminum sheeting alloy H. Aluminum sheeting must be attached to struts with inchdiameter anodized aluminum rivets .
The rivets must be placed through the sign face at the spacing shown after applying the background material and legend .
The formed edges must be square .
The drilled mounting holes must be straight and perpendicular to the front and back surfaces of the formed edges .
A fabricated formedpanel sign must be within inch of the dimensions shown and flat to within inft of the panel dimensions in any direction as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel. . CONSTRUCTION .A General Deliver sign panels to the job site with the background and legend permanently affixed to the panels .
Do not chip or bend sign panels .
Immediately replace sign panels exhibiting damage or flaws including a significant color difference between daytime and nighttime .
Obtain authorization before repairing sign panels at the job site .
Use the following hardware to mount the type of sign panel shown .
Lag screws nuts bolts and washers for roadside signs .
Braces and wood block spacers for roadside signs .
Type A and Type A mounting hardware for overhead laminatedpanel signs .
Type A mounting hardware for overhead formedpanel signs .B Laminated Panels For laminated multiplepanel signs place an Hsection closure extrusion in the top channel of the lower panel before mounting the upper panel .
When mounted the bottom channel of the adjoining upper panel must fit together to enclose the Hsection closure extrusion for the full length of the panel without gaps .
SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for furnishing any type of sign panel is the area determined from the dimensions shown .
ROADSIDE SIGNS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing roadside signs .
Roadside signs include Type N CA Type P CA and Type R CA marker panels .
.B Definitions roadside sign Traffic sign with or more sign panels attached to a supporting structure consisting of or posts a signal standard or a lighting standard .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance When delivered to the job site treated posts must comply with the specified grading requirements and have a moisture content of not more than percent when tested under ASTM D with an authorized moisture meter. . MATERIALS .A General A roadside sign includes sign panels fastening hardware back braces straps and saddle brackets and frame assemblies for multiple sign panels .
.B Metal Posts A mounting for a roadside sign to be installed on a barrier or railing must be fabricated from welded or seamless steel pipe complying with ASTM AAM Grade B and structural steel complying with ASTM AAM .
Bolted connections must comply with section .D .
Concrete anchorage devices must comply with section .
After fabrication all metal parts for mounting a roadside sign must be galvanized under section .B .
.C Wood Posts A wood post must be the allowable grade and species for the sizes shown in the following table SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS Nominal post sizea Allowable grades and species by inches Select heart redwood No .
heart structural redwood f No .
heart structural redwood f No .
structural light framing Douglas fir free of heart center No .
structural light framing HemFir free of heart center No .
structural light framing Southern yellow pine free of heart center by inches Select heart grade redwood Select heart structural grade redwood f No .
heart structural redwood f No .
structural joists and planks Douglas fir free of heart center No .
structural joists and planks HemFir free of heart center No .
structural joists and planks Southern yellow pine Greater than by inches Select heart redwood No .
heart structural redwood f No .
posts and timbers also known as no .
structural Douglas fir free of heart center Select structural posts and timbers HemFir free of heart center and no .
timbers Southern yellow pine free of heart center aSizes shown are minimum dressed dry sizes The posts must be graded under section .B .
The sweep must not exceed .
foot in feet .
When tested under ASTM D with an authorized moisture meter the moisture content of Douglas fir HemFir and Southern yellow pine posts must be not more than percent in the outer inch at the posts midpoint before preservative treatment .
Douglas fir and HemFir posts must be treated under section .B and under AWPA U Use Category UCA Commodity Specification A .
Posts must be incised and the minimum retention of preservative must comply with AWPA requirements .
.D Laminated Wood Box Posts The Department furnishes a laminated wood box post with an attached metal cap at the top of each post .
.E Sign Panel Fastening and Mounting Hardware Frame assemblies for multiple sign installations must be fabricated from an aluminum alloy or structural steel complying with ASTM AAM .
Frames fabricated from structural steel must be hotdip galvanized after fabrication .
Back braces for a sign must be made of commercialquality mild steel and hotdip galvanized after fabrication .
Straps and saddle brackets for mounting sign panels on lighting standards sign structure posts and traffic signal standards must be stainless steel complying with ASTM A Type B. Theftproof bolts must be stainless steel with a chromium content of at least percent and a nickel content of at least percent .
Bolts except theftproof bolts lag screws metal washers and nuts must be made of commercialquality steel and hotdip galvanized after fabrication .
Fiber washers must be commercial quality .
Galvanizing must comply with section .B. . CONSTRUCTION .A General You may cut the ends of wood posts at the job site .
If cutting or boring is performed after treating posts with preservative manually apply preservative to the cuts and holes under section .B .
Treat wood block spacers inserted between the post and sign panel on singlepost installations with wood preservative under section .B .
SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS If you do not immediately use laminated wood box posts neatly stack them on dunnage .
Do not paint wood posts and block spacers unless described otherwise .
Drill holes in each wood post to provide the breakaway feature shown .
Make breakaway saw cuts and holes for the saw cuts in laminated wood box posts after installation of the posts .
Do not splice the posts .
You may make trim cut at the bottom of the post .
The line between the center of the top of a post and the center of the post at ground level must not deviate from a plumb line by more than .
foot in feet .
Backfill the space around wood posts with earth or sand that is free of rocks or other deleterious material .
Backfill around laminated wood box posts with granular material .
Place the backfill material in layers approximately foot thick .
Moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
Backfill the space around metal posts with minor concrete that contains at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Unless surplus excavated material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the Engineer .
.B Sign Panel Installation Install lag screws by turning the lag screw into pilot holes using a wrench .
Bore the pilot holes with a bit diameter equal to the root diameter of the lag screw thread .
Apply PVC tape polyethylene tape or other authorized corrosionresistant barrier to the areas on metal sign surfaces or hardware that will be in contact with treated wood .
Before inserting bolts fill the bolt holes with the hardware manufacturers recommended corrosionprotection grease that will not melt or run at a temperature of degrees F. The corrosionresistant barrier and grease is not required if wood posts and blocks are treated with pentachlorophenol in hydrocarbon solvent. . PAYMENT An installed roadside sign consisting of one or more sign panels attached to .
post is measurement unit of roadside sign one post .
posts is measurement unit of roadside sign two post .
or laminated wood box posts is measurement unit of install roadside sign laminated wood box post The payment quantity for metal rail mounted sign and metal barrier mounted sign is determined by the scale weight of the pipe posts base plates anchorage assemblies and other metal parts used to mount a roadside sign on a barrier or railing .
The payment quantity for roadside signs installed by the strap and saddle bracket method on electroliers sign structure posts and traffic signal standards and by the mast arm hanger method on traffic signal mast arms is the quantity of the sign panels on these elements .
Payment for furnishing sign panels is not included in the payment for roadside signs .
SIGN OVERLAYS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for installing sign overlays. . MATERIALS Sign overlay materials must comply with section .. A selfplugging blind rivet for installing a sign overlay must have a byinch shank. . CONSTRUCTION Drill the rivet holes with a no .
drill bit .
If the overlay is not prepunched the maximum rivet spacing is inches .
SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS If the existing sign panel is porcelainenameled steel drill the rivet holes with a diamond bit .
Cover the exposed metal around the hole with a thin coat of silicone adhesive. . PAYMENT Not Used MARKERS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for fabricating and installing markers including highway post markers .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for .
Metal target plates .
Enamel coating .
Retroreflective sheeting .D Quality Assurance When tested under California Test the enamel coating on metal target plates must have satisfactory resistance to weathering humidity salt spray and chemicals .
The enamel coating must have .
Satisfactory adherence and impact resistance .
Pencil lead hardness of HB minimum .
degree specular gloss of percent minimum .
Excitation purity of percent maximum .
As received .
After hours in an artificial weathering device as specified in ASTM G Table X .
Cycle .
Daylight luminous directional reflectance Y value of minimum The Department may sample metal target plates for testing at the production stages for the lot and sample sizes shown in the following table Metal Target Plate Sampling Production stage Lot size Sample size Finished target plates Less than target plates target plates Flat sheet stock sq ft or lessa Five byinch specimens Coil stock lb or less Two byinch specimens or one by inch specimen aFlat sheet stock must be identifiable with parent coil stock .
The Department rejects the entire lot if either of the following occurs .
Any sample does not comply with section .
Zinccoated steel sheets show any evidence of damage to or removal of the zinc coating If the Department chooses to resample the sample size may be twice the number shown in the table titled Metal Target Plate Sampling. . MATERIALS .A General A marker must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS .B Wood Posts A wood post must comply with section .C .
.C Metal Posts Steel for a metal post must comply with ASTM AAM .
A metal post must be galvanized under section .B .
.D Flexible Posts A flexible post must be white except where shown as yellow .
The flexible post must be free from burns discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects that affect appearance or serviceability .
.E Target Plates A target plate for a Type K CA or a Type K CA object marker must be the same color and material as the flexible post .
A target plate for highway post marker or Type L CA or Type L CA object marker installed on a metal post must be manufactured from an aluminum sheet or zinccoated steel sheet .
Galvanize steel sheets under section .B .
Zinccoated steel sheets must comply with ASTM AAM Commercial Steel Types A B and C. The nominal thickness of a zinccoated steel sheet must be at least .
inch .
Prepare zinccoated surfaces to produce optimum adherence of the enamel coating without damaging or removing the zinc coating .
An aluminum target plate must be aluminum alloy H. You may use other alloys having equivalent properties if authorized .
The nominal thickness of an aluminum sheet must be at least .
inch .
Prepare the aluminum sheets for the enamel coating by a suitable cleaning method to remove contaminants and by uniformly applying an acidchromatefluoride acidchromatefluoride phosphate or equivalent chemical anticorrosion conversion coating .
Cut the target plate to size and shape and punch the mounting bolt holes .
The surfaces and edges of the plate must be free from fabrication defects .
Coat the pretreated metal target plate with an opaque white coating on both sides using a coat or coat system .
When tested under California Test the dry film for the .
coat system must be uniform and have an average thickness of at least .
mil with no individual measurement less than .
mil .
coat system must consist of .
to .milthick primer and have an average thickness of at least .
mil including primer and top coat with no individual measurement less than .
mil If using a coat painting system fabricate a zinccoated steel target plate including shearing cutting and punching before starting the enameling process .
The enamel coating on a metal target plate must be the product of a commercial manufacturer .
Apply the enamel coating by spray dip roller or continuous roller coating .
You may use other methods if authorized .
The coating must be smooth and substantially free from flow lines paint washout streaks blisters and other defects that might impair serviceability or detract from the general appearance .
A finished metal target plate must not have dents or defects .
The maximum edgetoedge surface deviation from a horizontal plane must not exceed inch .
SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS .F Reflectors A reflector for a marker must be made of a Type III or higher grade retroreflective sign sheeting shown on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
.G Hardware Use inch galvanized steel or aluminum nuts and bolts or inch blind aluminum rivets and washers to attach a target plate to a post .
Use inch galvanized steel bolts nuts and washers to attach a marker panel to a post .
.H Highway Post Markers A highway post marker is shown in the Bid Item List as a milepost marker .
Letters and numerals on a highway post marker must be made with opaque black paint or film .
The paint and film must have an equivalent outdoor weatherability as the retroreflective sheeting specified in ASTM D. Nonreflective opaque black film must be vinyl or acrylic material .
Film for letters and numerals must be computer cut and have pressuresensitive adhesive .
.I.L Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Drive posts in place where soil conditions allow the driving without damage to the posts .
Drill pilot holes if the ground conditions are such that the posts can not be driven without being damaged .
Install target plates and marker panels after the posts are set in place .
After setting the posts fill the space around them with rockfree earth .
During placement thoroughly tamp and water the fill material such that the post is held securely in position .
Unless surplus excavated material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the Engineer .
Use stencils to paint letters and numerals on highway post markers .
Before Contract acceptance spot paint all exposed areas where the paint is damaged and clean all exposed areas that are soiled. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED EXISTING ROADSIDE SIGNS AND MARKERS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for performing work on existing roadside signs and markers .
Work performed on existing roadside signs and markers must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Remove roadside signs only when replacement signs are installed or when the existing signs are no longer required for traffic .
Reset or relocate each roadside sign the same day it is removed .
Single sheet aluminum signs to be salvaged must be banded on a pallet with a total weight of not more than lbpallet .
Reset or relocate roadside signs using existing posts .
If an existing post is deteriorated or broken notify the Engineer .
If ordered use a new post .
SECTION SIGNS AND MARKERS Any new post and its installation ordered for reasons other than damage you cause is change order work .
.B Installation of Sign Panels on Existing Frames Install sign panels on existing frames with fastening hardware under section .A .
.C Installation of Removable Sign Panel Frames Install sign panels on removable sign panel frames with fastening hardware under section .E .
.D Relocate Markers Reserved .E Reset Markers Reserved .
PAYMENT Payment for furnishing sign panels of any type is not included in the payment for install sign panel on existing frame .
Remove sign panel and remove sign panel frame consisting of a single removable sign panel frame with attached sign panels is measurement unit .
Payment for furnishing sign panels is not included in the payment for furnish removable sign panel frame with sign panels attached and install removable sign panel frame .
Each sign installation is measurement unit regardless of the number of posts or sign panels involved .
RAILINGS AND BARRIERS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for constructing railings and barriers .
Excavation and backfill must comply with section . . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Steel Parts and Hardware Welding must comply with AWS D ..
Grind welds on exposed surfaces flush with the adjacent surfaces .
Galvanize completed steel parts and hardware for railings and thrie beam barrier under section .B .
After galvanizing the railing and barrier elements must be free of fins abrasions rough or sharp edges and other surface defects and must not be kinked twisted or bent .
If straightening is necessary use an authorized method .
Elements with kinks twists or bends may be rejected .
Clean and regalvanize abraded or damaged galvanized surfaces of steel rail elements and posts and ends of steel rail elements cut after galvanizing .
If authorized you may repair to the surfaces under section .B instead of regalvanizing .
.C Mortar Mortar must comply with the specifications for mortar in section except the mortar must consist of part by volume of cement and parts by volume of clean sand .
.D Markers Markers must comply with section . . CONSTRUCTION .A General At locations exposed to traffic schedule construction activities such that at the end of each day no post holes are open and no posts are installed without the blocks and rail elements assembled and mounted .
After constructing railings barriers terminal systems crash cushions and vegetation control uniformly spread the surplus excavated material along the adjacent roadway where designated by the Engineer unless the material is hazardous .
.B Mortar Cure mortar by either the water method or the curing compound method using curing compound no. . .C Median Barriers Trim existing median plantings to clear the work area for median barrier construction .
Dispose of the trimmings .
Do not remove an existing median barrier more than feet in advance of the barrier being constructed .
At the end of each days activities reset the existing median barrier without mesh or glare screen and anchor the barrier in an authorized way such that no gap is left between the reset barrier and the barrier being constructed .
You may place Type K temporary railing instead of resetting the existing barrier. . PAYMENT Except for midwest guardrail system and double midwest guardrail system the payment quantity for railings is the length measured along the face of the railing including end and intermediate posts with no deductions for gaps in the railing for lighting and sign supports .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS METAL RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .
GENERAL .A General .A General Section includes specifications for constructing metal railings and barriers .
.A Materials Plastic blocks for midwest guardrail systems and thrie beam barrier must be on the Authorized Material List for highway safety features .
Grease used to coat the inside surfaces of foundation tubes to receive wood posts must not melt or run at a temperature of degrees F. .A Construction For midwest guardrail systems and thrie beam barrier install posts foundation tubes and soil plates in soil .
.A Payment Not Used .B Vegetation Control Reserved .
MIDWEST GUARDRAIL SYSTEMS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing midwest guardrail systems .
The reinforcing steel in the concrete anchors for Type CA end anchor assemblies must comply with section .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit certified copies of mill test reports as an informational submittal for each heat of steel from which the rail elements and steel posts are formed or fabricated .
For end anchor assemblies and rail tensioning assemblies submit .
certified copies of the mill test reports for each manufactured length of cable used. . sample of the cable for testing .
The cable must be inches in total length and must be properly fitted with a swaged fitting and righthand thread stud at both ends as specified in section .B including a clevis if shown .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .B General .Ba General Railing parts must be interchangeable with similar parts regardless of the source .
.Bb Steel Components and Hardware Workmanship for steel components and hardware must be equivalent to good commercial practice .
Edges bolt holes and surfaces must be free of torn metal burrs sharp edges and protrusions .
Fabricate the metal work in the shop .
Do not punch cut or weld in the field .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Rail elements end caps and return caps must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type I Wbeam guardrail except within .
miles of the coast the components must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type II Wbeam guardrail .
Bolts nuts and other fittings must comply with AASHTO M . Instead of the rolled steel section shown you may substitute a welded section built up from structural steel plates if .
Depth width and average thicknesses of the welded section are at least equal to those of the rolled section .
Steel plates of the welded section comply with ASTM AAM .
Flanges of the welded section are welded to the web with continuous fillet welds on each side of the web The rail element metal must withstand a cold bend without cracking of degrees around a mandrel of a diameter equal to .
times the plate thickness .
If the radius of curvature of a rail element is feet or less shape the rail element in the shop .
Stencil the radius of curvature on the back of each rail element in inchhigh numerals .
Fabricate steel posts from steel complying with ASTM AAM .
Bolts must have shoulders of a shape that will prevent the bolts from turning .
The holes in the rail elements must be of a shape similar to the bolt shoulder .
The bolted connection of the rail element to the post must withstand a lb pull at degrees to the line of the railing .
.Bc Wood Posts and Blocks The grade and species of wood posts and blocks must be no .
timbers also known as no .
structural Douglas fir or no .
timbers Southern yellow pine .
Wood posts and blocks must be graded under section .B except allowances for shrinkage after mill cutting must not exceed percent of the American Softwood Lumber Standard PS minimum sizes when installed .
Wood posts and blocks must be rough or SS .
The size tolerance of rough sawn blocks in the direction of the bolt holes must not exceed inch .
After fabrication the wood posts and blocks must be pressure treated under section .
and AWPA U Use Category UCA Commodity Specification A .
.Bd Bolt Hole Grease Grease used to fill bolt holes in wood posts and blocks must be recommended for corrosion protection by the manufacturer .
The grease must not melt or run at a temperature of degrees F. .Be Components for Connection to a Concrete Surface Components for connecting midwest guardrail systems to vertical concrete surfaces such as bridge railings barriers retaining walls and abutments must comply with the following requirements .
Metal box spacers and plate washers must be fabricated from steel complying with ASTM AAM. . Metal box spacers must be fabricated from separate plates and welded or pressformed and welded. . HS bolts must comply with ASTM A AM or A or be fabricated from steel rods complying with ASTM A .
The bolts or rods must comply with the mechanical requirements in ASTM A or AM after galvanizing .
The nuts and washers must comply with ASTM A or AM. . For connecting guardrail to existing bridge railings or barriers the epoxy adhesive used in the sand and the epoxy adhesive mixture for repairing spalled or damaged areas around the anchor bolt holes must be a component commercialquality epoxy adhesive manufactured especially for making epoxysand mortar .
.B End Anchor Assemblies and Rail Tensioning Assemblies Section .B applies to end anchor assemblies and rail tensioning assemblies .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Concrete used to construct the anchors for end anchor assemblies must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
Fabricate the metal components of anchor assemblies in compliance with good shop practice .
Fabricate the anchor plates metal plates foundation tubes and soil plates from steel complying with ASTM AAM .
Fabricate the anchor rods from steel complying with ASTM AAM ASTM A or ASTM A Grade or .
Hot forge the eyes or form the eyes with CJP welds .
After fabricating and before galvanizing thermally stress relieve anchor rods with eyes that were formed with any part of the eye below degrees F during forming or with eyes that were closed by welding .
The completed anchor rod after galvanizing must develop a strength of lb .
Instead of using builtup fabrication you may pressform the anchor plates from steel plate with or without welded seams .
Bolts and nuts must comply with ASTM A. Anchor cables must be inch preformed x wire strand core or independent wire rope core galvanized under Federal Specification RRW right regular lay manufactured from improved plow steel with a minimum breaking strength of tons .
The overall length of each cable anchor assembly must be at least .
feet .
Use cable clips and a cable thimble to attach the cable to the anchor rod where shown .
Thimbles must be commercialquality galvanized steel .
Cable clips must be commercialquality dropforged galvanized steel .
Swaged fittings must be machined from hotrolled steel bars complying with AISI C and annealed suitable for cold swaging .
Galvanize the swaged fitting before swaging .
To keep the stud in the proper position drill a lock pin hole through the head of the swaged fitting and install a inch plated steel spring pin .
Stamp the manufacturers identifying mark on the body of the swaged fitting .
Before galvanizing mill a inch slot in the stud end for the locking pin .
Studs must comply with ASTM A after galvanizing .
The swaged fittings stud and nut assembly must develop the specified breaking strength of the cable .
Ship cable assemblies as a complete unit including studs and nuts .
Clevises must be dropforged galvanized steel and must develop the specified breaking strength of the cable .
For anchor rods to be buried in earth coat the portions to be buried with a mil minimum thickness of one of the following .
Coal tar enamel complying with AWWA C . Coal tar epoxy complying with either of the following .. SSPCPaint Coal Tar EpoxyPolyamide Black Paint .. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Specifications Formula Ca Coal TarEpoxy Black Paint .B Type WB Transition Railings Section .B applies to Type WB transition railings .
Tengauge rail elements must comply with AASHTO M for Class B Type I thrie beam element except within .
miles of the coast the gauge rail elements must comply with AASHTO M for Class B Type II thrie beam element .
Other rail elements and end caps must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type I thrie beam element except within .
miles of the coast the rail elements and end caps must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type II thrie beam element .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .C Construction .C General .Ca General At locations where traffic is adjacent to midwest guardrail system work all materials required to complete the guardrail work at a location must be available before you start work at the location .
Construct midwest guardrail systems using .
Wood or steel line posts. . Wood blocks for line posts .
You may use plastic blocks for steel line posts where shown. . Only type of post and block for any continuous length of guardrail .
.Cb Posts Place the posts at equal intervals except you may space the end posts closer to the adjacent posts if authorized .
Drive wood posts with or without pilot holes or place the posts in drilled holes .
Backfill any space around the wood posts with selected earth that is free of rock .
Place the earth in inchthick layers .
Moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
Drive steel posts with or without pilot holes .
If pilot holes are used backfill any space around the steel posts with dry sand or pea gravel after driving .
Drive steel foundation tubes with soil plates attached with or without pilot holes or place them in drilled holes .
Backfill any space around the foundation tubes with selected earth that is free of rock .
Place the earth in inchthick layers .
Moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
Coat the inside surfaces of the foundation tubes to receive wood terminal posts with grease .
Insert the posts into the tubes by hand .
Do not drive the posts .
You may slightly round the post edges to facilitate insertion .
.Cc Bolt Holes and Cuts in Wood Posts and Blocks If copper naphthenate ammoniacal copper arsenate ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate ammoniacal copper quat or copper azole is used to treat wood posts and blocks before inserting the bolts fill the bolt holes with grease .
You may field bore the inchdiameter holes shown for breakaway wood guardrail terminal posts .
If you perform field cutting or boring after treatment thoroughly swab spray or brush the cuts and holes with applications of the same type of preservative as initially used or treat the cuts and holes with copper naphthenate under AWPA Standard M. Preservative application in the field must comply with the st and nd paragraphs of section .Cb .
.Cd Rail Elements The edges and center of the rail elements must contact each post block .
Splice the rail elements at .foot maximum intervals .
Locate the splices at midspan between posts .
Rail element splices must be lapped at least inches and bolted .
Lap the rail elements such that the exposed ends do not face approaching traffic .
The rail elements must have full bearing at joints .
Install end caps and return caps under the manufacturers instructions .
.Ce Connection to a Concrete Bridge Railing or Barrier If connecting a midwest guardrail system to a new concrete bridge railing or barrier drill anchor bolt holes in the concrete or form holes using metal or PVC sleeves .
If connecting a midwest guardrail system to an existing concrete bridge railing or barrier drill anchor bolt holes in the concrete .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Repair any areas around the holes that were spalled or otherwise damaged during drilling using an epoxy adhesive and sand mixture in proportions of to .
The epoxy adhesive must comply with section .Be .
Mix the components and the epoxysand mixture under the manufacturers instructions .
.Cf Anchor Bolts Set With Epoxy For anchor bolts set with epoxy place the anchor bolts in holes filled with a component epoxy mixture complying with the specifications for load bearing applications .
.C End Anchor Assemblies Place the concrete for end anchors for Type CA end anchor assemblies against the undisturbed material of the excavated holes .
If ordered form the top inches of the holes .
Tighten the anchor cables for Type CA end anchor assemblies after the concrete anchor has cured for at least days .
Backfill the holes excavated in the slope to construct buried post end anchors with selected earth .
Place the earth in layers approximately foot thick .
Moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
.C Type WB Transition Railings Reserved .D Payment Except for midwest guardrail systems located within the pay limits of a terminal system a transition railing an end anchor assembly or a railing tensioning assembly the payment quantity for midwest guardrail system is the length measured along the face of the rail element from end post to end post of the completed railing and includes buried post anchors .
The point of measurement at the end post is the center of the bolt attaching the rail element to the end post .
If midwest guardrail system is connected to a structure barrier wall or abutment the point of measurement is the midpoint between the bolts attaching the rail element to the structure barrier wall or abutment .
The payment quantity for double midwest guardrail system is the length measured from end post to end post along the center line of the guardrail .
An end anchor assembly Type CA with cables attached to concrete anchor is measurement unit. . THRIE BEAM BARRIERS .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing thrie beam barrier .
Thrie beam barrier must comply with the specifications for midwest guardrail systems in section ..
Single thrie beam barrier work includes transition sections between W beam and thrie beam elements .
.B Materials Rail elements terminal connectors end caps and return caps must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type I thrie beam guardrail except within .
miles of the coast the components must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type II thrie beam guardrail .
Tengauge rail elements for transition railings must comply with AASHTO M for Class B Type I thrie beam element except within .
miles of the coast the gauge rail elements must comply with AASHTO M for Class B Type II thrie beam element .
Other rail elements and end caps for transition railings must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type I thrie beam element except within .
miles of the coast the rail elements and end caps must comply with AASHTO M for Class A Type II thrie beam element .
Use steel posts for thrie beam barrier on bridges .
Use wood posts for approach barrier transitions to connect to concrete structures and for posts set in steel foundation tubes at trailing end anchors .
At all other locations use either wood or steel posts .
Use only type of post in any continuous length of barrier .
Use wood blocks with wood and steel posts .
You may use plastic blocks with steel posts where shown .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS For thrie beam barrier on bridges .
Threaded rods must comply with ASTM A . Anchor bolts must comply with ASTM F Grade .
Plates must comply with section .C Construction Toenailing wood blocks to wood posts is not required .
If the spacing between the posts must be varied from the standard spacing you may modify the rail elements at the job site if authorized .
Repair damaged galvanizing under section .B .
For thrie beam barrier on bridges .
If cored or drilled holes for anchor bolts must be offset to avoid existing main reinforcing steel the corresponding base plate anchor bolt holes may be slotted to adjust to the new anchor bolt locations .
Slotting must not reduce the edge distance of the hole to less than inch. . Drilling of anchor bolt holes and bonding of bolts must comply with the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section .E .
If median barrier delineation is shown match the barrier marker spacing to the raised pavement marker spacing on the adjacent median edgeline pavement delineation .
.D Payment The payment quantity for single thrie beam barrier is the length measured from end post to end post along the face of the rail element of the installed barrier .
The quantity does not include any portion of single thrie beam barrier within the pay limits of transition railing Type STB .
The payment quantity for single thrie beam barrier constructed on each side of a bent underneath a structure or on each side of other obstructions is the length measured along each face of the installed barriers .
The payment quantity for double thrie beam barrier is the length measured from end post to end post along the center line of the installed barrier .
The quantity does not include any portion of double thrie beam barrier within the pay limits of transition railing Type DTB .
The point of measurement at the end posts of single and double thrie beam barriers is the center of the bolt or rod attaching the rail element to the end post .
If a single thrie beam barrier is constructed on each side of a median obstruction and the single barriers merge into a double barrier the post with blocks attached is the end post for measuring the length of the single and double thrie beam barriers .
The division point for determining the payment quantities of double thrie beam barrier bridge and double thrie beam barrier is the face of the paving notch of the bridge. . TERMINAL SYSTEMS .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing terminal systems .
.A Materials Not Used .A Construction Not Used .A Payment Not Used SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .B Alternative InLine Terminal Systems Reserved .C Alternative Flared Terminal Systems Reserved .D.H Reserved .
CALIFORNIA BRIDGE RAILS .A General .A Summary Section .
includes specifications for constructing California bridge rail .
Concrete must comply with section .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
California STS bridge rail work includes the handrailing .
.A Definitions Reserved .A Submittals Submit shop drawings for the California bridge rail .
The shop drawings must include .
Details for venting and pickup holes in rails and sleeves .
Railing layout .
Complete details for the construction of the work including construction methods sequence of shop and field assembly and installation procedures Submit copies of the shop drawings .
Allow days for review .
Upon authorization the Engineer returns copies to you for use during construction .
.A Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials .B General Reserved .B Reinforced Concrete In freezethaw areas .
Concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
Bar reinforcing steel must comply with section .
.B Metal Components Structural shapes structural tubing plates bars bolts nuts and washers must comply with section .. Other fittings must be commercial quality .
Formed steel sections must be uniform in appearance .
Stud bolts must comply with the specifications for studs in clause of AWS D .. Ferrous metal parts must be galvanized under section .B .
Railings must conform to the curvature by means of a series of short chords from centertocenter of rail posts except tubing for railings described as conforming to the curvature must be shop bent to fit the curvature and tubing with a horizontal curve radius less than feet must be shop bent or fabricated to fit the curvature .
Joints must be matchmarked .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .B Coatings Organic zincrich primer used to paint the exposed bolt threads must be on the Authorized Material List for organic zincrich primers .
.C Construction Railings must present a smooth uniform appearance in their final position conforming closely to the horizontal and vertical lines shown or ordered .
Erect railings carefully and true to line and grade .
Posts must be normal to the profile grade .
Transverse to the profile grade railings must be plumb within a tolerance not to exceed .
foot in feet .
Adjacent rail elements must align with each other within inch .
In freezethaw areas cure concrete by the water method .
After installing the rail paint the exposed bolt threads with applications of organic zincrich primer .
.D Payment The payment quantity for California bridge rail is the length measured from end to end along the face of the railing including reinforced concrete end blocks and intermediate posts. . CHAIN LINK RAILINGS .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing chain link railings .
.B Materials Structural shapes plates bars and bolts must comply with section ..
Structural tubing steel must comply with ASTM AAM or A. Frame members carrying electrical conductors must be rigid metal conduit manufactured of mild steel complying with UL Electrical Rigid Metal Conduit Steel .
Hot dip galvanize the interior and exterior surfaces of the rigid metal conduit .
Truss rods post tops and other required fittings and hardware must be steel malleable iron or wrought iron .
Post tops and other closures must be watertight .
Fittings and hardware must fasten properly to the posts and other members .
Cable used in the frame must .
Be wire rope .
Be inch in diameter .
Have a minimum breaking strength of lb .
Be galvanized under Federal Specification RRW Crimped sleeve clamps and stud socket assemblies must .
Be metal .
Develop the strength of the cable .
Be the same color as the cable Tension wires must be at least gauge coil spring steel .
Post clips must be at least gauge steel .
Wire ties or hog rings must be gauge commercialquality steel wire .
Galvanize the tension wires post clips wire ties and hog rings under ASTM A Coating Type Z Class .
You may substitute one of the following for the steel wire ties or hog rings .
gauge .inch minimum diameter aluminum wire ties complying with ASTM B or BM Alloy H SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .
gauge .inch minimum diameter aluminum hog rings complying with ASTM B or BM Alloy T or Alloy H Chain link fabric must be gauge and must comply with one of the following .
AASHTO M Type I Class C . AASHTO M Type IV Class A . ASTM F Class Chain link fabric must be woven into approximately inch mesh .
All of the railings for a single structure must be the same color .
.C Construction Give wire ties at least complete turn .
Bend the wire tie ends away from pedestrian traffic .
Tighten truss rods and cables with turnbuckles or other fittings .
Install a thimble at each cable loop .
Stretch and fasten the chain link fabric securely to the posts other members and tension wires .
Stretch the tension wires tightly .
Wherever necessary to conform to horizontal or vertical curvature rework and fit the fabric to present a smooth neat and workmanlike appearance .
Provide openings in the fabric as required by other facilities .
Reinforce the openings with at least turn of gauge wire .
Attach pipe handrailing to chain link railing where shown .
Pipe handrailing must comply with section .. .D Payment Not Used .
CABLE RAILINGS .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing cable railings .
.B Materials Concrete for the post footings must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
Pipe for posts and braces must be standard steel pipe or pipe complying with section .B .
Truss rods post tops cable clamps eye bolts thimbles and other required fittings must be commercial quality steel malleable iron or wrought iron .
Post tops must be watertight .
The eye of the eye bolts must be either drop forged or formed with a complete penetration weld .
The eye must develop percent of the bolt strength .
Turnbuckles must .
Be commercial quality .
Have jaw or eye ends .
Have a minimum breaking strength of lb .
Be steel pipe type or dropforged steel Crimped sleeve clamps and stop sleeve clamps must .
Be nonferrous metal .
Develop the strength of the cable .
Be the same color as the cable Cables must SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .
Be wire strand or rope .
Have a minimum diameter of inch .
Have a minimum breaking strength of lb .
Be galvanized under Federal Specification RRW .C Construction Tension the cables to provide taut railings between posts .
Install a thimble at each cable loop .
.D Payment Not Used .
TUBULAR HANDRAILINGS .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing tubular handrailings .
.B Materials The materials for tubular handrailing components must comply with the specifications shown in the following table Material Specification Rail and post tubes ASTM AAM Grade B Rolled bars and plates ASTM AAM Rail splice sleeves ASTM AAM Bolts ASTM A AM or A Threaded rods ASTM A Nuts and washers for bolts and threaded rods ASTM A or AM Bolts and threaded rods furnished under ASTM A must comply with the mechanical requirements specified in ASTM A after galvanizing .
Rail tubes must be shop bent or fabricated to fit the horizontal curve if the radius is less than feet .
If the vertical radius of the tubular handrailing is feet or less that portion of the railing must be either shop bent or built up from inchthick structural steel plates .
The builtup tubular rail elements must match the seamless tubing in appearance .
The difference between outtoout rail splice sleeve dimensions and the clear inside dimensions of the tubular steel rail elements must not exceed inch after galvanizing .
.C Construction Tubular handrailings must present a smooth uniform appearance in their final position conforming closely to the horizontal and vertical lines shown or ordered .
Before the tubular handrailing parts are assembled clean the bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact .
If the railing is mounted on a concrete surface the post bases must be true and flat to provide uniform bearing .
Carefully handle the materials such that no parts are bent broken abraded or otherwise damaged .
Do not use manufacturing handling or installation methods that damage or distort the members or damage the galvanizing .
Adjust the vertical position of the tubular handrailing to compensate for the camber and dead load deflection of the superstructure .
The Engineer determines the adjustment amount before the railing is installed .
The metal railing posts to which the chain link railing attaches must fit the mounting brackets pipe sleeves and other connection fittings .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Where necessary install shims at posts and rail elements to provide uniform bearing and conformance with the horizontal lines and vertical grade lines .
Shims at steel posts must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel .
.D Payment Not Used .
PIPE HANDRAILINGS .A General Section .
includes specifications for constructing pipe handrailings .
.B Materials Rail elements must be commercialquality standard steel pipe .
Brackets bolts nuts and other fittings must be commercialquality structural steel except standard steel pipe fittings may be used where shown .
.C Construction Erect pipe handrailings carefully and true to line and grade .
.D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED CONCRETE BARRIERS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing concrete barriers and wildlife passage ways in concrete barriers .
Concrete must comply with section .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
Drill and bond dowels under section .
Concrete barrier work includes .
Bar reinforcing steel including the length that extends from the barrier into decks walls and footings .
Constructing Type L wildlife passage ways .
Constructing steel plate barriers at overhead sign foundations electroliers drainage structures and other locations shown For Type SW concrete barriers .
Tubular handrailing and tubular lower rail must comply with the specifications for tubular handrailings in section . . Threaded rods for the tubular handrailing and resin capsule anchors for the tubular lower rail must comply with section Type K concrete barrier must comply with the specifications for Type K temporary railing in section .
and the plans for Type K temporary railing except removable panels must not be used and the barriers must remain in place at the completion of the work .
Thrie beam barrier elements end caps and hardware required to construct Type M wildlife passage ways must comply with section .. .B Definitions Reserved SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .C Submittals If the extrusion or slip form method is to be used and the reinforcement is not fixed in place before placing the concrete submit a QC plan for the extrusion or slip form construction method .
The QC plan must include .
Contingency plan for correcting problems in production transportation or placement .
Procedure for splicing concrete barrier reinforcement .
Procedure for positioning reinforcement during extrusion or slip form operations .
Test procedure for verifying the final positions of the longitudinal reinforcement .
Test report form to be used that shows the station of the test the position of the reinforcement relative to the top of the barrier and the clearance cover from the faces of the barrier to the reinforcement Submit the test report forms within hours after constructing the concrete barrier .
Submit a certificate of compliance for a new or used Type K portable concrete barrier that is not cast on the job site .
For the tubular handrailing on a Type SW concrete barrier submit copies of the threaded rod layouts before placing the barrier reinforcement .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Barrier Smoothness Test the smoothness of the top and exposed faces of barriers using a foot straightedge laid on the surfaces .
.Dc Barrier Reinforcement Positions For the extrusion or slip form construction method if the reinforcement is not fixed in place before placing the concrete verify the final positions of the horizontal reinforcement at foot intervals evaluated a minimum of feet behind the trailing extrusion or slip form edge by testing the position of the reinforcement relative to the top of the barrier and the clearance cover from the faces of the barrier to the reinforcement .
.D Department Acceptance The Department rejects concrete barriers with any reinforcement that does not comply with section .Aciii. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Concrete .B General Concrete for Type series concrete barriers must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
In nonfreezethaw areas concrete for concrete barriers other than Type series must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
In freezethaw areas concrete for concrete barriers must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS For Type F GE and SF concrete barriers the concrete paving between the tops of the walls of the barrier and the optional concrete slab at the base between the walls of the barrier must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
.B Concrete for Extrusion or Slip form Methods Minor concrete for extruded or slip formed concrete barriers must comply with the following .
Maximum aggregate size must be no larger than inches and no smaller than inch . .
If the inch maximum size aggregate is used the concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard . .
Combined aggregate gradation must produce concrete of the shape and surface texture specified . .
Consistency must be such that after extrusion or slip forming the concrete maintains the shape of the barrier without support .
You may make the concrete by continuously batching the materials by volume and mixing in a continuous mixer under the batching and mixing requirements in ASTM CCM .
.C Bar Reinforcing Steel In freezethaw areas bar reinforcing steel for concrete barriers must be epoxy coated under section .. .D Steel Plates and Hardware Structural steel plates and hardware required to join the concrete barrier at gaps caused by overhead sign foundations electroliers drainage structures and at other locations shown must comply with section .A .
.E Granular Backfill For Type F GE and SF concrete barriers the granular material for backfill between the walls of concrete barrier must .
Be earthy material suitable for the purpose intended .
Have no rocks lumps or clods exceeding inches in greatest dimension .F Type K Concrete Barrier Reflectors Type K concrete barrier reflectors must be Type K temporary railing reflectors on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
The adhesive used to mount reflectors on a Type K concrete barrier must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
.G Connection of a Concrete Barrier to a Structure Sheet metal neoprene strip and grease at the connection of a concrete barrier to a structure must comply with the following .
Sheet metal must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel that is smooth and free of kinks bends or burrs .
Joints in the sheet metal must be butt joints sealed with plastic ductsealing tape. . Neoprene strip must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section .. .
Grease must comply with SAE AS .
Expanded polystyrene at the connection of a concrete barrier to a structure and at a concrete barrier transition at a bridge column must comply with section .B .
.H Type K Portable Concrete Barriers Type K portable concrete barrier must consist of interconnected new or undamaged used PC portable concrete barrier units .
For Type K portable concrete barrier .
Concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except weighmaster certificates and certificates of compliance are not required .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .
Steel plates must comply with ASTM AAM .
After fabrication galvanize the steel plates under section .B . .
Connection pins must be round bars complying with ASTM AAM. . CONSTRUCTION .A General .A General Reserved .A Closing Gaps in Concrete Barriers During construction on highways open to traffic if a gap is left in the concrete barrier such as for equipment or special drainage features close the gap by temporary or permanent means when work is not actively in progress at the location of the gap .
.A Adjusting Barrier Height If the concrete barrier height is adjusted the Engineer determines the adjustment amount before the concrete is placed .
If a concrete barrier is constructed on AB adjust the barrier height to compensate for irregularities in the surface of the finished AB .
For a concrete barrier constructed on a recently completed bridge adjust the barrier height to compensate for the camber and dead load deflection of the superstructure .
Construct the barrier after the falsework has been released and as long after the superstructure construction as the progress of the work will allow .
For a concrete barrier constructed on existing pavement or on an existing structure adjust the barrier height to compensate for irregularities in the existing grade .
.A Locating Expansion Joints Locate concrete barrier expansion joints at deck pavement and principal wall joints .
The expansion joint filler material must be the same size as the joint or a minimum of inch .
.A Placing Barriers The concrete barrier must present a smooth uniform appearance in its final position conforming closely to the horizontal and vertical lines shown or ordered .
The barrier must be free of lumps sags or other irregularities .
You may place the portion of the barrier that is below finished grade to the neat lines of the excavation .
.A Barrier Construction Methods .Aa General Construct Type series concrete barriers by one of the following methods .
Castinplacewithfixedforms method .
Extrusion or slip form method .
Combination of both methods Construct concrete barriers other than Type series by the castinplacewithfixedforms method .
.Ab CastInPlacewithFixedForms Method Concrete barriers constructed by the castinplacewithfixedforms method must comply with section .
Do not use PC mortar blocks to support the reinforcing steel on the traffic side of barriers .
.Ac Extrusion or Slip form Method .Aci General Reserved SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .Acii Placing Concrete For concrete barriers constructed using an extrusion or slip form machine or other similar type of equipment the concrete must be well compacted and dense and the exposed surfaces must comply with section .
You may be required to submit evidence of successful operation of the extrusion or slip form machine or other equipment .
Feed the concrete to the extrusion or slip form machine at a uniform rate .
Operate the machine under enough uniform restraint to the forward motion to produce a wellcompacted concrete mass free from surface pits larger than inch in diameter and requiring no further finishing other than that specified in section .A .
.Aciii Placing Reinforcing Bars For concrete barriers constructed using extrusion or slip form methods place the horizontal reinforcing bars continuously .
If the reinforcement is not fixed in place before placing the concrete the reinforcement must not deviate more than inch from the positions shown when tested under section .Dc .
.Aciv Maintaining Barrier Grades The grade for the top of concrete barriers constructed using extrusion or slip form methods must be indicated by an offset guide line set from survey marks established by the Engineer .
The forming portion of the extrusion or slip form machine must be readily adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine to conform to the predetermined grade line .
A grade line gauge or pointer must be attached to the machine such that a continual comparison can be made between the barrier being placed and the established grade line as indicated by the offset guide line .
Instead of the above method for maintaining the barrier grade the extrusion or slip form machine may be operated on rails or forms set at a uniform depth below the predetermined finished top of the barrier grade or on existing pavement or bridge decks .
.Acv Constructing Expansion Joints For concrete barriers constructed using extrusion or slip forming methods construct expansion joints using one of the following methods .
Comply with section . .
Saw through the barrier section to its full depth .
Insertion of joint filler is not required .
If you saw or form the joints before the concrete has hardened firmly support the adjacent portions of the barrier with close fitting shields .
If you saw or form the joints after applying curing compound treat the exposed barrier faces in the vicinity of the joint with curing compound after sawing or forming the joints .
.A Finishing Before applying the curing compound the surface finish of Type series concrete barriers must be free from surface pits larger than inch in diameter and you must give the surface a final soft brush finish with strokes parallel to the line of the barriers .
Do not finish the surface with a brush application of grout .
To facilitate finishing remove fixed forms for CIP Type series concrete barriers as soon as possible after the concrete has set enough to maintain the barrier shape without support .
At least days after placing Type series concrete barriers give the exposed surfaces a light abrasive blast finish to achieve a uniform appearance .
The final surface finish of concrete barriers other than Type series must be a Class surface finish complying with section .F .
Any alternative method of final surface finishing must be authorized .
.A Curing Cure the exposed surfaces of concrete barriers under section .B by the curing compound method using curing compound no. . For concrete barriers on bridges and walls that do not support soundwalls SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS you may instead cure the formed surfaces of the barriers by the formsinplace method if you keep the forms in place for at least hours after placing the concrete .
For Type series concrete barriers apply the curing compound using a mechanical sprayer capable of applying the curing compound to at least entire side and the top of the concrete barrier in application at a uniform rate of coverage .
Protect the spray against wind .
In freezethaw areas cure concrete barriers on bridges and walls under section .B by the water method .
For Type series concrete barriers keep the forms in place for at least hours after placing the concrete .
.A Smoothness The top and exposed faces of barriers must comply with the following smoothness requirements when tested under section .Db .
For Type series concrete barriers the top must not vary more than .
foot from the edge of the straightedge and the faces must not vary more than .
foot from the edge of the straightedge. . For concrete barriers other than Type series both the top and faces must not vary more than .
foot from the edge of the straightedge .
.A Installing Tubular Handrailings For a tubular handrailing mounted on a Type SW concrete barrier drill and bond the threaded rods under the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section .
.A Installing Barrier Markers Where concrete barrier markers are shown cement the markers to the barrier under the manufacturers instructions .
Match the barrier marker spacing to the raised pavement marker spacing on the adjacent median edgeline pavement delineation .
.A Installing Reflectors Where shown install reflectors on Type K concrete barriers .
Mount the reflectors using an adhesive complying with section .F .
.A Placing Granular Backfill For Type F GE and SF concrete barriers place the granular material for backfill between the walls of the concrete barrier must be placed without compaction .
.B Concrete Barriers at Existing Structures For a concrete barrier constructed on an existing structure bond the dowels in drilled holes in the existing concrete .
For a concrete barrier constructed to the face of an existing concrete structure match the existing weep holes .
.C Connection of a Concrete Barrier to a Structure At the connection of a concrete barrier to a structure apply a uniform film of grease to the upper surface of the neoprene strip before placing the sheet metal .
.D Concrete Barrier Transitions For a concrete barrier transition .
Remove portions of the existing concrete barrier where shown .
Roughen the contact surfaces of the existing concrete barrier .
Drill and bond dowels into the existing concrete barrier .E Type K Portable Concrete Barriers Set Type K portable concrete barriers on a firm stable foundation .
Grade the foundation to provide uniform bearing throughout the entire barrier length .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Place and maintain the abutting ends of the PC concrete units in alignment without substantial offset to each other .
Position the PC concrete units straight on tangent alignments and on a true arc on curved alignments .
The minimum curve radius for horizontal alignments is feet .
The final surface finish of Type K portable concrete barriers must comply with section .F .
Place the fabrication date and your name or logo on each panel .
The fabrication date and name or logo must be inches or less in height and must be located inches or less above the bottom of the rail panel .
Cure the exposed surfaces of concrete elements by the water method the formsinplace method or the curing compound method .
Curing compound must be curing compound no. . .F Wildlife Passage Ways Construct wildlife passage ways in concrete barriers where shown .
Construct the passage way opening by forming the opening in the concrete barrier or after the concrete barrier is constructed by saw cutting the outline of the opening and removing the concrete and bar reinforcing steel within the limits of the opening .
The completed opening for the wildlife passage way must be clear and unobstructed for the dimensions shown .
For a Type M wildlife passage way you may be required to remove concrete barrier .
Before removing the concrete barrier make a saw cut of approximately inch in depth on the face of the barrier along the removal limits. . PAYMENT The payment quantity for concrete barriers other than Types F GE and SF is the length measured along the top of the barrier .
The payment quantity for Type F GE and SF concrete barriers is the length measured once along the centerline between the walls of the barrier .
The payment quantity for concrete barriers includes the length of gaps in the concrete barrier where steel plate barrier is attached to the concrete barrier .
CRASH CUSHIONS .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for constructing crash cushions .
.B Materials Not Used .C Construction Not Used .D Payment Not Used ..
RESERVED RESERVED EXISTING RAILINGS AND BARRIERS .
GENERAL .A General Section includes specifications for performing work on existing railings barriers terminal systems and crash cushions .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Work performed on existing railings barriers terminal systems and crash cushions must comply with section .
.B Materials Concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
Reinforcement must comply with section .
.C Construction If a portion of a guardrail or thrie beam barrier is to remain in place removing salvaging reconstructing relocating or resetting work includes .
Resetting end caps return caps and buried post anchors .
Providing connections to existing and new facilities including connections to concrete .D Payment The payment quantities for removing salvaging reconstructing relocating and resetting existing railings and barriers are measured as specified for measuring new railings and barriers . .
EXISTING GUARDRAILS .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for performing work on existing guardrail .
.A Materials Not Used .A Construction Not Used .A Payment Not Used .B Remove Guardrails .B General Section .B includes specifications for removing guardrail .
.B Materials Not Used .B Construction Where removing guardrail remove any concrete anchors and steel foundation tubes .
.B Payment Not Used .C Salvage Guardrails .C General Section .C includes specifications for salvaging guardrail .
.C Materials Not Used .C Construction Remove disassemble clean prepare mark bundle package tag haul and stockpile the guardrail to be salvaged .
Comply with the requirements for number per bundle for the guardrail components shown in the following table SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Component Number per bundle Rail Wood posts by inches Wood posts by inches Steel posts Blocks Tag incomplete bundles and show the quantity contained .
.C Payment Not Used .D Reconstruct Guardrails Reserved .E Adjust Guardrails Reserved .F.J Reserved .
EXISTING METAL BRIDGE RAILINGS .A General .A General Section .
includes specifications for performing work on existing metal bridge railings .
.A Materials Not Used .A Construction Not Used .A Payment Not Used .B Reconstruct Metal Bridge Railings .B General .Ba Summary Section .B includes specifications for reconstructing metal bridge railings .
.Bb Definitions Reserved .Bc Submittals Submit copies of shop drawings showing the details of the refabrication of the removed materials and the fabrication of the new materials .
Include a list of the new materials the type of metal and the metal specifications .
.Bd Quality Assurance Reserved .B Materials Not Used .B Construction Remove refabricate and install the metal bridge railing of the type shown .
Refabrication of removed material fabrication of new material and installation of the railing must comply with the specifications for a new metal bridge railing of the type being reconstructed .
SECTION RAILINGS AND BARRIERS Perform aluminum welding by the inertgasshielded arc welding process .
Finish exposed aluminum welds to a neat surface .
Repair abraded and damaged galvanized surfaces on the removed material under section .B .
.B Payment The payment quantity for reconstruct metal railing bridge is the length measured along the face of the reconstructed railing and includes the length of gaps in the railing for lighting and sign supports .
.C.G Reserved ..
RESERVED MARKINGS GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for applying and constructing markings .
Markings must comply with the CA MUTCD. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used TRAFFIC STRIPES AND PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for applying traffic stripes and pavement markings .
.B Definitions pavement marking Transverse marking such as a limit line a stop line or a word symbol shoulder parking stall or railroadgradecrossing marking .
traffic stripe Longitudinal centerline or lane line used for separating traffic lanes in the same direction of travel or in the opposing direction of travel or a longitudinal edge line marking the edge of the traveled way or the edge of a lane at a gore area separating traffic at an exit or entrance ramp .
A traffic stripe is shown as a traffic line .
.C Submittals For each lot or batch of thermoplastic paint and glass beads submit .
Certificate of compliance including the product name lot or batch number and manufacture date .
METS notification letter stating that the material is authorized for use .
SDS For glass beads used in dropon applications and in thermoplastic formulations submit a certificate of compliance and test results for each lot of beads specifying the EPA test methods used and tracing the lot to the specific test sample .
The testing for lead and arsenic content must be performed by an independent testing laboratory .
Submit retroreflectivity readings for traffic stripes and pavement markings at locations with deficient retroreflectivity determined by the Engineer .
.D Quality Assurance Before starting permanent application of twocomponent painted traffic stripes or markings apply a test stripe of the paint on roofing felt or other suitable material in the presence of the Engineer .
The test section must be at least feet in length .
Test each lot of glass beads for arsenic and lead under EPA Test Method and B or C. The Engineer will perform a nighttime drivethrough visual inspection of the retroreflectivity of the traffic stripes and pavement markings and notify you of any locations with deficient retroreflectivity .
Measure the retroreflectivity of the deficient areas using a retroreflectometer under ASTM E and the sampling protocol specified in ASTM D. SECTION MARKINGS .
MATERIALS .A General Traffic stripes and pavement markings must be retroreflective .
Within days of applying traffic stripes and pavement markings the retroreflectivity of the stripes and markings must be a minimum of mcdmlx for white and mcdmlx for yellow when measured under ASTM E. .B Thermoplastic Thermoplastic must comply with State Specification PTHSPRAY PTHHYDRO or PTHALKYD .
For recessed thermoplastic stripes and pavement markings mark packages of thermoplastic with the words For Recessed Application .
.C Paint The paint for traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with the specifications for the paint type and color shown in following table Paint Specifications Paint type Color Specification Waterborne traffic line White yellow and black State Specification PTWBR Acetonebased White yellow and black State Specification PTVOCA Waterborne traffic line for the international symbol of accessibility and other curb markings Blue red and green Federal Specification TTPE The color of painted traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with ASTM D. .D Glass Beads Glass beads applied to paint must comply with State Specification .
Glass beads applied to molten thermoplastic material must be Type beads complying with AASHTO M . The glass beads must have a coating that promotes adhesion of the beads to thermoplastic .
At least percent of the beads by count must be true spheres that are colorless and do not exhibit dark spots air inclusions or surface scratches when viewed under X magnification .
Each lot of glass beads used in pavement markings must contain less than ppm each of arsenic and lead when tested under EPA Test Methods and B or C. .E Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings with Enhanced WetNight Visibility A thermoplastic traffic stripe or pavement marking with enhanced wetnight visibility consists of a single uniform layer of thermoplastic and layers of glass beads .
The st layer of glass beads must be on the Authorized Material List for highperformance glass beads .
The color of the glass beads must match the color of the stripe or marking to which they are being applied .
The nd layer of glass beads must comply with AASHTO M Type .
The glass beads used in both layers must be surface treated for use with thermoplastic under the bead manufacturers instructions .
Within days of applying a thermoplastic traffic stripe or pavement marking with enhanced wetnight visibility the retroreflectivity must be a minimum of mcdmlx for white stripes and markings and mcdmlx for yellow stripes and markings when measured under ASTM E. .F TwoComponent Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings A twocomponent painted traffic stripe or pavement marking consists of coat of paint and applications of retroreflective glass beads of gradations .
SECTION MARKINGS The largegradation glass beads must be on the Authorized Material List for twocomponent traffic striping paints and largegradation retroreflective glass beads .
The smallgradation glass beads must comply with AASHTO M Type .
The glass beads must have an adhesionpromoting and waterrepellant coating complying with the paint manufacturers instructions .
You may use alternative types of glass beads recommended by the paint manufacturer if authorized .
The daytime and nighttime color of the painted traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with ASTM D. .G Recessed TwoComponent Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Reserved .H Traffic Stripe and Pavement Marking Tape Reserved .I.M Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Establish the alignment for traffic stripes and the layouts for pavement markings with a device or method that will not conflict with other traffic control devices .
Protect existing retroreflective pavement markers during work activities .
Remove existing pavement markers that are coated or damaged by work activities and replace each with an equivalent marker on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
A completed traffic stripe must .
Have clean welldefined edges without running or deformation .
Be uniform .
Be straight on a tangent alignment and on a true arc on a curved alignment The width of a completed traffic stripe must not deviate from the width shown by more than inch on a tangent alignment and inch on a curved alignment .
The length of the gaps and individual stripes that form a broken traffic stripe must not deviate by more than inches from the lengths shown .
The gaps and stripes must be uniform throughout the entire length of each section of broken traffic stripe so that a normal striping machine can repeat the pattern and superimpose successive coats on the applied traffic stripe .
A completed pavement marking must have welldefined edges without running or deformation .
A completed thermoplastic traffic stripe or thermoplastic pavement marking must be free from runs bubbles craters drag marks stretch marks and debris .
Protect newly placed traffic stripes and pavement markings from traffic and other deleterious activities until the paint is thoroughly dry or the thermoplastic is hard enough to bear traffic .
.B Surface Preparation Use mechanical wire brushing to remove dirt contaminants and loose material from the pavement surface that is to receive the traffic stripe or pavement marking .
Use abrasive blast cleaning to remove laitance and curing compound from the surface of new concrete pavement that is to receive the traffic stripe or pavement marking .
.C Application of Stripes and Markings .C General Apply thermoplastic for a pavement marking with a stencil or a preformed marking .
SECTION MARKINGS Apply paint for a pavement marking by hand with a stencil and spray equipment .
You may use permanent tape for a traffic stripe or a pavement marking instead of paint or thermoplastic .
The permanent tape must be on the Authorized Material List for signing and delineation materials .
Apply the tape under the manufacturers instructions .
Immediately remove drips overspray improper markings paint and thermoplastic tracked by traffic with an authorized method .
Apply a traffic stripe or a pavement marking only to a dry surface during a period of favorable weather when the pavement surface is above degrees F. The glass beads must be embedded in the coat of paint or thermoplastic to a depth of their diameters .
Verify the rate of application of the glass beads by stabbing the glass bead tank with a calibrated rod .
Where a new broken traffic stripe joins an existing broken traffic stripe allow enough overlap distance between the new and existing striping patterns to ensure continuity at the beginning and end of the transition .
.C Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings .Ca General Do not thin the primer .
Apply the primer under the manufacturers instructions .
To asphaltic surfaces over months old and to all concrete surfaces .
Immediately before and concurrently with the application of the thermoplastic .
At the manufacturers instructed rate Use preheaters with mixers having a degree rotation to preheat the thermoplastic material .
Apply the thermoplastic in a single uniform layer by spray or extrusion methods .
Completely coat and fill voids in the pavement surface with the thermoplastic .
.Cb Extruded Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Apply extruded thermoplastic at a temperature from to degrees F unless a different temperature is recommended by the manufacturer .
Apply extruded thermoplastic for a traffic stripe at a rate of at least .
lb of thermoplastic per foot of inchwide solid stripe .
The applied thermoplastic traffic stripe must be at least .
inch thick .
An applied thermoplastic pavement marking must be from .
to .
inch thick .
Apply glass beads to the surface of the molten thermoplastic at a rate of at least lb of beads per sq ft. .Cc Sprayable Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Apply sprayable thermoplastic under State Specification PTHSPRAY at a temperature from to degrees F. Apply sprayable thermoplastic at a rate of at least .
lb of thermoplastic per foot of inchwide solid stripe .
The applied sprayable thermoplastic material must be at least .
inch thick .
.Cd Recessed Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Construct recesses for double traffic stripes in a single pass .
Keep the recesses dry and free from debris .
Apply primer to the recesses .
After constructing the recesses apply the thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings before the end of the same work shift .
SECTION MARKINGS .Ce Thermoplastic Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings with Enhanced WetNight Visibility Use a ribbonextrusion or screedtype applicator to apply thermoplastic traffic stripes with enhanced wet night visibility .
Operate the striping machine at a speed of mph or slower during the application of the stripe and glass beads .
Apply the stripe at a rate of at least .
lb of thermoplastic per foot of inchwide solid stripe .
The applied thermoplastic traffic stripe must be at least .
inch thick .
Apply thermoplastic pavement marking at a rate of at least .
lb of thermoplastic per square foot of marking .
The applied thermoplastic pavement marking must be at least .
inch thick .
Apply thermoplastic traffic stripe and both types of glass beads in a single pass .
First apply the thermoplastic followed immediately by consecutive applications of highperformance glass beads and then AASHTO M Type glass beads .
Use a separate applicator gun for each type of glass bead .
You may apply glass beads by hand on pavement markings .
Uniformly distribute glass beads on traffic stripes and pavement markings .
Apply highperformance glass beads at a rate of at least lb of glass beads per sq ft of stripe or marking .
Apply AASHTO M Type glass beads at a rate of at least lb of glass beads per sq ft of stripe or marking .
The combined weight of the types of glass beads must be greater than lb of glass beads per sq ft of stripe or marking .
.C Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings .Ca General Do not thin paint for traffic stripes and pavement markings .
Mix the paint by mechanical means until it is homogeneous .
Thoroughly agitate the paint during its application .
Use mechanical means to paint traffic stripes and pavement markings and to apply glass beads for traffic stripes .
The striping machine must be capable of superimposing successive coats of paint on the st coat and on existing stripes at a speed of at least mph .
The striping machine must .
Have rubber tires .
Be maneuverable enough to produce straight lines and normal curves in true arcs .
Be capable of applying traffic paint and glass beads at the specified rates .
Be equipped with .. Pointer or sighting device at least feet long extending from the front of the machine .. Pointer or sighting device extending from the side of the machine to determine the distance from the centerline for painting shoulder stripes ..
Positive acting cutoff device to prevent depositing paint in gaps of broken stripes .. Shields or an adjustable air curtain for line control .. Pressure regulators and gauges that are in full view of the operator for a pneumatically operated machine ..
Paint strainer in the paint supply line ..
Paint storage tank with a mechanical agitator that operates continuously during painting activities .. Glass bead dispenser located behind the paint applicator nozzle that is controlled simultaneously with the paint applicator nozzle .. Calibrated rods for measuring the volumes of paint and glass beads in the paint and glass bead tanks Airatomized spray equipment must .
Be equipped with oil and water extractors and pressure regulators .
Have adequate air volume and compressor recovery capacity .
Have properly sized orifices and needle assemblies for the spray gun tip SECTION MARKINGS Where the configuration or location of a traffic stripe is such that the use of a striping machine is not practicable you may apply the traffic paint and glass beads by other methods and equipment if authorized .
The Engineer determines if the striping machine is not practicable for a particular use .
For an existing surface apply traffic stripes and pavement markings in coat .
For a new surface except for the black stripe between the yellow stripes of a double traffic stripe apply traffic stripes and pavement markings in coats .
The st coat of paint must be dry before applying the nd coat .
Paint a coat inchwide black stripe between the two inchwide yellow stripes of a double traffic stripe .
If the two inchwide yellow stripes are applied in coats apply the black stripe concurrently with the nd coat of the yellow stripes .
Apply each coat of paint for any traffic stripe in pass of the striping machine including the glass beads regardless of the number width and pattern of the individual stripes .
Do not paint traffic stripes and pavement markings if .
Freshly painted surfaces could become damaged by rain fog or condensation .
Atmospheric temperature could drop below degrees F for acetonebased paint and degrees F for waterborne paint during the drying period On lane highways .
If the st coat of the centerline stripe is applied in the same direction as increasing post miles use the righthand spray gun of the spray guns used to apply the double yellow stripe to apply a single yellow stripe . .
If the st coat of the centerline stripe is applied in the same direction as decreasing post miles use the lefthand spray gun of the spray guns used to apply the double yellow stripe to apply a single yellow stripe . .
Apply the nd coat of centerline striping in the opposite direction of the st coat .
Apply coat paint at an approximate rate of sq ftgal .
Apply coat paint at the approximate rate shown in the following table TwoCoat Paint Application Rates Coverage sq ftgal Paint type st coat nd coat Waterborne paint Acetonebased paint Apply glass beads at an approximate rate of lb of beads per gallon of paint .
The Engineer determines the exact application rate of the paint and glass beads .
Verify the application rate of paint by stabbing the paint tank with a calibrated rod .
If the striping machine has paint gauges the Engineer may measure the volume of paint using the gauges instead of stabbing the paint tank with a calibrated rod .
.Cb TwoComponent Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Do not apply paint for twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings until authorized .
Apply the paint only to clean completely dry surfaces when the pavement surface temperature is above degrees F and the ambient temperature is above degrees F. Comply with the paint manufacturers instructions for the temperature of the paint during its application .
The striping machine must not travel faster than mph when applying the paint and glass beads .
Apply the paint and glass beads in pass in the following order SECTION MARKINGS .
Paint .
Largegradation glass beads .
Smallgradation glass beads Apply the glass beads with separate applicator guns .
Uniformly distribute the glass beads on traffic stripes and pavement markings .
You may apply the glass beads by hand methods on pavement markings .
Apply the largegradation glass beads at a minimum rate of .
lb of beads per gallon of paint .
Apply the smallgradation glass beads at a minimum rate of .
lb of beads per gallon of paint .
.Cc Recessed TwoComponent Painted Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Reserved .C Reserved Reserved .C.C Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for a traffic stripe is the length measured along the line of the traffic stripe without deductions for gaps in the broken traffic stripe .
The payment quantity for a pavement marking is the area covered .
A double extruded thermoplastic traffic stripe consisting of two inchwide yellow stripes is measured as traffic stripes .
A double sprayable thermoplastic traffic stripe consisting of two inchwide yellow stripes is measured as traffic stripe .
A double traffic stripe consisting of two inchwide yellow stripes separated by a inchwide black stripe is measured as a single traffic stripe .
CONTRAST TREATMENT ..
RESERVED RESERVED RUMBLE STRIPS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for constructing rumble strips .
.B Definitions rumble strip Band of raised material or indentations formed or grooved in the traveled way on the centerline or shoulders that is used to alert or warn drivers .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Do not construct shoulder rumble strips on structures or approach slabs .
SECTION MARKINGS Construct rumble strips within inches of the alignment shown .
Rumble strip equipment must be equipped with a sighting device that enables the operator to maintain the rumble strip alignment .
Indentations must not vary from the dimensions shown by more than inch in depth or more than percent in length and width .
Grind or remove and replace noncompliant rumble strip indentations at locations determined by the Engineer .
Ground surface areas must be neat and uniform in appearance .
Grinding equipment must be equipped with a vacuum attachment to remove residue from the roadbed .
.B Rumble Strips in Concrete Pavement Construct rumble strips by grinding indentations in new concrete pavement .
Concrete pavement must be hardened before grinding the indentations .
Do not construct indentations until days after concrete placement and the concrete has developed a modulus of rupture of psi when tested under California Test .
.C Rumble Strips in Asphalt Concrete Pavement Construct rumble strips in the top layer of asphalt concrete by grinding indentations in the pavement .
Select the method and equipment for constructing groundin indentations .
On ground areas apply a fog seal coat under section . . PAYMENT The payment quantity for any type of rumble strip is the length measured by the station rumble strip without deductions for gaps between indentations .
EXISTING MARKINGS .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for removing existing markings .
Work performed on existing markings must comply with section . . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Remove Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Remove traffic stripes before making any change to the traffic pattern .
Remove traffic stripes and pavement markings including paint in the gaps by methods that do not materially damage the pavement .
Remove a pavement marking such that the old message can not be identified .
If removing by grinding make the grinding area rectangular .
The minimum dimensions for the rectangular area are the height and width of the pavement marking .
Sweep up or vacuum any residue before it can be blown by traffic or wind migrate across lanes or shoulders or enter a drainage facility .
.C Remove Traffic Stripes and Pavement Markings Containing Lead Reserved .D Remove Contrast Treatment If contrast treatment is shown to be removed remove it by a method that does not materially damage the pavement .
Sweep up or vacuum any residue before it can be blown by traffic or wind migrate across lanes or shoulders or enter a drainage facility .
SECTION MARKINGS .E.J Reserved .
PAYMENT The payment quantity for remove traffic stripe is the measured length multiplied by .
for a single inchwide traffic stripe .
for a single inchwide traffic stripe .
for a double traffic stripe .
for a triple traffic stripe The payment quantity for remove traffic stripe does not include the gaps in broken traffic stripes .
Payment for removal of paint evident in a gap is included in the payment for remove traffic stripe of the type involved .
If no bid item is shown on the Bid Item List for remove pavement marking remove pavement marking is paid for as remove traffic stripe of the types shown in the Bid Item List and the payment quantity for square foot of pavement marking is linear feet .
RESERVED RESERVED DIVISION X ELECTRICAL WORK RESERVED DIVISION XI MATERIALS AGGREGATE GENERAL .
GENERAL Section includes general specifications for furnishing aggregate. . MATERIALS Not Used .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED CONCRETE GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for furnishing curing and protecting concrete .
Concrete must be composed of cementitious material fine aggregate coarse aggregate admixtures if used and water .
PCC must comply with the specifications for concrete .
.B Definitions free water Total water in the concrete mixture minus the water absorbed by the aggregates in reaching a saturated surfacedry condition .
reclaimed aggregate Aggregate that has been recovered from plastic concrete by washing away the cementitious material .
.C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Aggregate Gradation Before starting concrete work submit the gradation of the primary aggregate nominal sizes .
If the aggregate source changes submit the new gradation before using the aggregate .
If a primary coarse aggregate or the fine aggregate is separated into or more sizes submit the gradation and proposed proportions of each size combined mathematically to show proposed gradation .
Show the percentage passing for each applicable sieve size .
.C Cementitious Materials Submit a certificate of compliance for cementitious materials .
Include the source name and location .
If the cementitious material is delivered directly to the job site the certificate of compliance must be signed by the cementitious material supplier .
If the cementitious material is used in readymixed concrete the certificate of compliance must be signed by the concrete manufacturer .
If blended cement is used the certificate of compliance must include a statement signed by the blended cement supplier that shows the actual percentage of SCM by weight in the blend .
Determine the weight of SCM by using a weighing device or by chemical analysis .
.C Admixtures If you propose to use an admixture from the Authorized Material List for chemical admixture for use in concrete submit a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer certifying that the admixture furnished is the same as that previously authorized .
.C Curing Compound For each batch of curing compound delivered to the job site or casting site submit .
Split curing compound test samples to METS .
The test samples must be from the shipping containers at the manufacturers source of supply . .
Certificate of compliance to the Engineer and to METS .
The certificate of compliance must include .. Test results for the tests specified in section .D .
.. Certification that the material was tested within year before use .
If the curing compound is shipped in tanks or tank trucks submit a shipping invoice with each load .
The invoice must show the same information specified for container labels in section .Bb .
SECTION CONCRETE .C Mix Design Submit the concrete mix design before using the concrete in the work and before changing the mix proportions or an aggregate source .
.C Concrete Delivery Submit a weighmaster certificate as an informational submittal with each load of concrete delivered to the job site .
The weighmaster certificate must show .
Mix identification number. . Nonrepeating load number . .
Date and time the materials were batched. . Total quantity of water added to the load. . For transitmixed concrete the revolution counter reading at the time the truck mixer is charged with cement. . Actual scale weights in pounds for the ingredients batched .
Do not substitute theoretical or target batch weights for actual scale weights .
Submit weighmaster certificates in printed form or if authorized in electronic media .
Present electronic media in a tabdelimited format on a CD or DVD .
Captured data for the ingredients represented by each batch must be a linefeed carriagereturn and one line separated record with sufficient fields for the specified data .
You may submit a weighmaster certificate with a separate certificate that lists the actual batch weights or measurements for a load of concrete if both certificates are delivered to the job site and are imprinted with the same nonrepeating load number that is unique to the Contract .
.C Testing If the concrete is tested for shrinkage submit the test data with the mix design .
If prequalification is specified submit certified test data or trial batch test reports under section .Db .
If days are allowed for the concrete to attain the strength described submit test results under section .Da .
.C Stationary Mixer Certification If you weigh the SCM cumulatively with the cement for concrete completely mixed in a stationary mixer submit certification of the stationary mixer under section .Fc .
.C Protecting Concrete If requested submit a plan for protecting the concrete .
.D Quality Assurance .D General If requested furnish test samples of the freshly mixed concrete and provide satisfactory facilities for obtaining the test samples .
.D Cementitious Material Content Adjust the batch proportions as necessary to produce concrete having the specified cementitious material content .
The Engineer verifies compliance with the specified cementitious material content by testing under California Test for cement content .
For testing purposes SCM is considered to be cement .
For all concrete except minor concrete if the cementitious material portland cement or SCM content is less than the minimum required and is not within the batching tolerances allowed under section .F you must remove the concrete .
If the Engineer determines that the concrete is structurally adequate the concrete may remain in place and .
is deducted for each pound of cementitious SECTION CONCRETE material portland cement or SCM less than the minimum required .
No deductions are made based on the results of California Test .
.D Shrinkage If shrinkage limitations are specified test the concrete under AASHTO T modified as follows .
Prepare specimens that have a by inch cross section . .
Remove each specimen from the mold hours after mixing the concrete and place the specimen in lime water at degrees F until days age. . Take a comparator reading at days age and record it as the initial reading. . Store the specimens in a humiditycontrolled room maintained at degrees F and percent relative humidity for the remainder of the test. . Take subsequent readings at and days drying .
Perform AASHTO T testing at a laboratory that is accredited to perform AASHTO T or that maintains a current rating of or better for the Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory concrete proficiency sample program .
Shrinkage test data authorized by the Department no more than years before the st day of the Contract is authorized for the entire Contract .
The test data must be for concrete with similar proportions and using the same materials and material sources to be used on the Contract .
Concrete is considered to have similar proportions if no more than mix design elements are varied and the variation is within the tolerances shown in the following table Mix design element Tolerance Water to cementitious material ratio .
Total water content Coarse aggregate content Fine aggregate content SCM content Admixture as originally doseda aAdmixtures must be the same brand .
.D Concrete Uniformity The Engineer determines the uniformity of concrete mixtures based on differences in test results between test samples of mixed concrete from the same batch for the following tests .
California Test if the mix design specifies a penetration value .
ASTM C if the mix design specifies a slump value .
California Test .D Compressive Strength .Da General Section .D applies for either of the following cases .
Concrete is designated by compressive strength . .
Attaining a minimum concrete compressive strength is specified as a prerequisite to applying loads or stresses to a concrete structure or member .
If the day compressive strength described is psi or greater the concrete is designated by compressive strength .
If the concrete is designated by compressive strength the strength of concrete that is not steam cured is determined from cylinders cured under Method of California Test .
If attaining a minimum concrete compressive strength is specified as a prerequisite to applying loads or stresses to a concrete structure or member cylinders for concrete that is not steam cured are cured under Method of California Test and the concrete compressive strength is evaluated based on individual tests .
SECTION CONCRETE For concrete with a described day compressive strength greater than psi days are allowed to attain the strength described .
Except for concrete specified to be in a freezethaw area days are allowed to attain the strength described if the cementitious material satisfies the following equation x UF x F x SLTC .
where F natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
F is equivalent to the sum of FA and FB as defined in section .B .
SL GGBFS including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd UF silica fume metakaolin or UFFA including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd TC total quantity of cementitious material used lbcu yd For concrete satisfying the equation above test for the compressive strength at least once every cu yd at and days .
Submit the test results to the Engineer and to METS Attention Office of Structural Materials Concrete Materials Testing Branch .
The Engineer determines the concrete compressive strength from test cylinders .
Made from concrete sampled under California Test .
Molded and initially field cured under California Test .
Cured and tested under California Test A compressive strength test represents no more than cu yd of concrete and consists of the average compressive strength of cylinders made from material taken from a single load of concrete .
If a cylinder shows evidence of improper sampling molding or testing the cylinder is discarded and the test consists of the compressive strength of the remaining cylinder .
If a single compressive strength test result is below the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed or if the compressive strength of concrete tested at days indicates to the Engineer that the concrete will not attain the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed correct the mix design or concrete fabrication procedures and obtain authorization before you place additional concrete .
If a single compressive strength test result is below the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed the concrete represented by the test is subject to one of the following actions .
If the compressive strength is at least percent of the strength described per cubic yard of concrete is deducted . .
If the compressive strength is below percent of the strength described but is at least percent of the strength described per cubic yard of concrete is deducted . .
If the compressive strength is below percent of the strength described you must remove the concrete .
If a strength test result at the maximum age specified or allowed is below the strength described but is at least percent of the strength described the deductions specified above apply unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is greater than or equal to the strength described and this evidence is accepted by the Engineer .
If a strength test result at the maximum age specified or allowed is below percent of the strength described you must remove the concrete represented by the test unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is at least percent of the strength described and this evidence is accepted by the Engineer .
If the evidence consists of tests made on cores taken from the work obtain and test the cores under ASTM C. SECTION CONCRETE .Db Prequalification If the concrete has a described day compressive strength greater than psi or if prequalification is specified prequalify the materials mix proportions mixing equipment and procedures proposed for use in the work before placing the concrete .
Submit certified test data or trial batch test reports based on the same materials mix proportions mixing equipment procedures and batch size proposed for use in the work .
Certified test data must show that .
Results of percent or more of at least consecutive tests exceed the compressive strength described at the maximum number of days specified or allowed and none of the test results are less than percent of the strength described .
All tests are the most recent tests made on concrete of the proposed mix design and were made within year of the proposed use of the concrete Trial batch test reports must show that .
Average compressive strength for consecutive concrete cylinders taken from a single batch and tested at not more than the maximum age specified or allowed is at least psi greater than the day compressive strength described .
No individual cylinder has a strength less than the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed .
Data contained in the report is from trial batches produced within year of the proposed use of the concrete If air entrainment is specified the air content of the trial batches must be greater than or equal to the air content specified for the concrete without reduction due to tolerances .
Perform tests under the appropriate California Test methods or comparable ASTM test methods .
Use testing equipment that is in good condition and properly calibrated .
If tests are performed during the Contract notify the Engineer in advance so that the Engineer can witness the test procedures .
Certified test data and trial batch reports must include .
Date of mixing .
Mixing equipment and procedures .
Batch size in cubic yards .
Weight type and source for each ingredient .
Penetration or slump as specified in section .G Air content if an airentraining admixture is used .
Concrete age at the time of testing .
Compressive strength for each cylinder tested .
Signature of an official of the testing firm If authorized you may use the concrete from trial batches in the work at locations where lower quality concrete is required .
Any change to the prequalified materials mix proportions mixing equipment or procedures that could result in a concrete strength below that described requires additional prequalification by trial batch testing .
.D Curing Compound Test each batch of curing compound delivered to the job site or casting site for .
Water loss at hours under California Test .
Reflectance under ASTM E . Viscosity under ASTM D . Nonvolatile content under ASTM D . Pigment content under ASTM D A batch must be no larger than gal .
SECTION CONCRETE The Engineer samples the curing compound at any of the following .
Manufacturers supply source .
Job site or casting site The curing compound sampled from shipping containers from the manufacturers supply source or from the job site must match the test results for viscosity nonvolatile content and pigment content within the tolerances specified in the precision and bias statements for the test methods .
Additional testing of the curing compound may be required before its use if the compound has not been used within year or if the Engineer believes that the compound may no longer be acceptable. . MATERIALS .A General Concrete for pavement approach slabs and bridge decks must comply with the shrinkage limitations shown in the following table when tested under section .D Type of work Maximum length change of laboratory cast specimens at days drying average of percent Paving and approach slab concrete .
Bridge deck concrete .
When tested for uniformity under section .D the differences in test results between the concrete test samples must comply with the following .
When tested under California Test the difference in penetration values must not exceed inch . .
When tested under ASTM C the difference in slump values must not exceed the values shown in the following table Average slump S in Maximum permissible difference in S S S . When tested under California Test the difference in the proportion of coarse aggregate must not exceed pounds of aggregate per cubic yard of concrete .
Unless a modulus of rupture is specified the minimum required compressive strength for concrete must be the greater of either the strength described or psi .
Proportion the concrete to attain the minimum required compressive strength .
For concrete not designated by compressive strength the concrete must attain at least percent of the minimum required compressive strength when tested at days .
.B Cementitious Materials .B General The cementitious materials type and brand must be on the Authorized Material List for cementitious material for use in concrete when the mix design is submitted .
Unless otherwise specified the cementitious material must be one of the following .
Combination of Type II or V portland cement and SCM .
Blended cement The cementitious materials used in CIP concrete for exposed surfaces of similar elements of a structure must be from the same sources and of the same proportions .
SECTION CONCRETE Protect cementitious materials from moisture until used .
Place sacked cementitious materials in a pile to allow access for tallying inspecting and identifying each shipment .
Provide facilities that ensure the cementitious materials to be used in the work are kept separate from each other and from other cementitious materials .
A storage silo containing a cementitious material must be emptied before using the silo for a different cementitious material .
Blended cements with a percentage of SCM differing by more than percent are considered different cementitious materials .
Sample cementitious materials under California Test .
.B Cement Portland cement must comply with ASTM C except the CS content of Type II cement must not exceed percent .
Blended cement must comply with portland blastfurnace slag cement Type IS MS or portland pozzolan cement Type IP MS specified in AASHTO M except .
Maximum limits on pozzolan content do not apply .
Blended cement must be composed of Type II or V cement and SCM produced by one of the following methods .. Intergrinding of portland cement clinker and granulated blast furnace slag GGBFS or pozzolan .. Blending of portland cement and either GGBFS or finely divided pozzolan ..
Combination of intergrinding and blending Types II III and V portland cement must comply with the following .
Alkali content must not exceed .
percent by mass of alkalies as NaO .
KO when determined under AASHTO T . . Autoclave expansion must not exceed .
percent .
Type III portland cement may be used only if specified or authorized .
.B Supplementary Cementitious Materials Each SCM must be one of the following .
Fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F and either of the following ..
Available alkali as NaO .
KO must not exceed .
percent when tested under ASTM C. .. Total alkali as NaO .
KO must not exceed .
percent when tested under AASHTO T . . UFFA complying with AASHTO M Class F and the chemical and physical requirements shown in the following tables Chemical quality characteristic Requirement percent Sulfur trioxide SO max .
Loss on ignition max .
Available alkalies as NaO .
KO max .
SECTION CONCRETE Physical quality characteristic Requirement percent Particle size distribution Less than .
microns min Less than .
microns min Strength activity index with portland cement days of control min days t of control min Expansion at days when testing project materials under ASTM Ca max .
aIn the test mix at least percent by weight of the Type II or V portland cement must be replaced with UFFA . .
Raw or calcined natural pozzolans complying with AASHTO M Class N and either of the following ..
Available alkali as NaO .
KO must not exceed .
percent when tested under ASTM C. .. Total alkali as NaO .
KO must not exceed .
percent when tested under AASHTO T . . Metakaolin complying with AASHTO M Class N and the chemical and physical requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following tables Chemical quality characteristic Requirement percent Silicon dioxide SiO aluminum oxide AlO min .
Calcium oxide CaO max .
Sulfur trioxide SO max .
Loss on ignition max .
Available alkalies as NaO .
KO max .
Physical quality characteristic Requirement percent Particle size distribution less than microns min Strength activity index with portland cement days of control min days of control min .
GGBFS complying with AASHTO M Grade or . . Silica fume complying with AASHTO M with a minimum reduction in mortar expansion of percent when using the cement from the proposed mix design .
Fly ash from different sources may be commingled at uncontrolled ratios if .
Each source produces fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F . At the time of commingling each fly ash has .. Running average of relative density that does not differ from any other fly ash by more than .
.. Running average of loss on ignition that does not differ from any other fly ash by more than percent .
Final commingled fly ash complies with AASHTO M Class F . Fly ash supplier is responsible for testing the commingled fly ash The quantity of portland cement and SCM in concrete must comply with the minimum cementitious material content specified .
The SCM content in concrete must comply with one of the following SECTION CONCRETE .
Any combination of portland cement and at least SCM satisfying equations and Equation x UF x FA x FB x SLMC X where UF silica fume metakaolin or UFFA including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd FA natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N with a CaO content of up to percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd FB natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N with a CaO content of greater than percent and up to percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd SL GGBFS including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd MC minimum quantity of cementitious material specified lbcu yd X . for innocuous aggregate .
for all other aggregate Equation MC MSCM PC where MC minimum quantity of cementitious material specified lbcu yd MSCM minimum sum of SCMs that satisfies equation lbcu yd PC quantity of portland cement including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
percent Class F fly ash with at least oz of LiNO solution added per lb of portland cement .
The CaO content of the fly ash must not exceed percent .
.C Aggregates .C General Both the coarse and fine aggregate must be on the Authorized Material List for the aggregate used in concrete to be considered innocuous .
Aggregates must be free from deleterious coatings clay balls roots bark sticks rags and other extraneous material .
Provide safe and suitable facilities including splitting devices for obtaining aggregate test samples under California Test .
Aggregates must have .
Characteristics that enable the production of workable concrete within the limits of water content specified in section .G. . No more than percent loss when tested for soundness under California Test .
The soundness requirement does not apply to fine aggregate if the durability index of the fine aggregate is or greater when tested under California Test .
Each cleanness value sand equivalent or aggregate gradation test represents no more than cu yd of concrete or days pour whichever is smaller .
If the results of any or more of the cleanness value sand equivalent or aggregate gradation tests do not comply with the requirements for operating range but all comply with the requirements for contract compliance .
Suspend the concrete placement at the completion of the current pour .
Do not restart the concrete placement until test results or other information show that the next material to be used in the work complies with the requirements for operating range SECTION CONCRETE If the results of either or both of the cleanness value and coarse aggregate gradation tests do not comply with the requirements for contract compliance you must remove the concrete represented by the tests .
If the Engineer determines that the concrete is structurally adequate the concrete may remain in place and .
per cubic yard for paving concrete and .
per cubic yard for other concrete is deducted for the concrete represented by these tests and left in place .
If the results of either or both of the sand equivalent and fine aggregate gradation tests do not comply with the requirements for contract compliance you must remove the concrete represented by the tests .
If the Engineer determines that the concrete is structurally adequate the concrete may remain in place and .
per cubic yard for paving concrete and .
per cubic yard for other concrete is deducted for the concrete represented by these tests and left in place .
The preceding paragraphs apply individually to the contract compliance requirements for coarse and fine aggregate .
If both coarse and fine aggregate do not comply with the contract compliance requirements both paragraphs apply .
The deductions specified in those paragraphs are in addition to any deductions made under section .D .
.C Coarse Aggregate Coarse aggregate must consist of gravel crushed gravel crushed rock reclaimed aggregate crushed aircooled iron blast furnace slag or a combination of these .
Do not use crushed aircooled iron blast furnace slag in reinforced or PS concrete .
Reclaimed aggregate must comply with the specifications for aggregate .
Coarse aggregate must have the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Loss in Los Angeles rattler after revolutions max California Test Cleanness value Operating range min California Test Contract compliance min California Test For cleanness value an operating range limit of minimum and a contract compliance limit of minimum apply if you submit a certificate of compliance certifying that .
Coarse aggregate sampled at the completion of processing at the aggregate production plant had a cleanness value of at least when tested under California Test .
Prequalification tests performed under California Test showed that the aggregate would develop a relative strength of at least percent and have a relative shrinkage of no more than percent based on concrete .C Fine Aggregate Fine aggregate must consist of natural sand manufactured sand produced from larger aggregate or a combination of these .
Manufactured sand must be well graded .
Fine aggregate must have the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Organic impurities California Test Satisfactorya Sand equivalent Operating range min California Test Contract compliance min California Test aFine aggregate that develops a color darker than the reference standard color may be authorized if percent relative mortar strength is achieved when tested under ASTM C. For sand equivalent an operating range limit of minimum and a contract compliance limit of minimum apply if you submit a certificate of compliance certifying that SECTION CONCRETE Fine aggregate sampled at the completion of processing at the aggregate production plant had a sand equivalent value of at least when tested under California Test .
Prequalification tests performed under California Test showed that the aggregate would develop a relative strength of at least percent and have a relative shrinkage of no more than percent based on concrete .C Aggregate Gradation .Ca General Proposed aggregate gradations must be within the percentage passing limits shown in the following table Primary aggregate nominal size Sieve size Limits of gradation passing x inch in inch x No .
in inch x No .
in inch x No .
in inch x No .
in Fine aggregate No .
Fine aggregate No .
Fine aggregate No .
The Engineer may waive in writing the specifications for gradation if in the Engineers opinion furnishing the gradation is not necessary for the work .
.Cb Coarse Aggregate Gradation Coarse aggregate must be graded within the limits shown in the following table for each size of coarse aggregate Sieve size Primary aggregate nominal sizes x inch inch x No .
inch x No .
inch x No .
Operating Contract Operating Contract Operating Contract Operating Contract Range passing Compliance passing Range passing Compliance passing Range passing Compliance passing Range passing Compliance passing inch inch inch X X inch X X inch inch X X X X X X No .
No .
NOTE X is the percent passing of the gradation that you propose to furnish for the specific sieve size under section .Ca .
Furnish coarse aggregate for the inch maximum combined aggregate gradation under section .Cd in or more primary aggregate nominal sizes .
You may separate each primary aggregate nominal size into sizes and store them separately provided that the combined material complies with the gradation specifications for the primary aggregate nominal size .
You may separate the coarse aggregate for the inch maximum combined aggregate gradation under section .Cd into sizes and store them separately provided that the combined material complies with the gradation specifications for the inch x No .
primary aggregate nominal size .
SECTION CONCRETE .Cc Fine Aggregate Gradation Fine aggregate must be graded within the limits shown in the following table Sieve size Operating range passing Contract compliance passing inch No .
No .
No .
X X No .
X X No .
X X No .
No .
NOTE X is the percent passing of the gradation that you propose to furnish for the specific sieve size under section .Ca .
Fine aggregate sizes must be distributed such that the difference between the total percentage passing the No .
and No .
sieves is from to and the difference between the percentage passing the No .
and No .
sieves is from to .
You may separate fine aggregate into or more sizes and store them separately provided that the combined material complies with the gradation specifications .
.Cd Combined Aggregate Gradation Use combined aggregate gradation limits only for the design of concrete mixes .
Design concrete mixes such that aggregates are combined in proportions that produce a mixture within the gradation limits for combined aggregate .
Use either the inch maximum gradation or the inch maximum gradation unless otherwise specified .
Combined aggregate must be graded within the limits shown in the following table Sieve size inch max passing inch max passing inch max passing inch max passing inch inch inch inch inch inch No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
Do not change from one aggregate gradation to another during the progress of the work .
.D Water Water for washing aggregates mixing concrete and curing must not contain .
Oil .
Impurities at concentrations that cause either of the following results when compared to the same test using distilled or deionized water .. Change of more than percent in the setting time of cement when tested under ASTM C or ASTM C SECTION CONCRETE ..
Reduction by more than percent in the mortar compressive strength at days when tested under ASTM C . Chlorides as Cl or sulfates as SO in excess of the values shown in the following table Type of concrete work Quality characteristic Nonreinforced Reinforced PS Chloride as Cla ppm max Sulfate as SOb ppm max aWhen tested under California Test bWhen tested under California Test Water for curing concrete must not contain impurities at concentrations that cause discoloration or surface etching .
Water reclaimed from washing out the mixer may be used in mixing concrete .
The water must not contain coloring agents or more than ppm of alkalis as NaO .
KO as determined on the filtrate .
The specific gravity of the water must not exceed .
and must not vary more than .
during a days activities .
.E Admixtures .E General The admixture type and brand must be on the Authorized Material List at the time of mix design submittal .
Admixtures must comply with the following .
Chemical admixtures must comply with ASTM C . Airentraining admixtures must comply with ASTM C . Lithium nitrate must be in an aqueous solution that complies with the following .. Lithium nitrate as LiNO must be .
percent by weight .. Sulfate as SO must be less than ppm .. Chloride as Cl must be less than ppm .. Alkalis as NaO .
KO must be less than ppm Chemical or airentraining admixtures must not contain more than percent chlorides as Cl by weight of admixture when tested under California Test .
Store and dispense the admixtures in liquid form .
Admixture properties must be uniform throughout their use in the work .
If more than admixture is used the admixtures must be compatible with each other such that the desirable effects of all the admixtures used are realized .
Use chemical admixtures in compliance with the manufacturers written instructions .
The instructions must include a statement that the admixture is compatible with the types and quantities of SCM used .
If you are ordered to use admixtures in the concrete that are not specified furnishing the admixtures and adding them to the concrete is change order work .
.E Chemical Admixtures If the use of chemical admixtures is specified use the dosage specified .
If the dosage is not specified use the dosage recommended by the admixture manufacturer .
You may use any of the following admixture types to conserve cementitious material or to facilitate construction .
Type A or F waterreducing .
Type B retarding .
Type D or G waterreducing and retarding SECTION CONCRETE If you use a waterreducing admixture or a waterreducing and retarding admixture you may reduce the specified cementitious material content by up to percent by weight .
The resulting concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
If you reduce the cementitious material content use at least the admixture dosage used in authorizing the admixture as shown on the Authorized Material List for chemical admixture for use in concrete .
You may use a Type S admixture .
You may use a Type C accelerating admixture .
Inclusion of the Type C admixture in the mix design is not required if it is added to counteract changing conditions that contribute to delayed setting of the concrete and if the use or change in dosage of the admixture is authorized .
.E AirEntraining Admixtures If air entrainment is specified or ordered use the quantity of airentraining admixture that produces concrete having the specified air content when tested under California Test .
If air entrainment is not specified or ordered you may use an airentraining admixture to facilitate the use of a construction procedure or equipment .
The average air content of successive tests must not exceed percent and each test value must be no more than .
percent when tested under California Test .
.F Proportioning Concrete .F General Reserved .F Storage of Aggregates Store or stockpile aggregates such that the coarse and fine particles of each size do not separate and various sizes do not intermix before proportioning .
Prevent contamination by foreign materials while storing stockpiling and handling aggregates .
If you store the aggregates at a batching or mixing plant that is erected after the Contract is awarded and is used for furnishing concrete for the work .
Prevent intermingling of different aggregate sizes by using measures such as the physical separation of stockpiles or the construction of bulkheads of adequate length and height .
Prevent contamination of the aggregates by contact with the ground through measures such as placing the aggregates on wooden platforms or on hardened surfaces made of concrete asphalt concrete or cementtreated material When placing the aggregates in storage or moving the aggregates from storage to the weigh hopper of the batching plant do not use methods that cause either of the following .
Segregation degradation or the combining of materials of different gradations and result in an aggregate size failing to comply with the gradation specifications at the weigh hopper .
Excessive particle breakage You may be required to use devices that reduce the impact of falling aggregates .
.F Proportioning Devices Automatic weighing systems must comply with section .Fc .
For an automatic device the single operation of a switch or starter must be the only manual operation required to proportion the aggregates cement and SCM for batch of concrete .
Insulate the weighing equipment against the vibration or movement of other plant equipment .
The weight of each batch of material must not vary from the weight designated by the Engineer by more than the specified tolerances .
The weighing and measuring equipment must have the following zero tolerances .
For cumulative weighing of aggregates .
percent of the designated total aggregate batch weight SECTION CONCRETE .
For weighing each aggregate size separately .
percent of the designated batch weight for each aggregate size .
For cumulative weighing of cement and SCM .
percent of the designated total batch weight of the cement and SCM .
For weighing cement and SCM separately .
percent of their designated individual batch weights .
For measuring water .
percent of its designated weight or volume The weight indicated for a batch of material must not vary from the preselected scale setting by more than the following .
Aggregates weighed cumulatively must be within .
percent of the designated total aggregate batch weight . .
Aggregates weighed separately must be within .
percent of the designated batch weight of each aggregate. . Cement weighed separately must be within to percent of the designated cement batch weight. . SCM weighed separately must be within to percent of the designated SCM batch weight. . For cement and SCM weighed cumulatively the cement must be within to percent of the designated cement batch weight and the total for cement and SCM must be within to percent of the sum of the designated cement and SCM batch weights. . Water must be within .
percent of the designated weight or volume of water .
Each scale graduation must be no more than .
of the total scale capacity .
For each material being weighed use a scale with single graduations that indicate a weight not exceeding the maximum permissible weight variation above except that graduations less than lb are not required .
.F Proportioning .Fa General Proportioning consists of dividing the aggregates into the specified sizes each stored in a separate bin and combining the aggregates with cementitious material admixtures if used and water .
Proportion the aggregates by weight .
At the time of batching .
Aggregates must be dried and drained to a stable moisture content such that no visible separation of water from the aggregate occurs during transportation from the proportioning plant to the point of mixing .
Free moisture content of the fine aggregate must not exceed percent of its saturated surfacedry weight If the proportioning plant has separate supplies of the same size group of aggregate with different moisture content specific gravity or surface characteristics affecting workability exhaust one supply before using another supply .
Weigh bulk Type IP MS or Type IS MS cement in an individual hopper and keep it separate from the aggregates until the ingredients are released for discharge into the mixer .
Bulk cement and SCM may be weighed in separate weigh hoppers or in the same weigh hopper .
Keep the cement and SCM separate from the aggregates until the ingredients are released for discharge into the mixer .
If the cement and SCM are weighed in the same weigh hopper weigh the cement first .
If the cement and SCM are weighed in separate weigh hoppers the weigh systems for the proportioning of the aggregate the cement and the SCM must be individual and distinct from all other weigh systems .
To constitute an individual and distinct materialweighing device each weigh system must have a hopper a lever system and an indicator .
Discharge the cement and the SCM into the mixer simultaneously with the aggregate .
The scales and weigh hoppers for bulk weighing cement SCM or cement plus SCM must be separate and distinct from the aggregate weighing equipment .
SECTION CONCRETE For batches of cu yd or more the batching equipment must comply with one of the following combinations .
Separate boxes and separate scale and indicator for weighing each aggregate size .
Single box and scale indicator for all aggregates .
Single box or separate boxes and automatic weighing mechanism for all aggregates If you are requested to check the accuracy of batch weights determine the gross weight and tare weight of batch trucks truck mixers truck agitators and nonagitating hauling equipment .
Weigh the equipment using scales designated by the Engineer .
For proportioning pavement concrete install and maintain in good operating condition an electronically actuated moisture meter that indicates on a readily visible scale changes in the moisture content of the fine aggregate as it is batched within a sensitivity of .
percent by weight of the fine aggregate .
.Fb Proportioning and Dispensing Liquid Admixtures Liquid admixture dispensers must .
Have enough capacity to measure at time the total quantity of admixture required for each batch of concrete .
Include a graduated measuring unit that is accurate to within percent of the required quantity for each batch of concrete .
Be located and maintained such that the graduations can be read accurately from the point at which proportioning is controlled to allow a visual check of batching accuracy before discharge .
Have measuring units that are clearly marked for the type and quantity of admixture Each liquid admixture dispensing system must be equipped with a sampling device that consists of a valve located in a safe and readily accessible position such that the Engineer can slowly withdraw a test sample .
If more than liquid admixture is used in the concrete mix each admixture must have a separate measuring unit and must be dispensed by injecting equipment located such that the admixtures are not mixed at high concentrations and do not interfere with the effectiveness of each other .
If an airentraining admixture is used with other liquid admixtures incorporate the airentraining admixture into the mix first unless you demonstrate that a different sequence improves performance .
If automatic proportioning devices are used the liquid admixture dispensers must operate automatically with the batching control equipment .
The dispensers must have an automatic warning system in good operating condition that provides a visible or audible signal at the point at which proportioning is controlled .
The signal must activate if the quantity of admixture measured varies from the preselected dosage by more than percent or if the entire contents of the measuring unit are not emptied from the dispenser .
Add liquid admixtures to the premeasured batch water or discharge the admixtures into the stream of water such that they are welldispersed throughout the batch .
You may dispense airentraining admixtures directly into moist sand in the batching bins if you maintain adequate control of the concrete air content .
.Fc Automatic Proportioning Automatic proportioning devices must be authorized by the Department .
The batching of the aggregate and the cement SCM or cement plus SCM must be interlocked such that a new batch can not start until all weigh hoppers are empty the proportioning devices are within zero tolerance and the discharge gates are closed .
The interlock must not allow any part of the batch to be discharged until all aggregate hoppers and the cement and SCM hoppers or the cement plus SCM hopper are charged with weights that are within the tolerances specified in section .F .
SECTION CONCRETE If interlocks are required for the cement and SCM charging mechanisms and the cement and SCM are weighed cumulatively their charging mechanisms must be interlocked to prevent the introduction of SCM until the weight of cement in the cement weigh hopper is within the tolerances specified in section .F .
If the concrete is mixed completely in a stationary mixer weigh the SCM in a separate weigh hopper and introduce the SCM and cement simultaneously into the mixer proportionately with the aggregate .
If you submit certification that the stationary mixer is capable of mixing the cement SCM aggregates and water uniformly before discharge you may weigh the SCM cumulatively with the cement .
Certification must include .
Test results for compressive strength test cylinders taken within the first and compressive strength test cylinders taken within the last of a single batch of concrete discharged from the stationary mixer .
Strength tests and cylinder preparation must comply with section .D . .
Calculations demonstrating that the average of the compressive strengths taken within the first of the batch do not differ by more than .
percent from the average of the compressive strengths taken within the last of the batch. . Mixer rotation speed and time of mixing before discharge that are required to produce a mix that complies with the above requirements .
The discharge gate on the cement and SCM hoppers or the cement plus SCM hopper must be designed to allow the regulation of the flow of cement SCM or cement plus SCM into the aggregate .
If separate weigh boxes are used for each aggregate size the discharge gates must allow the regulation of the flow of each aggregate size .
Material discharged from each bin must be controlled by gates or by mechanical conveyors .
The means of withdrawal from the bins and of discharge from the weigh box must be interlocked such that not more than bin can discharge at a time and the weigh box can not be tripped until the required quantity from each bin has been deposited into it .
If a separate weigh box is used for each aggregate size all the weigh boxes may be operated and discharged simultaneously .
If the discharge from the bins is controlled by gates each gate must be actuated automatically such that the required weight is discharged into the weigh box after which the gate must automatically close and lock .
The automatic weighing system must be designed to allow all required proportions to be set on the weighing controller at the same time .
.G Mixing and Transporting Concrete .G General Mix the concrete in a mechanically operated mixer except if authorized you may mix batches not exceeding cu yd by hand methods under section .G .
Do not use equipment with components made of aluminum or magnesium alloys that could have contact with plastic concrete during mixing transporting or pumping .
Concrete must be thoroughly mixed homogeneous and free of lumps or evidence of undispersed cementitious material .
.G Machine Mixing Concrete mixers must be the revolving drum or revolving blade type .
Operate the mixing drum or blades uniformly at the mixing speed recommended by the manufacturer .
Do not use a mixer or agitator that has an accumulation of hard concrete or mortar .
Immediately before placing the concrete the temperature of the mixed concrete must be from to degrees F. Cool or heat the aggregates and mixing water as necessary to produce concrete within these temperature limits .
Do not heat the aggregates or water above degrees F. Any ice used to cool the concrete must be melted before the concrete is discharged from the mixer .
SECTION CONCRETE Charge the batch into the mixer such that some water enters before the cementitious materials and aggregates .
Add all the water to the drum by the end of the first of the specified mixing time .
If the concrete is delivered in a truck mixer you may withhold a portion of the mixing water and if authorized add it at the delivery point as specified in section .G .
Batch and charge the cementitious materials into the mixer by means that will not cause .
Loss of cementitious materials due to the effect of wind .
Accumulation of cementitious materials on the surfaces of conveyors or hoppers .
Other conditions that reduce or vary the required quantity of cementitious material in the concrete mixture Operate stationary mixers with an automatic timing device .
The timing device and discharge mechanism must be interlocked such that during normal operation no part of the batch is discharged before the specified mixing time has elapsed .
The total time from the intermingling of damp aggregates and all cementitious materials to the start of mixing must not exceed minutes .
The batch size must not exceed the manufacturers guaranteed capacity .
For pavement or base concrete install and maintain suitable batch counters in good operating condition at job site batching plants and stationary mixers .
The batch counters must indicate the exact number of batches proportioned and mixed .
Mix and deliver the concrete to the job site by one of the following methods .
Centralmixed concrete in which the concrete is mixed completely in a stationary mixer and transported to the delivery point in a truck agitator or nonagitating hauling equipment. . Shrinkmixed concrete in which the concrete is mixed partially in a stationary mixer and the mixing is completed in a truck mixer. . Transitmixed concrete in which the concrete is mixed completely in a truck mixer .
Agitators must be truck mixers operating at agitation speed or truck agitators .
Each mixer and agitator must have a metal plate attached in a prominent place that clearly shows .
Various uses for which the equipment is designed .
Manufacturers guaranteed drum or container capacity in terms of the volume of mixed concrete .
Rotation speed of the mixing drum or blades Truck mixers must have an electrically or mechanically actuated revolution counter that readily allows verification of the number of revolutions of the drum or blades .
For shrinkmixed concrete transfer concrete that has been partially mixed at a central plant into a truck mixer and comply with the specifications for transitmixed concrete .
Partial mixing in a central plant does not count toward the number of revolutions at mixing speed .
.G Transporting Mixed Concrete You must transport mixed concrete to the delivery point in one of the following .
Truck agitator operating at the manufacturers designated agitating speed if it ..
Does not carry more than the manufacturers guaranteed capacity .. Maintains the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass during hauling .
Truck mixer operating at the manufacturers designated agitating speed .
Nonagitating hauling equipment with a body that does not allow leakage of any part of the concrete mix at any time When discharged at the delivery point the consistency and workability of the mixed concrete must be suitable for adequate placement and consolidation in place and the mixed concrete must comply with the specifications for uniformity in section .A .
SECTION CONCRETE Protect concrete hauled in opentop vehicles from rain or from exposure to the sun for more than minutes if the ambient temperature exceeds degrees F. Do not add water to the concrete in excess of that in the authorized mix design .
At the delivery point you may add water withheld during batching if authorized .
Add the water in operation before the discharge of more than cu yd .
The equipment for supplying the water must comply with section .G .
After adding the water revolve the drum at least revolutions at mixing speed before discharging the concrete .
Control the rate of discharge of mixed concrete from a truck mixer or agitator by the speed of rotation of the drum in the discharge direction with the discharge gate fully open .
If you use a truck mixer or agitator to transport the concrete to the delivery point comply with the following limits .
Complete the discharge within .
hours or before revolutions of the drum or blades whichever occurs first after introducing the cementitious materials to the aggregates . .
Under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete or if the concrete temperature is degrees F or above the time allowed may be less than .
hours . .
If you use an admixture to retard the set time ..
Concrete temperature must not exceed degrees F .. Time limit is hours .. Revolution limit is If you use nonagitating hauling equipment to transport the concrete to the delivery point .
Complete the discharge within hour after introducing the cementitious materials to the aggregates .
Under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete or if the concrete temperature is degrees F or above complete the discharge within minutes after introducing the cementitious materials to the aggregates If you add a highrange waterreducing admixture to the concrete at the job site the total number of revolutions must not exceed .
.G Time or Quantity of Mixing Mixing of the concrete in a stationary mixer must continue for the required mixing time after all ingredients except water and admixture that is added with the water are in the mixing compartment of the mixer before any part of the batch is released .
The transfer time in multiple drum mixers must not be counted as part of the required mixing time .
For concrete used in concrete structures other than minor structures the mixing time in a stationary mixer must be at least seconds and no more than minutes except that if authorized the minimum mixing time may be reduced to seconds .
For all other concrete the mixing time must be at least seconds and no more than minutes .
The minimum required revolutions at the mixing speed for transitmixed concrete must be at least that recommended by the mixer manufacturer and must be enough to produce uniform concrete under section .A .
.G Hand Mixing Handmixed concrete must be made in batches of cu yd or less .
Use the following procedure to make handmixed concrete .
Measure the quantity of coarse aggregate in measuring boxes . .
Spread the coarse aggregate on a watertight level platform . .
Spread the fine aggregate on the layer of coarse aggregate .
The total depth of the layers must be foot or less . .
Spread the dry cementitious materials on the aggregates . .
Turn the whole dry mass at least times. . Add and evenly distribute the water . .
Turn the whole mass at least more times not including placement in the carriers or forms .
SECTION CONCRETE .G Quantity of Water and Penetration or Slump Regulate the quantity of water used in the concrete mix such that the penetration as tested under California Test or the slump as tested under ASTM C complies with the nominal range shown in the following table Type of work Nominal Maximum Penetration Slump Penetration Slump in in in in Concrete pavement .
Nonreinforced concrete members .
Reinforced concrete structures with Sections over inches thick . .
Sections inches thick or less Concrete placed under water CIP concrete piles ..
If the penetration or slump exceeds the nominal range adjust the mixture for subsequent batches to reduce the penetration or slump to a value within the nominal range .
Do not use a batch of concrete with a penetration or a slump that exceeds the maximum value shown in the table above .
If Type F or G chemical admixtures are used the penetration requirements do not apply and the slump must not exceed inches after adding the chemical admixtures .
The quantity of free water must not exceed pounds per cubic yard of concrete plus pounds of free water for each required pounds of cementitious material in excess of pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete .
When determining the total quantity of free water consider liquid admixtures to be water if the dosage is more than gallon of admixture per cubic yard of concrete .
If there are adverse or difficult conditions that affect concrete placement you may exceed the specified penetration and free water content limitations if you .
Receive authorization to increase the cementitious material content per cubic yard of concrete .
Increase the water and cementitious material at a ratio that does not exceed pounds of water per added pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete The equipment for supplying water to the mixer must accurately measure to within .
percent of the quantity of water required to be added to the mix for any position of the mixer .
The tanks used to measure the water must be designed such that water can not enter while water is being discharged into the mixer .
The water must be discharged into the mixer rapidly in operation without dribbling .
Arrange the equipment to allow checking of the quantity of water delivered by discharging into measured containers .
.H Concrete in Corrosive Environments Section .H applies to concrete specified in the special provisions to be in a corrosive environment .
The cementitious material to be used in the concrete must be a combination of Type II or V portland cement and SCM .
The concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
The reduction of cementitious material content as specified in section .E is not allowed .
The specifications for SCM content in section .B do not apply .
SECTION CONCRETE The cementitious material must be composed of one of the following by weight .
percent natural pozzolan or fly ash with a CaO content of up to percent and percent portland cement .
percent natural pozzolan or fly ash with a CaO content of up to percent percent silica fume and percent portland cement .
percent silica fume metakaolin or UFFA and percent portland cement .
percent GGBFS and percent portland cement .I Concrete in FreezeThaw Areas .I General Section .I applies to concrete for projects specified in the special provisions to be in a freezethaw area .
.I Materials .Ia General The concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard unless a higher cementitious material content is specified .
Add an airentraining admixture to the concrete at the rate required to produce an air content of . . percent in the freshly mixed concrete .
For concrete placed at least feet below the adjacent undisturbed grade or at least feet below compacted finished grade an airentraining admixture is not required unless the concrete will experience freezing conditions during construction .
The cementitious material must satisfy the following equation x UF x F x SLTC .
where UF silica fume metakaolin or UFFA including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd F natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
F is equivalent to the sum of FA and FB as defined in section .Ib .
SL GGBFS including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd TC total quantity of cementitious material used lbcu yd .Ib Concrete Exposed to Deicing Chemicals Section .Ib applies to concrete specified in the special provisions to be exposed to deicing chemicals .
The specifications for SCM content in section .B and the equation in section .Ia do not apply .
The cementitious material must be composed of any combination of portland cement and at least SCM satisfying the following equation Equation x UF x FA x FB x SLTC X The SCM must satisfy the following equations Equation x FA FBTC .
Equation SECTION CONCRETE x UFTC .
Equation x UF FA FB SLTC .
The concrete mix design must satisfy the following equation Equation x TC MCMC .
where UF silica fume metakaolin or UFFA including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
If UF is used the quantity of UF must be at least percent .
FA natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N with a CaO content of up to percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
If FA is used the quantity of FA must be at least percent .
FB natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N with a CaO content of greater than percent and up to percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
If FB is used the quantity of FB must be at least percent .
SL GGBFS including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd TC total quantity of cementitious material lbcu yd X . for innocuous aggregate .
for all other aggregate MC minimum quantity of cementitious material specified lbcu yd .J Curing Compound Curing compound water loss must not exceed .
kgm in hours when tested under California Test . . CONSTRUCTION .A General Reserved .B Curing Concrete .B General Unless otherwise specified cure newly placed concrete by one of the method specified in this section .
Cure mortar and grout by keeping the surface damp for days .
.B Water Method The water method must consist of keeping the concrete continuously wet by applying water for a curing period of at least days after the concrete is placed .
You may use cotton mats rugs carpets or earth or sand blankets as a curing medium to retain the moisture during the curing period .
For curing structures you may use a curing medium consisting of white opaque polyethylene sheeting extruded onto burlap .
The polyethylene sheeting must have a minimum thickness of mils and must be extruded onto ounce burlap .
For curing columns you may use a curing medium consisting of polyethylene sheeting with a minimum thickness of mils achieved in a single layer of material .
Keep the concrete surface damp by applying water with an atomizing nozzle that forms a mist and not a spray until the surface is covered with the curing medium .
Do not apply the water under pressure directly on the concrete or allow the water to flow over or wash the concrete surface .
At the end of the curing period remove the curing medium .
If you use polyethylene sheeting or polyethylene sheeting on burlap as a curing medium SECTION CONCRETE .
Secure the sheeting and the sheeting joints as necessary to retain moisture .
Keep the sheeting within inches of the concrete at all points along the surface being cured .
Monitor the concrete temperature during curing .
Discontinue the use of these curing media if the concrete temperature can not be maintained below degrees F .B Curing Compound Method .Ba General The curing compound method must consist of uniformly spraying the concrete surfaces exposed to the air with a curing compound .
.Bb Materials The curing compound must comply with the requirements shown in the following table for the curing compound number specified Curing compound no .
ASTM C classification Pigmented Type Class Ba Pigmented Type Class B Pigmented Type Class A Nonpigmented Type Class B Nonpigmented Type Class A Nonpigmented with fugitive dye Type D Class A aThe resin type must be polyalphamethylstyrene .
The infrared scan for the dried vehicle must match the scan on file at METS .
If no curing compound number is specified use any of the curing compounds shown in the table above .
The curing compound must be manufactured to .
Remain sprayable at temperatures above degrees F . Control sagging pigment settling leveling and deemulsification .
Maintain the specified properties for at least year Pigmented curing compounds must be manufactured such that the pigment does not settle badly cake or thicken in the container or become granular or curdled .
Settlement of pigment must be a thoroughly wetted soft mushy mass allowing the complete and easy vertical penetration of a paddle .
Settled pigment must be easily predisposed with minimum resistance to the sideways manual motion of the paddle across the bottom of the container to form a smooth uniform product of the proper consistency .
Do not dilute or alter the curing compound after manufacture .
The curing compound must be packaged in clean gallon totes gallon barrels or gallon pails or must be supplied from a suitable storage tank located at the job site or casting site .
The containers must comply with CFR .
The gallon totes and gallon barrels must have removable lids and airtight fasteners .
The gallon pails must be round and have standard full open head and bail .
Do not use lids with bungholes .
Containers must be filled in a way that prevents skinning .
Steel containers and lids must be lined with a coating that prevents destructive action by the compound or chemical agents in the air space above the compound .
The coating must not come off the container or lid as skins .
Plastic containers and lids must not react with the curing compound .
Label each curing compound container with .
Manufacturers name SECTION CONCRETE .
ASTM C classification .
Batch number .
Volume .
Date of manufacture .
Volatile organic compound content .
Warning that curing compound containing pigment must be well stirred before using .
Precautions concerning the handling and application of curing compound in compliance with CA Code of Regs and .
Statement that the contents fully comply with State air pollution control rules and regulations .Bc Mixing Before using a curing compound completely redisperse settled or separated solids in containers except tanks by mixing at low speed in compliance with these specifications and the manufacturers instructions .
Mix manually using a paddle or mix using a mixing blade driven by a drill motor at low speed .
Mixing blades must be the type used for mixing paint .
Keep onsite storage tanks clean and free of contaminants .
Each tank must have a permanent system that completely redisperses settled material without introducing air or other foreign substances .
At the time of use compounds containing pigments must be thoroughly mixed .
Use a paddle to loosen all settled pigment from the container bottom and use a powerdriven agitator to disperse the pigment uniformly throughout the vehicle .
Agitation must not introduce air or other foreign substances into the curing compound .
.Bd Application Apply the curing compound at a nominal rate of sq ftgal .
At any point the application rate must be within sq ftgal of the nominal rate .
The average application rate must be within sq ftgal of the nominal rate when tested under California Test .
Apply the curing compound such that there are no runs sags thin areas skips or holidays .
Apply the curing compound using poweroperated spraying equipment with an operational pressure gauge and a means of controlling the pressure .
The Engineer may allow hand spraying for small and irregular areas that in the Engineers opinion are not reasonably accessible to poweroperated spraying equipment .
Apply the curing compound to the concrete after finishing the surface immediately before the moisture sheen disappears from the concrete surface but before drying shrinkage or craze cracks start to appear .
If the concrete surface cracks or dries immediately and continually apply water with an atomizing nozzle as specified in section .B until application of the curing compound is resumed or started .
Do not apply the curing compound over freestanding water .
If the film of curing compound is damaged before the expiration of days after the concrete is placed for structures and hours for pavement immediately repair it with additional compound .
.B Waterproof Membrane Method The waterproof membrane method must consist of .
Spraying the exposed finished concrete surfaces with water using an atomizing nozzle that forms a mist and not a spray until the concrete has set .
Placing the waterproof curing membrane immediately after spraying .
Keeping the membrane in place for at least hours The membrane must be sheeting material that complies with ASTM C for white reflective materials .
Use sheeting material of such a width as to completely cover the entire concrete surface .
Cement the sheeting joints together securely such that the joints are waterproof .
The joint seams must have at least a inch lap .
SECTION CONCRETE Securely weigh down the sheets by placing an earth bank on the sheet edges or by other authorized means .
If any portion of the sheets are damaged within hours after being placed immediately repair the damaged portion by cementing new sheets into place .
Do not use a membrane that is no longer waterproof or has been damaged such that it is unfit for curing concrete .
.B FormsInPlace Method The formsinplace method must consist of curing formed concrete surfaces by keeping the forms in place .
Keep the forms in place for at least days after the concrete is placed except keep the forms in place for at least days for concrete members over inches in least dimension .
The joints in the forms and the joints between the end of the forms and the concrete must be kept moisture tight during the curing period .
Reseal cracks in the forms and cracks between the forms and the concrete using authorized methods .
.C Protecting Concrete Protect the concrete from damage due to any cause including rain heat cold wind your actions and the actions of others .
Do not place the concrete on frozen or icecoated ground or subgrade or on icecoated forms reinforcing steel structural steel conduits PC members or construction joints .
If it is raining you must provide adequate protection against damage or you must stop placing the concrete before the quantity of surface water is sufficient to damage the surface mortar or cause a flow or wash of the concrete surface. . PAYMENT Not Used MINOR CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing and protecting minor concrete .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals If required by the following table submit compressive strength test results with the mix design that verify the minimum required compressive strength SCM Test submittal required Fly ash used alone If portland cement content lbcu yd GGBFS used alone If portland cement content lbcu yd Natural pozzolan used alone If portland cement content lbcu yd More than SCM Always NOTE Compressive strength tests must be performed by an ACIcertified technician .
Submit the concrete mix design before using the concrete in the work and before changing the mix proportions .
Submit a proposed combined aggregate gradation .
After authorization of the gradation the aggregate furnished for minor concrete must comply with that gradation .
If requested submit periodic test reports of the aggregate gradation furnished .
SECTION CONCRETE The Engineer may waive the specifications for gradation if the Engineer determines that furnishing a gradation is not necessary for the type or quantity of concrete work to be constructed .
Before placing minor concrete from a source not previously used on the Contract submit a certificate of compliance stating that the minor concrete to be furnished complies with the Contract requirements including the specified minimum cementitious material content .
Submit a weighmaster certificate as an informational submittal with each load of readymixed concrete at the concrete discharge location .
The weighmaster certificate must show the date and time the load left the batching plant and if hauled in a truck mixer or agitator the time the mixing cycle started .
.D Quality Assurance Section .D and the specifications for uniformity in section .A do not apply to minor concrete .
The Engineer may perform tests and inspect the facilities materials and methods for producing the minor concrete to ensure that it is of suitable quality for use in the work .
The Engineer verifies compliance with the specified cementitious material content by testing under California Test for cement content .
For testing purposes SCM is considered to be cement .
Adjust the batch proportions as necessary to produce concrete having the specified cementitious material content. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B Cementitious Material Minor concrete must contain at least pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
You may use rice hull ash as an SCM .
Rice hull ash must comply with AASHTO M and the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following tables Chemical quality characteristic Requirement percent Silicon dioxide SiOa min Loss on ignition max .
Total alkalies as NaO equivalent max .
aSiO in crystalline form must not exceed .
percent .
Physical quality characteristic Requirement Particle size distribution Less than microns min Less than microns min Strength activity index with portland cementa days min of control days min of control Expansion at days when testing project materials under ASTM Cb max .
Surface area when testing by nitrogen adsorption under ASTM D min mg . aWhen tested under AASHTO M for strength activity testing of silica fume .
bIn the test mix Type II or V portland cement must be replaced with at least percent rice hull ash by weight .
For the purpose of calculating the equations for the cementitious material specifications consider rice hull ash to be represented by the variable UF .
SECTION CONCRETE .C Aggregate Sections .C and .C do not apply to minor concrete .
The aggregate must be clean and free from deleterious coatings clay balls roots and other extraneous material .
The maximum aggregate size must not be larger than inches or smaller than inch .
You may use crushed concrete and reclaimed aggregate if they comply with the specifications for aggregate .
.D Water Section .D does not apply to minor concrete .
Water used for washing mixing and curing must be free from oil salts and other impurities that would discolor or etch the surface or have an adverse affect on the concrete quality .
.E Production Sections .F .G .G .G and .G do not apply to minor concrete .
Store proportion mix transport and discharge the cementitious material water aggregate and admixtures in compliance with recognized standards of good practice that result in thoroughly and uniformly mixed concrete suitable for the intended use .
Recognized standards of good practice are outlined in various industry publications such as those issued by ACI AASHTO or the Department .
Use a quantity of water that produces concrete with a consistency that complies with section .G .
Do not add water during hauling or after arrival at the delivery point unless allowed by the Engineer .
Discharge readymixed concrete from the transport vehicle while the concrete is still plastic and before stiffening occurs .
Take whatever action is necessary to eliminate quick stiffening except do not add water .
Conditions contributing to quick stiffening are .
Elapsed time of .
hours in agitating hauling equipment or hour in nonagitating hauling equipment .
More than revolutions of the drum or blades after introduction of the cementitious material to the aggregates .
Concrete temperature over degrees F The mixing time in a stationary mixer must be at least seconds and no more than minutes .
The minimum required revolutions at mixing speed for transitmixed concrete must be at least that recommended by the mixer manufacturer and must be increased as needed to produce thoroughly and uniformly mixed concrete .
If you add a highrange waterreducing admixture to the concrete at the job site the total revolutions must not exceed . . CONSTRUCTION Maintain a concrete temperature of at least degrees F for hours after placing. . PAYMENT Not Used RAPID STRENGTH CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing and curing RSC .
Section applies only where the specifications allow the use of RSC .
SECTION CONCRETE .B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Reserved .C Volumetric Proportioning For volumetricproportioned RSC submit .
Aggregate moisture test results .
Log of production data .
Test samples of freshly mixed concrete for uniformity testing Sampling facilities must be safe accessible and clean and must produce a test sample that is representative of production .
The sampling devices and methods must comply with California Test .
.C Certificate of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance with each delivery of aggregate cementitious material and admixtures used for calibration tests .
Include certified copies of the weight of each delivery .
The certificate of compliance must state that the source of the materials used for the calibration tests is the same source as to be used for the planned work .
The certificate must be signed by your assigned representative .
.C Weighmaster Certificate Submit weighmaster certificates for RSC .
Regardless of the proportioning method used the certificates must include all the information necessary to trace the manufacturer and manufacturers lot number for the cement used .
The weighmaster certificate for the cement must include .
Date of proportioning .
Location of proportioning .
Actual net draft cement weight if proportioned into fabric containers .
Net draft cement weight used in the load if proportioned at the pour site from a storage silo .C Production Data For volumetricproportioned RSC submit the daily production data in electronic or printed media at the end of each production shift .
Report the data including data titles in the following order .
Weight of cement per revolution count .
Weight of each aggregate size per revolution count .
Gate openings for each aggregate size .
Weight of water added to the concrete per revolution count .
Moisture content of each aggregate size .
Individual volume of admixtures per revolution count .
Time of day .
Day of week .
Production start and stop times .
Volumetric mixer identification .
Name of supplier .
Specific type of concrete being produced .
Source of the individual aggregate sizes .
Source brand and type of cement .
Source brand and type of individual admixtures .
Name and signature of the operator The device controlling the proportioning of cement aggregate and water must produce production data that is captured at minute intervals throughout daily production .
Each capture of production data must SECTION CONCRETE represent the production activity at that time and must not be a summation of data .
The quantity of material represented by each production capture is the quantity produced in the period from .
minutes before to .
minutes after the capture time .
Production data must be input by hand into a preprinted form or captured and printed by the proportioning device .
Present electronic media containing recorded production data in a tabdelimited format on a CD or DVD .
Each capture of production data must be followed by a line feed carriage return with sufficient fields for the specified data .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Penetration The specifications for penetration in section .G do not apply to RSC .
.D Aggregate Moisture For volumetricproportioned RSC determine the aggregate moisture under California Test at least every hours during proportioning and mixing .
Record the aggregate moisture determinations and submit them at the end of each production shift .
.D Concrete Uniformity For volumetricproportioned RSC the Engineer determines the uniformity of concrete mixtures based on differences in penetration measurements when tested under California Test .
Differences in penetration are determined by comparing the penetration tests on test samples of mixed concrete from the same batch or volumetric mixer load. . MATERIALS .A General RSC must be one of the following .
Concrete complying with section .
You may use Type III portland cement . .
Concrete complying with section except .. You may use any cement that complies with the definition of hydraulic cement or blended hydraulic cement in ASTM C and must have the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table Quality characteristic Test method Requirementb Contraction in air max California Test WC ratio .
. . Mortar expansion in water max ASTM C . Soluble chloridea max California Test .
Soluble sulfatea max California Test .
Thermal stability min California Test Compressive strength at days psi min ASTM C aPerform the test on a cube specimen fabricated in compliance with ASTM C cured for at least days and then pulverized such that percent passes the no .
sieve .
bIf you use chemical admixtures include them when testing .
.. You may use citric acid or borax if you submit a written request from the cement manufacturer and a test sample .
The requirement for air entrainment of concrete in freezethaw areas applies only when portland cement is used .
SCM is not required in RSC .
When tested for uniformity under section .D the difference in penetration between the concrete test samples must not exceed inch .
SECTION CONCRETE .B Volumetric Proportioning .B General RSC may be proportioned and placed using a volumetric mixer .
.B Proportioning Volumetric mixers must proportion cement water aggregate and additives by volume .
Proportion aggregate using a belt feeder that is operated with an adjustable cutoff gate delineated to the nearest quarter increment .
The gate opening height must be readily determinable .
Proportion cement by any method that complies with the accuracy tolerance specifications in section .F .
Proportion water with a meter .
Proportion liquid admixtures under section .Fb except proportion liquid admixtures with a meter .
.B Mixer Requirements Mix volumetricproportioned RSC in a mechanically operated mixer .
You may use an augertype mixer .
Operate the mixer uniformly at the mixing speed recommended by the manufacturer .
Do not use a mixer that has an accumulation of hard concrete or mortar .
Volumetric mixers must comply with the following .
Aggregate feeders must connect directly to the drive on the cement vane feeder. . Cement feed rate must be tied directly to the feed rate for the aggregate and other ingredients .
The ratio of cement to aggregate must be changed only by changing the gate opening for the aggregate feed. . Drive shaft of the aggregate feeder must have a revolution counter reading to the nearest full or partial revolution of the aggregate delivery belt .
Do not use equipment with components made of aluminum or magnesium alloys that could have contact with plastic concrete during mixing or transporting of the RSC .
Cover the rotating and reciprocating equipment on volumetric mixers with metal guards .
The identifying numbers of volumetric mixers must be at least inches in height and must be located on the front and rear of the vehicle .
Each mixer must have metal plates that state the designed usage the manufacturers guaranteed mixed concrete volumetric capacity and the rotation speed .
Locate cement storage immediately before the cement feeder .
Equip the system with a device that automatically shuts down power to the cement feeder and aggregate belt feeder if the cement storage level is less than percent of the total volume .
Equip each aggregate bin with a device that automatically shuts down the power to the cement feeder and the aggregate belt feeder if the aggregate discharge rate is less than percent of the scheduled discharge rate .
The proportioning device indicators must be in working order before starting proportioning or mixing and must be visible when standing near the volumetric mixer .
.B Mixer Calibration Calibrate the cutoff gate for each volumetric mixer used and for each aggregate source .
Calibrate each volumetric mixer at different aggregate gate settings that correspond to production needs .
Perform at least calibration runs for each aggregate gate .
Individual aggregate delivery rate checkruns must not vary by more than .
percent from the mathematical average of all runs for the same gate and aggregate type .
Each test run must be at least lb .
SECTION CONCRETE Individual cement delivery rate checkruns must not vary by more than .
percent from the mathematical average of runs of at least lb each .
When the water meter operates from to percent of production capacity the indicated weight of water delivered must not differ from the actual weight delivered by more than .
percent for each of runs of gal for pavement or gal for structures .
Calibrate the water meter under California Test .
The water meter must be equipped with a resettable totalizer and must display the operating rate .
Conduct the calibration tests for aggregate cement and water proportioning devices using a platform scale located at the calibration site .
Platform scales for weighing testrun calibration material must have a maximum capacity of .
tons with maximum graduations of lb .
Error test the platform scale within hours of calibrating the volumetric mixer proportioning devices .
Perform error testing with test weights under California Test .
Furnish a witness scale that is within graduations of the test weight load .
The witness scale must be available for use at the production site throughout the production period .
Equipment needed for the calibration of proportioning systems must remain available at the production site throughout the production period .
The volumetric mixer must be equipped such that accuracy checks can be made .
After production starts recalibrate the proportioning devices at least every days for pavement or days for structures or when you change the source or type of any ingredient .
Each time tons of cement passes through the volumetric mixer perform a run spot calibration of only the cement proportioning system .
If the spot calibration shows that the cement proportioning system does not comply with the specifications complete a full calibration of the cement proportioning system before you resume production .
.B Mixing Concrete At the time of batching volumetricproportioned RSC .
Aggregates must be dried and drained to a stable moisture content .
Do not proportion aggregates with visible separation of water from the aggregate. . Free moisture content of the fine aggregate must not exceed percent of its saturated surfacedry weight .
If the proportioning plant has separate supplies of the same size group of aggregate with different moisture content specific gravity or surface characteristics affecting workability exhaust one supply before using another supply .
Do not use ice to cool volumetricproportioned RSC directly .
If ice is used to cool the water used in the mix it must be melted before entering the mixer .
Proportion and charge the cement into the volumetric mixer such that there is no variance of the required quantity due to conditions such as wind or accumulation on equipment .
Do not mix more material in the volumetric mixer than will allow complete mixing .
Reduce the volume of material in the mixer if complete mixing is not achieved .
Continue mixing until a homogeneous mixture is produced at discharge .
Do not add water to the RSC after discharge. . CONSTRUCTION For RSC using a cement other than portland cement cure the concrete as recommended by the cement manufacturer .
The method of curing must be authorized before starting construction. . PAYMENT If volumetric mixer calibration is performed more than miles from the project limits per calibration session is deducted .
SECTION CONCRETE PRECAST CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing and curing PC concrete members .
The specifications for shrinkage in section .A do not apply .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General For reports and logs type or clearly print the name next to the signature of the person signing the report or log .
Submit expansion test data under section .
if required .
.C Certificates of Compliance Submit a certificate of compliance for the cementitious material used in PC concrete members .
The certificate must be signed by the PC concrete product manufacturer .
Submit a certificate of compliance for each PC concrete member .
The certificate of compliance for tier and tier members must be signed by the QC manager .
The certificate of compliance for tier members must be signed by the QC Inspector .
.C Precast Concrete Quality Control Plan Before performing any precasting activities for tier and tier PC concrete members submit copies of the projectspecific QC plan for the PC plant .
The QC plan must supplement the information from the authorized facility audit .
Submit a separate QC plan for each plant .
Allow days for review .
Each projectspecific QC plan must include .
Name of the precasting plant concrete plants and any testing laboratory to be used. . Manual prepared by the precasting plant that includes .. Equipment description ..
Testing procedures .. Safety plan ..
Personnel names qualifications and copies of certifications .
QC manager and QC inspector names qualifications and copies of certifications . .
Organizational chart showing QC personnel and their assigned QC responsibilities. . Methods and frequencies for performing QC procedures including inspections material testing and any survey performed for all components of PC concrete members .
Components include prestressing concrete grout reinforcement steel miscellaneous metal and formwork. . System for reporting noncompliant PC concrete members to the Engineer. . System for identification and tracking repairs and repair methods. . Procedure for the reinspection of repaired PC concrete members. . Forms for certificates of compliance daily production logs and daily reports .
Submit a revised QC plan for any changes to .
Concrete plants .
Material sources .
Material testing procedures .
Testing laboratory .
Procedures and equipment .
Updated systems for tracking and identifying PC concrete members .
QC personnel After authorization submit copies of each authorized QC plan and make copy available at each location where work is performed .
SECTION CONCRETE Allow days for review of a revised QC plan .
.C Daily Production Log The QC inspector must provide reports to the QC manager for each day that precasting activities are performed .
The QC manager must maintain a daily production log of PC activities for each days precasting .
PC activities include setting forms placing reinforcement setting prestressing steel casting curing post tensioning and form release .
This daily log must be available at the precasting plant .
The daily log must include .
Plant location .
Specific description of casting or related activities .
Any problems or deficiencies discovered .
Any testing or repair work performed .
Names of QC inspectors and the specific QC inspections they performed that day .
Reports for that days precasting activities from each QC inspector including before during and after precast inspections Immediately notify the Engineer when any precasting problems or deficiencies are discovered and submit the proposed repair or process changes necessary to correct them .
.C Precast Concrete Report Before shipping PC concrete members submit a PC concrete report .
The report must include .
Reports of all material tests and any survey checks .
Documentation that .. You have evaluated all tests .. You corrected all rejected deficiencies ..
Repairs have been reexamined with the required tests and found acceptable .
Daily production logs .
Certificates of compliance .
Documentation of inspections Each person who performs a material test or survey check must sign the corresponding report and submit the report directly to the QC manager .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Quality assurance for PC concrete includes .
Your QC program .
Departments acceptance of PC concrete members PC concrete members are categorized into the following tiers .
Tier consists of ..
Components of bridge structures including girders deck panels bent caps abutments slabs closure wall panels and piling .. Prestressed pavement .
Tier consists of ..
Components of earth retaining systems .. Wingwalls .. Types A B and C pipe culvert headwalls endwalls and wingwalls .. Pavement ..
Box culverts .. Sound wall panels and supports .
Tier consists of ..
Pipes ..
Pipe drainage facilities SECTION CONCRETE .. Straight and L pipe culvert headwalls except those listed under tier .. Drainage Inlets .. Flared end sections .
Tier consists of any member not described as tier tier or tier .D Quality Control .Da General For tier and tier PC concrete members .
Fabricate PC concrete members at a plant on the Authorized Facility Audit List .
Assign a PC concrete QC manager to the plant .
Assign a QC inspector who is either registered as a civil engineer in the State or .. For tier has a Plant Quality Personnel Level II certification from the PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute .. For tier has a Plant Quality Personnel Level I certification from the PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute .
Prepare a PC concrete QC plan .
Perform PC concrete materials testing .
Maintain a daily production log .
Prepare a PC concrete report .
Prepare a certificate of compliance For tier PC concrete members .
Assign a QC inspector who has one of the following qualifications ..
Registration as a civil engineer in the State .
.. Plant Quality Personnel Level I certification from the PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute .
.. Competency to perform inspection of PC operations .
An inspector is competent if the individual has completed training or has experience in PC operations and inspection . .
Prepare a certificate of compliance For tier PC concrete members prepare a certificate of compliance .
For each ASTM test method specified in this section the materials test result must comply with the requirement specified for the comparable test elsewhere in section unless otherwise specified .
If curing compound is used provide certificate of compliance as specified in section .C .
If PC concrete is manufactured at an established PC concrete plant a trial batch and prequalification of the materials mix proportions mixing equipment and procedures under section .Db are not required .
.Db Quality Control Meeting After submitting the PC concrete QC plan hold a meeting to discuss the requirements for PC concrete QC .
The meeting attendees must include the Engineer the PC concrete QC manager and a representative from each plant performing PC concrete activities for the Contract .
.Dc Sampling Testing and Inspecting The QC laboratory testing personnel or the QC inspector must witness sampling .
The QC laboratory testing personnel must perform testing .
QC laboratory testing personnel must have the following certifications as applicable .
ACI Strength Testing Technician .
ACI Concrete Laboratory Testing Technician Level .
ACI Aggregate Testing Technician Level The QC Inspector must perform inspections before during and after casting is complete .
QC field testing and inspection personnel must have an ACI Concrete Field Testing Technician Grade I certification .
SECTION CONCRETE For each mix design used for tier and tier PC concrete members perform sampling and testing at the minimum frequencies shown in the following tables Aggregate QC Tests Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Aggregate gradation ASTM C Once per cu yd of concrete cast or every days whichever is more frequent Sand equivalent ASTM D Percent fines under micronsa ASTM C Moisture content of fine aggregate ASTM C or electronically actuated moisture meterb times per each day of pour depending on conditions aPercent fines under microns test replaces the cleanness test in section .C with the requirements of .
percent maximum for Operating Range and .
percent maximum for Contract Compliance .
The th paragraph of section .C does not apply .
bElectronically actuated moisture meter must be calibrated every days per ASTM C. Concrete QC Tests Quality characteristic Test method Minimum testing frequency Compressive strengtha ASTM CCM ASTM CCM and ASTM CCM Once per cu yd of concrete cast or every day of casting whichever is more frequent Slump ASTM CCM Temperature ASTM CCM Density ASTM C Once per cu yd of concrete cast or every days of batching whichever is more frequent Air content ASTM CCM or ASTM CCMb If concrete is air entrained once for each set of cylinders and when conditions warrant aCylinders must be by inches .
bASTM CCM must be used for lightweight concrete .
If concrete is batched at more than plant perform the tests at each plant .
Cure test cylinders for determining time of prestressing loading in the same manner as the concrete in the member .
Cure test cylinders for determining compliance with day strength requirements in the same manner as the member until completion of the steam curing process followed by a water bath or moist room at to degrees F until tested .
For PC concrete that is steam cured concrete designated by compressive strength is acceptable if its compressive strength reaches the described day compressive strength in no more than the maximum number of days specified or allowed after the concrete is cast .
.D Department Acceptance For PC concrete that is steam cured the Engineer evaluates the compressive strength based on individual tests representing specific portions of production. . MATERIALS You may use Type III portland cement in PC concrete .
The specifications for SCM content in section .B do not apply to PC concrete .
For PC concrete the SCM content must comply with one of the following .
Any combination of portland cement and SCM satisfying the following equation Equation SECTION CONCRETE x UF x FA x FB x SLTC X where UF silica fume metakaolin or UFFA including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd FA natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N with a CaO content of up to percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd FB natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with AASHTO M Class F or N with a CaO content of greater than percent and up to percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd SL GGBFS including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd TC total quantity of cementitious material lbcu yd X . for innocuous aggregate .
for all other aggregate .
percent Class F fly ash with at least oz of LiNO solution added per lb of portland cement .
The CaO content of the fly ash must not exceed percent. . Any combination of SCM and portland cement for which the expansion of cementitious material and aggregate does not exceed .
percent when tested under ASTM C. Submit test data with each mix design .
Test data authorized by the Department no more than years before the st day of the Contract is authorized for the entire Contract .
The test data must be for the same concrete mix and must use the same materials and material sources to be used on the Contract .
If municipally supplied potable water is used for PC concrete the testing specified in section .D is waived unless requested .
Portland cement based repair material must be on the Authorized Material List for precast Portland cement based repair material. . CONSTRUCTION Cure PC concrete using steam curing or any of the methods specified in section .B .
Cure for the minimum time specified for each method or until the concrete reaches its design strength whichever is less .
Steam curing must comply with the following .
After placing the concrete hold it for a hour minimum presteaming period .
If the ambient air temperature is below degrees F apply steam during the presteaming period to hold the air surrounding the concrete at a temperature of to degrees F. . To prevent moisture loss on the exposed surfaces during the presteaming period cover the concrete as soon as possible after casting or keep the exposed surfaces wet by fog spray curing compound or wet blankets. . Enclosures for steam curing must allow free circulation of steam around the concrete and must be constructed to contain the live steam with a minimum moisture loss .
The use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers is allowed if they are kept in good repair and secured in such a way that prevents the loss of steam and moisture . .
Steam at the jets must be at low pressure and in a saturated condition .
Steam jets must not impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
During application of the steam the temperature rise within the enclosure must not exceed degrees F per hour .
The curing temperature throughout the enclosure must not exceed degrees F and must be maintained at a constant level for the time necessary to develop the required transfer strength .
Cover control cylinders to prevent moisture loss and place them in a location where the temperature is representative of the average enclosure temperature. . Use a minimum of temperature recording device per feet of continuous bed length for checking the temperature .
Temperature recording devices must provide an accurate continuous permanent record of the curing temperature. . Detension the concrete in pretension beds immediately after the steam curing is completed while the concrete and forms are still warm or maintain the temperature under the enclosure above degrees F until the stress is transferred to the concrete. . Curing is complete at the end of the steam curing cycle .
SECTION CONCRETE For dimensional tolerances of PC concrete members comply with the PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institutes Tolerance Manual for Precast and Prestressed Concrete Construction MNL .
For tier and tier PC concrete members apply curing compound using poweroperated spraying equipment .
You may request application by hand spraying for small quantities of PC concrete members .
For tier and tier PC concrete members the application of curing compound may be hand sprayed. . PAYMENT Not Used SELFCONSOLIDATING CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing SCC .
Section applies only where the specifications allow the use of SCC .
You may use SCC for PC concrete .
.B Definitions selfconsolidating concrete SCC Flowing concrete that is capable of spreading to a level state without segregation and without the use of internal or external vibrators .
.C Submittals Submit the following before placing SCC .
Mix design and placement procedures. . Trial batch test report including test results for the tests specified in section .Dc . .
If a mockup is specified ..
Details and placement procedures for the mockup .. Test samples and test results from the mockup Submit test results for slump flow and visual stability index .
If the Engineer rejects the SCC for slump flow and visual stability index make corrective changes and resubmit the SCC mix design or placement procedures .
Submit the aggregate gradation as an informational submittal .
.D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Compressive Strength Prepare SCC specimens for compressive strength testing under California Test except fabricate test specimens as follows .
Place the test molds on a firm flat surface to prevent distortion of the bottom surface . .
If more than specimen is to be made from the same batch make all the specimens simultaneously . .
Fill the mold in lift pouring the concrete from a larger container. . Pat the sides of the mold lightly by hand or jig by rocking the mold from side to side. . Strike off the surface of the concrete even with the top edge of the mold . .
Wipe the sides of the mold free of excess concrete and press the lid on .
SECTION CONCRETE .Dc Prequalification of Mix Design Prequalify the SCC mix design with a trial batch using the same materials mix proportions mixing equipment procedures and batch size to be used in SCC production .
The SCC trial batch must comply with the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table SCC Mix Design Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Slump flow min inches ASTM C Flow rate T seconds ASTM C Visual stability index max ASTM C JRing flowa max inches ASTM C Column segregation static max ASTM C Bleeding capacity max ASTM C . Compressive strengthbc min psi California Test strength described Compressive strengthc min psi average of cylinders California Test strength described aDifference between Jring flow and slump flow bFor an individual test cylinder cAt the maximum age specified or allowed .Dd Mockup If the construction of a mockup is specified in the special provisions construct a mockup before placing the SCC .
The mockup must demonstrate that the SCC will .
Flow for the distance required by the proposed construction procedure .
Completely fill the forms .
Encapsulate the reinforcement and embedments Prequalify the SCC mix design before constructing the mockup .
The mockup forms must be similar to those used for the production elements .
Include in the mockup the concrete reinforcement and concrete embedments shown except the reinforcement and embedments must stop inches from both longitudinal ends of the mockup .
The mockup must simulate the flow of concrete for the maximum distance anticipated during production or for a minimum of feet if the anticipated flow travel is less than feet .
Place the SCC in the mockup in the Engineers presence .
Take a test sample of at least lb of concrete from within the forms at the discharge point and at the point farthest from the discharge point .
Determine the coarse aggregate content of each test sample under California Test .
The coarse aggregate content of the test samples must not differ from each other by more than pounds of aggregate per cubic foot of concrete .
Sawcut the mockup fulldepth in the transverse direction approximately feet from the end of the pour .
Voids or honeycombing in the SCC or between the concrete and embedded elements are not acceptable .
If the Engineer rejects the SCC placed in the mockup construct additional mockups until the SCC is accepted by the Engineer .
Dispose of the mockup .
SECTION CONCRETE .De Field Quality Control .Dei General Reserved .Deii Fine Aggregate Moisture Content Determine the fine aggregate moisture content for each batch of SCC .
.Deiii Slump Flow and Visual Stability Index At the start of SCC placement and whenever a set of concrete cylinders is prepared determine the slump flow and the visual stability index under ASTM C. .D Department Acceptance Reserved .
MATERIALS Section .C does not apply to SCC .
The minimum allowable slump flow is inches .
The slump flow must not vary by more than inches from the mix design slump flow .
The visual stability index must not exceed . . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETE .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing lightweight concrete .
Lightweight concrete must be composed of cementitious material lightweight coarse aggregate fine aggregate admixtures if used and water .
Section applies only where the use of lightweight concrete is specified in the special provisions .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General Submit the prequalification data or reports and the proposed mix design at least days before placing the lightweight concrete .
Submit certified copies of the manufacturers test reports showing the estimated fresh concrete unit weight that results in the selected airdry unit weight .
.C Mix Design Submit the mix design .
Include the type brand weight and absolute volume of each ingredient for each concrete type and strength .
Report the weight for each aggregate for a surfacedry condition including moisture absorbed in the aggregate for an ovendry condition or for the condition proposed for use .
Include with the mix design written verification that arrangements have been made for the Engineer to obtain test samples .
The test samples of lightweight aggregates will not exceed lb for each separate gradation .
SECTION CONCRETE .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Quality Control .Da General Reserved .Db Prequalification Prequalify the lightweight concrete by submitting certified test data or trial batch test reports under section .Db except for PC concrete you must prequalify by submitting trial batch test reports .
Dispose of the trial batches .
.Dc Unit Weight of Fresh Concrete Determine the unit weight of fresh concrete under California Test .
.Dd AirDry Unit Weight Determine the airdry unit weight as follows .
Test three inchdiameter by inchtall cylinders . .
Prepare the cylinders under ASTM CCM or ASTM CCM whichever is applicable . .
Cure the cylinders for days. . On the th day remove the cylinders from the molds or curing media and immerse them in water at .
degrees F for hours . .
Determine the suspendedimmersed weights of the cylinders . .
Remove the cylinders from the water and determine the saturated surfacedry weights. . Dry the cylinders for days at .
degrees F and a relative humidity of percent . .
Weigh the dried cylinders. . Use the following equation to calculate the airdry unit weight W A x .B C where W airdry unit weight pcf A day dried weight of the cylinder lb B saturated surfacedry weight of the cylinder lb C suspendedimmersed weight of the cylinder lb .D Department Acceptance .Da General Reserved .Db Penetration The Engineer performs penetration testing under California Test .
.Dc Air Content The Engineer determines the concrete air content under ASTM CCM .
.Dd Compressive Strength The Engineer determines the compressive strength under section .D. . MATERIALS .A General The unit weight of the fresh concrete used in the work must not vary from the weight shown in the test report by more than pcf .
The airdry unit weight of lightweight concrete furnished for each mix design must be a single weight from to pcf for prestressed concrete and from to pcf for nonprestressed concrete .
SECTION CONCRETE The total air content of freshly mixed concrete must not exceed percent .
Lightweight concrete must have a day compressive strength of at least that shown .
.B Aggregate The fine aggregate must consist of lightweight fine aggregate natural sand or manufactured sand fine aggregate or a combination of these as required to comply with the airdry unit weight requirements .
Lightweight aggregates must comply with ASTM CCM except the splitting tensile strength and drying shrinkage requirements do not apply .
Lightweight aggregates must be rotary kiln expanded shale or clay having a surface sealed by firing .
Do not crush the coarse aggregate after firing except aggregate that is inch and smaller may be crushed as necessary to produce the required coarse aggregate gradation .
The final coarse aggregate size must not exceed inch .
The shrinkage characteristics of lightweight aggregates must be such that the drying shrinkage of the lightweight concrete produced does not exceed .
percent after days of drying when tested under California Test .
Lightweight aggregates must have no more than percent loss when tested for soundness under California Test .
.C Proportioning At the time of batching adjust the authorized aggregate weight to compensate for surface moisture and absorbed moisture .
After authorization of the mix design do not alter the materials and batch proportions during the work except as required to maintain the authorized cementitious material content and unit weight .
The cementitious material content of individual batches must not vary from the authorized cementitious material content by more than from to pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete .
Batch the lightweight fine aggregate and natural sand by weight .
Batch the lightweight coarse aggregate by weight or volumetric methods .
If volumetric methods are used the batching equipment must allow the Engineer to check the weight of each aggregate size in the batch .
Limit the absolute volume of coarse aggregate such that no concrete segregation occurs during mixing transporting placing consolidating or finishing .
For sitecast concrete the absolute volume of coarse aggregate must not exceed cubic feet per cubic yard of concrete .
Uniformly prewet or presaturate the aggregates such that uniform penetration of the concrete is maintained .
For lightweight concrete that is to be pumped presaturate the aggregates using thermal vacuum or equivalent methods .
Lightweight concrete must have adequate workability such that proper placement consolidation and finishing are attained. . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED PAINT GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes general specifications for furnishing paint used for highway construction .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance The Department tests samples of paint taken from the source .
Do not use paint until authorized. . MATERIALS Paint containers must be .
New .
Round .
No more than gallons in capacity .
Standard full open head with bails .
Nonreactive with contents .
Equipped with compatible gaskets .
Free of bungholes in the lids .
Labeled with .. State Specification number if described .. Manufacturers name product number and batch number ..
Date of manufacture .. Precautions required by CA Code of Regs and concerning the handling and application of paint Paint must .
Be manufactured ready for application .
Do not add materials such as thinners after manufacture. . Be homogenous and free of contaminants. . Be smooth .
Settled pigment must be soft and easily dispersed before using . .
Retain the properties that affect its application adhesion and curing for at least year after the date of manufacture. . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used PAINT FOR METAL .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for furnishing paint for metal. . MATERIALS .A General Zincrich primer must be on the Authorized Material List for inorganic and organic zincrich primers .
.B ExteriorGrade Latex Paint Exteriorgrade latex paint must be recommended by the manufacturer of the zincrich primer .
SECTION PAINT Exteriorgrade latex paint must comply with SSPCPaint .
No visible color change in the finish coat must occur when tested for hours under ASTM D test cycle .
The vehicle must be an acrylic or modified acrylic copolymer with a minimum of necessary additives .
.C MoistureCured Polyurethane Coating Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used PAINT FOR TIMBER .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for furnishing paint for timber. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved .B LatexBase Wood Primer Wood primer must be latexbase paint suitable for priming unpainted wood or exterior woodwork .
Wood primer must comply with the MPI detailed performance standards for exterior wood primers and be listed on the MPI approved product list no .
for primer latex for exterior wood .
.C LatexBase Paint for Exterior Wood Latexbase paint for exterior wood must comply with the MPI detailed performance standards for exterior latex paint and must be listed on one of the MPI approved products lists shown in the following table MPI list no .
Category name Latex exterior flat MPI gloss level Latex exterior semigloss MPI gloss level Latex exterior gloss MPI gloss level You may use recycled paint .
Recycled paint must comply with the MPI detailed performance standards for exterior latex paint and must be listed on one of the following MPI approved products lists MPI list no .
Category name RR Latex recycled remanufactured exterior flat G RC Latex recycled consolidated exterior flat G RR Latex recycled remanufactured exterior low sheen G . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used MISCELLANEOUS PAINT .
GENERAL Section includes specifications for furnishing paint for materials other than metal or timber. . MATERIALS .A General Reserved SECTION PAINT .B Acrylic Emulsion Paint for Exterior Masonry Acrylic emulsion paint for exterior masonry must comply with the MPI detailed performance standards for exterior latex paint and must be listed on one of the following MPI approved products lists MPI list no .
Category name Latex exterior flat MPI gloss level Latex exterior semigloss MPI gloss level Latex exterior gloss MPI gloss level Acrylic emulsion paint may be tinted by using universal or allpurpose concentrates .
.C.F Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used ASPHALT BINDERS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing asphalt binders .
.B Definitions asphalt binder Asphalt from refined petroleum or from a mixture of refined liquid asphalt and refined solid asphalt prepared from crude petroleum .
modified asphalt binder Asphalt binder modified with polymers crumb rubber or both .
.C Submittals Reserved .D Quality Assurance .D General Reserved .D Certification Asphalt binder suppliers must comply with the Departments Certification Program for Suppliers of Asphalt .
For a copy of the certification program go to the METS website .
.D Sampling A sampling device must be located in the asphalt binder feed line connecting the plant storage tanks to the asphalt binder weighing system or spray bar .
The sampling device must be accessible from to inches above the platform .
Provide a receptacle for flushing the sampling device .
The valve for the sampling device must be to inch in diameter and must allow a quart sample to be taken slowly at any time during plant activities .
In the Engineers presence take two quart samples per day during plant activities for the project .
Sample containers must be quart capacity and include round frictiontop lids. . MATERIALS .A General Asphalt binder must not include residues caused by artificial distillation of coal coal tar or paraffin .
Asphalt binder must be homogeneous and free of water .
.B Performance Grade Asphalt Binders PG asphalt binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS PG Asphalt Binders Quality characteristic Test method Requirement PG a PG PG PG PG Original Binder Flash point min C AASHTO T Solubilityb min AASHTO T Viscosity at Cc max Pas AASHTO T . . . . .
Dynamic shear Test temperature at rads C Gsindelta min kPa Gsindelta max kPa AASHTO T . . . . . . . . . . RTFOf teste mass loss max AASHTO T . . . . . RTFOf Test Aged Binder Dynamic shear Test temperature at rads C Gsindelta min kPa AASHTO T . . . . . Ductility at C min cm AASHTO T PAVg Test temperature C AASHTO R RTFOf Test and PAVg Aged Binder Dynamic shear Test temperature at rads C Gsindelta max kPa AASHTO T d d d d d Creep stiffness Test temperature C Svalue max MPa Mvalue min AASHTO T . . . . . aUse as asphalt rubber base stock for high mountain and high desert area .
bThe Engineer waives solubility requirements if the supplier is an authorized material source as defined by the Departments Certification Program for Suppliers of Asphalt .
cThe Engineer waives this specification if the supplier provides written certification the asphalt binder can be adequately pumped and mixed at temperatures meeting applicable safety standards .
dTest the sample at C higher if it fails at the specified test temperature .
Gsindelta remains kPa maximum .
eThe residue from mass change determination may be used for other tests .
fRTFO means rolling thin film oven .
gPAV means Pressure Aging Vessel .
PG modified asphalt binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS PG Modified Asphalt Binders Quality characteristic Test method Requirement PG M PG M PG M Original Binder Flash point min C AASHTO T Solubility min AASHTO T a . . .b Viscosity at Cc max Pas AASHTO T . . .
Dynamic shear Test temperature at rads C Gsindelta min kPa AASHTO T . . . RTFOg testd Mass loss max AASHTO T . . . RTFOg Test Aged Binder Dynamic shear Test temperature at rads C Gsindelta min kPa AASHTO T . . .
Dynamic shear Test temperature at rads C Delta max degree AASHTO T e e e Elastic recoveryf Test temperature C Recovery min AASHTO T PAVh Temperature C AASHTO R RTFOg Test and PAVh Aged Binder Dynamic shear Test temperature at rads C Gsindelta max kPa AASHTO T Creep stiffness Test temperature C Svalue max Mpa Mvalue min AASHTO T . . . aThe Department allows ASTM D or ASTM D instead of AASHTO T . Particles recovered from ASTM D or ASTM D or AASHTO T must be less than m .
bReport only for spray application .
cThe Engineer waives the viscosity requirements if the supplier provides written certification the asphalt binder can be adequately pumped and mixed at temperatures meeting applicable safety standards .
dThe residue from mass change determination may be used for other tests .
eTest temperature is the temperature at which Gsindelta is .
kPa .
A graph of log Gsindelta plotted against temperature may be used to determine the test temperature when Gsindelta is .
kPa .
A graph of delta versus temperature may be used to determine delta at the temperature when Gsindelta is .
kPa .
The graph must have at least points that envelope Gsindelta of .
kPa and the test temperature must not be more than degree C apart .
The Engineer also accepts direct measurement of delta at the temperature when Gsindelta is .
kPa .
fTests without a force ductility clamp may be performed .
gRTFO means rolling thin film oven .
hPAV means Pressure Aging Vessel .
Do not modify PG modified asphalt binder using polyphosphoric acid .
SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS Crumb rubber must be from automobile and truck tires and must be free from contaminants including fabric metal minerals and other nonrubber substances .
PG modified asphalt binder modified with crumb rubber must be homogeneous and must not contain visible particles of crumb rubber .
The supplier of PG modified asphalt binder modified with crumb rubber must .
Report the quantity of crumb rubber by weight of asphalt binder .
Certify a minimum of percent of crumb rubber by weight of asphalt binder .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT If asphalt binder is paid for as a bid item the payment quantity for any type of asphalt binder is measured by weight If a partial load of asphalt binder is used and a scale is not available within miles the weight of asphalt binder remaining on the transporting vehicle may be determined from volumetric measurements provided that the asphalt binder is delivered in a calibrated tank with a measuring stick and calibration card or trucks equipped with a vehicle tank meter and a calibrated thermometer that determines the asphalt binder temperature at delivery .
Before converting the volume to weight the volume measured must be reduced to what the asphalt binder would occupy at degrees F. Use the following conversion table to convert asphalt binder volume to weight SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS Conversion Table t A B t A B t A B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notes t observed temperature in degrees F A multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of .
pcf or higher B multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of from .
to .
pcf SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS Conversion TableContinued t A B t A B t A B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notes t observed temperature in degrees F A multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of .
pcf or higher B multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of from .
to .
pcf SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS Conversion TableContinued t A B t A B t A B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notes t observed temperature in degrees F A multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of .
pcf or higher B multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of from .
to .
pcf SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS Conversion TableContinued t A B t A B t A B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notes t observed temperature in degrees F A multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of .
pcf or higher B multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of from .
to .
pcf SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS Conversion TableContinued t A B t A B t A B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notes t observed temperature in degrees F A multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of .
pcf or higher B multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of from .
to .
pcf SECTION ASPHALT BINDERS Conversion TableContinued t A B t A B t A B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notes t observed temperature in degrees A multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of .
pcf or higher B multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F for asphalt binder with density at F of from .
to .
pcf RESERVED ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing asphaltic emulsions .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals Submit an SDS for each shipment of asphaltic emulsion to the job site .
If you use the asphaltic emulsion before the Departments sampling and testing is complete submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment to the job site .
The certificate of compliance must include .
Shipment number and shipment date .
Source refinery consignee and destination .
Type and description of material with specific gravity and quantity .
Contract or purchase order number .
Signature by the manufacturer of the material and a statement that the material complies with the Contract .
Test results showing the material complies with section .
If no certificate of compliance is submitted do not use asphaltic emulsion until authorized .
.D Quality Assurance Sample asphaltic emulsion under AASHTO T . Store samples in clean and airtight sealed containers .
Storage temperature must be at least degrees F until tested .
The Engineer may waive the settlement test if the asphaltic emulsion is used in less than days from the time the sample is taken. . MATERIALS .A General Asphaltic emulsions must be composed of a bituminous material uniformly emulsified with water and an emulsifying or a stabilizing agent .
Polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must contain a polymer .
Asphaltic emulsion must be homogeneous .
Within days after delivery and if freezing has not caused separation the asphaltic emulsion must be homogeneous after thorough mixing .
Asphaltic emulsion must be anionic cationic polymer modified or quick setting .
.B Anionic Asphaltic Emulsions Anionic asphaltic emulsion must be rapid setting medium setting or slow setting .
Rapidsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS RapidSetting Anionic Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grade RS Grade RS Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds Settlement days max Storage stability test day max a Demulsibility ml .
N CaCl min b Sieve test max . . Residue by distillation min Tests on residue from distillation test Penetration C c c Ductility C mmminute min mm Solubility in trichloroethylene min . . aThe hour storage stability test may be used instead of the day settlement test .
bThe demulsibility test must be made within days from date of shipment .
cA harder base asphalt meeting current asphalt binder specifications may be specified if the test requirements on the residue from distillation are waived .
Mediumsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table MediumSetting Anionic Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grade MS Grade MS Grade MSh Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T min min Settlement days max Storage stability test day max a Coating ability and water resistance Coating dry aggregate good good good Coating after spraying fair fair fair Coating wet aggregate fair fair fair Coating after spraying fair fair fair Sieve test max .
. . Residue by distillation min Tests on residue from distillation test Penetration C Ductility C mmminute min mm Solubility in trichloroethylene min .
. . aThe hour storage stability test may be used instead of the day settlement test .
Slowsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS SlowSetting Anionic Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grade SS Grade SSh Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Settlement days max Storage stability test day max a Cement mixing test max . . Sieve test max . . Residue by distillation min Tests on residue from distillation test Penetration C Ductility C mmminute min mm Solubility in trichloroethylene min . . aThe hour storage stability test may be used instead of the day settlement test .
.C Cationic Asphaltic Emulsions Cationic asphaltic emulsion must be rapid medium or slow setting .
Rapidsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table RapidSetting Cationic Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grade CRS Grade CRS Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Settlement days max Storage stability test day max a Demulsibility ml .
sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate min b Particle charge test positive positive Sieve test max . . Distillation Oil distillate by volume of emulsion max Residue min Tests on residue . . Tests on residue from distillation test Penetration C c c Ductility C mmminute min mm Solubility in trichloroethylene min . . aThe hour storage stability test may be used instead of the day settlement test .
bThe demulsibility test must be made within days from date of shipment .
cA harder base asphalt meeting current asphalt binder specifications may be specified if the test requirements on the residue from distillation are waived .
Mediumsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS MediumSetting Cationic Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grade CMSS Grade CMS Grade CMSh Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Settlement days max Storage stability test day max a Coating ability and water resistance Coating dry aggregate good good good Coating after spraying fair fair fair Coating wet aggregate fair fair fair Coating after spraying fair fair fair Particle charge test positive positive positive Sieve test max .
. . Distillation Oil distillate by volume of emulsion max Residue min Tests on residue from distillation test Penetration C Ductility C mmminute min mm Solubility in trichloroethylene min .
. . aThe hour storage stability test may be used instead of the day settlement test .
Slowsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SlowSetting Cationic Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grade CSS Grade CSSh Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Settlement days max Storage stability test day max a Particle charge test Positiveb Positiveb Sieve test max . . Cement mixing test max . . Residue by distillation min Tests on residue from distillation test Penetration C Ductility C mmminute min mm Solubility in trichloroethylene min . . aThe hour storage stability test may be used instead of the day settlement test .
bMust comply with a pH requirement of .
maximum under ASTM E if the particle charge test result is inconclusive .
.D Polymer Modified Asphaltic Emulsions Polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS Polymer Modified Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Anionic Cationic Grade PMRS Grade PMRSh Grade PMCRS Grade PMCRSh Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Settlement days max Storage stability test day max Sieve test max . . . . Demulsibility min a a b b Particle charge positive positive Ash content max ASTM D . . . . Residue by evaporation min California Test Tests on residue from evaporation test Penetration C AASHTO T Ductility C min mm AASHTO T Torsional recovery min or Polymer content at by weight min California Test California Test . . . . aUse ml of .
N CaCl solution .
bUse ml of .
sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate solution .
.E Quicksetting Asphaltic Emulsions Quicksetting asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS Quicksetting Asphaltic Emulsion Requirements Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Anionic Cationic Grade QS Grade QSh Grade CQS Grade CQSh Saybolt Furol viscosity C Saybolt Furol seconds AASHTO T Storage stability test day max Sieve test max . . . .
Particle chargea negative negative positive positive Residue by distillation min Tests on residue from distillation test Penetration C AASHTO T Ductility C min mm AASHTO T Solubility in trichloroethylene min AASHTO T aIf the result of the particle charge test is inconclusive the asphaltic emulsion must be tested for pH under ASTM E. Grade QSh asphaltic emulsion must have a minimum pH of .. Grade CQSh asphaltic emulsion must have a maximum pH of .. . CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT The quantity of asphaltic emulsion is the weight determined before the addition of any water .
The weight of asphaltic emulsion is determined from volumetric measurements if .
Partial loads are used .
Scale is not available within miles .
Asphaltic emulsion is delivered in .. Trucks with each tank calibrated and accompanied by its measuring stick and calibration card .. Trucks equipped with a vehicle tank meter and a calibrated thermometer that determines the asphalt temperature at delivery For volumetric measurements the measured volume of asphaltic emulsion is reduced to the volume the material would occupy at degrees F. One ton of asphaltic emulsion at degrees F equals gal .
One gallon of asphaltic emulsion at degrees F equals .
lb .
Convert volume to weight using the factors shown in the following table SECTION ASPHALTIC EMULSIONS Conversion Table t M t M t M t M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . t observed temperature in degrees F M multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of F EPOXY GENERAL .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for mixing and applying epoxy .
.B Definitions kit Two proportioned epoxy components packaged together .
.C Submittals Submit a certificate of compliance for epoxy .
.D Quality Assurance Reserved .
MATERIALS .A General Furnish epoxy as components and mix them together at the job site .
.B Packaging Labeling and Storing Each epoxy component must be packaged in containers of a size proportional to the amount of that component in the mix so that container of each component is used in mixing batch of epoxy .
The containers must be sealed to prevent leakage and must not react with the components .
Each container must be clearly labeled by the epoxy manufacturer with .
ASTM CCM class and type .
Component designation A or B .
Manufacturers name .
Manufacture date .
Batch number .
Expiration date .
Directions for use .
Warnings or precautions required by State and federal laws and regulations Store epoxy components at temperatures greater than degrees F. .C Epoxy Binder Epoxy binder must be a lowviscosity epoxy formulated primarily for use in .
Making HS epoxy concrete and epoxy mortar .
Pressure grouting cracks in concrete For loadbearing applications the epoxy must comply with ASTM CCM Type IV Grade Class B or C. For nonloadbearing applications the epoxy must comply with ASTM CCM Type I Grade Class B or C. Use Class B whenever the surface temperature is from to degrees F. Use Class C whenever the surface temperature is above degrees F. If epoxy binder is used for HS epoxy concrete or epoxy mortar thoroughly mix the components before adding aggregate .
The mix proportions must be part epoxy to parts aggregate by volume .
Aggregate must be clean and have a moisture content of not more than .
percent when tested under California Test .
.D Epoxy Adhesive for Bonding Freshly Mixed Concrete to Hardened Concrete Epoxy adhesive for bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete must comply with ASTM CCM Type V Grade Class B or C. SECTION EPOXY Use Class B whenever the surface temperature is from to degrees F or if a faster cure is required .
Use Class C whenever the surface temperature is above degrees F. .E Rapid Set Epoxy Adhesive for Pavement Markers Rapid set epoxy adhesive for bonding pavement markers to concrete and HMA must comply with ASTM CCM Type IV Grade Class B or C. The gel time for rapid set epoxy adhesive may be less than minutes .
Use Class B whenever the surface temperature is from to degrees F. Use Class C whenever the surface temperature is above degrees F. The epoxy adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Rapid Set Epoxy Adhesive For Pavement Markers Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Gel time max minutes at F California Test Bond strength to concrete minutes maximum to reach not less than psi at F at F Slant shear strength min psi days at F days at F plus water soak Tensile adhesion and cohesion min psi Ceramic marker bottom Ceramic marker bottom including post cure Retroreflective pavement marker bottom Color of mixed epoxy gray Glass transition temperaturea Tg minimum F aBefore testing samples must be conditioned at F for hours under ASTM D .F Standard Set Epoxy Adhesive for Pavement Markers Standard set epoxy adhesive for bonding pavement markers to concrete and HMA must comply with ASTM CCM Type IV Grade Class B or C. Use Class B whenever the surface temperature is from to degrees F. Use Class C whenever the surface temperature is above degrees F. The epoxy adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Standard Set Epoxy Adhesive For Pavement Markers Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Bond strength to concrete hours maximum to reach not less than psi California Test at F . at F Slant shear strength min psi days at F days at F plus water soak Tensile adhesion and cohesion min psi Ceramic marker bottom Ceramic marker bottom including post cure Reflective pavement marker bottom Color of mixed components gray Glass transition temperaturea Tg minimum F aBefore testing samples must be conditioned at F for hours under ASTM D SECTION EPOXY .G Epoxy Sealant for Inductive Loops The epoxy for sealing inductive loops and leads imbedded in HMA and concrete must comply with ASTM CCM Type I Grade .
The epoxy sealant must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Epoxy Sealant for Inductive Loops Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Tensile strengtha min psi California Test Elongationa min Shore D hardnessa minimum aTest on a .inchthick cast sheet cured hours at F plus hours at F .H Epoxy Resin Adhesive for Pressure Injection Grouting of Concrete Pavement The epoxy resin adhesive for injection grouting of concrete pavement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Epoxy Resin Adhesive for Injection Grouting of Concrete Pavement Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Brookfield viscosity No .
spindle at rpm max poise at F California Test .
Gel time minutes Slant shear strength on dry concretea min psi after days of cure in air at F Slant shear strength on wet concretea min psi after days of cure in air at F Tensile strength min psi after days of cure at F Elongation max after days of cure at F aTest for slant shear strength as follows except item in the list does not apply for testing on dry concrete .
Soak blocks in water for hours at F. Remove and wipe off excess water . .
Apply a coat of epoxy .inchthick to each diagonal surface .
Place pieces of shim stock on block to control final film thickness .
Shim stock pieces must be .
by .
inch and .
inch thick .
Before pressing the coated surfaces together leave the blocks such that the coated surfaces are horizontal until the epoxy reacts slightly to prevent excessive flow. . CONSTRUCTION Mix and apply the epoxy under the manufacturers instructions .
Do not use an epoxy component if any of the following occur .
Evidence of crystallization .
Permanent increase in viscosity too thick to be adequately mixed .
Settled pigments that can not be readily dispersed with a paddle .
Component is older than the manufacturers recommended expiration date Thoroughly stir each epoxy component before mixing them together .
Do not mix partial kits .
Do not add solvents .
Automatic mixing equipment must have positive displacement pumps and be capable of metering a component mix in the specified ratio percent by volume of either component .
Mix the epoxy components until no trace of black or white streaks is present in the mixed epoxy .
Clean surfaces to receive the epoxy of rust paint grease asphalt loose and deleterious material .
Apply the epoxy and place materials to be bonded before the epoxy starts to thicken .
Do not use epoxy that has exceeded its working life .
Prime surfaces with epoxy immediately before placing epoxy concrete or mortar .
SECTION EPOXY When bonding freshlymixed concrete to hardened concrete coat the blastcleaned concrete surface with epoxy using a brush or roller .
Place freshlymixed concrete while the epoxy is tacky .
Apply new coat of epoxy if the epoxy sets. . PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED GEOSYNTHETICS .
GENERAL .A Summary Section includes specifications for furnishing geosynthetics .
.B Definitions Reserved .C Submittals .C General For each type of geosynthetic submit .
Certificate of compliance .
Test sample representing each lot .
Minimum average roll value Label submittals with the manufacturers name and product information .
.C Geotechnical Subsurface Reinforcement Submit the LTDS and its supporting calculations at least days before placing geotechnical subsurface reinforcement .
The calculations must be signed by an engineer registered as a civil engineer in the State .
.D Quality Assurance Geosynthetics must be on the DataMine list for geotextiles and geosynthetics at the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program website .
The product name manufacturing source and date of manufacture must be printed every meters along the edge of the material except for .
Paving mat .
Paving grid Class and .
Biaxial geogrid .
MATERIALS .A General Treat geosynthetics to resist degradation from exposure to sunlight .
Furnish geosynthetics in covers to protect against damage from moisture sunlight and shipping and storage .
.B Filter Fabric Geosynthetics used for filter fabric must be permeable and nonwoven .
Filter fabric must be manufactured from one of the following .
Polyester .
Polypropylene .
Combined polyester and polypropylene SECTION GEOSYNTHETICS Filter fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Filter Fabric Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Class A Class B Class C Permittivity min sec ASTM D . . .
Apparent opening size average roll value max US standard sieve size ASTM D Grab breaking load inch grip in each direction min lb ASTM D Apparent elongation in each direction min percent ASTM D Puncture strength min lb ASTM D Trapezoid tearing strength min lb ASTM D UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D .C Geocomposite Wall Drain Geocomposite wall drain must consist of a polymeric core with filter fabric integrally bonded to one or both sides of the core creating a stable drainage void .
Filter fabric must comply with section .B .
Geocomposite wall drain must be from .
to inches thick .
Geocomposite wall drain must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Geocomposite Wall Drain Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Transmissivity galminft gradient .
Normal stress psf ASTM D .D Geotechnical Subsurface Reinforcement .D General Geosynthetic reinforcement used for geotechnical subsurface reinforcement must be either geotextile or geogrid .
When tested under ASTM D geotextile permittivity must be at least .
sec .
Geogrid must have a regular and defined open area .
The open area must be from to percent of the total grid area .
.D Long Term Design Strength Determine the LTDS of geosynthetic reinforcement from the ultimate tensile strength in the primary strength direction divided by reduction factors .
Calculate LTDS from the guidelines in Geosynthetic Research Institute Standard Practice GGa GRI GGb or GRI GT .
The product of the reduction factors must be at least ..
Determine the reduction factor for creep using a year design life for permanent applications .
For temporary applications use a year design life to determine the reduction factor .
Determine the installation damage reduction factor from the characteristics of backfill materials used .
If test data is not available use default values of reduction factors in the Geosynthetic Research Institute Standard Practice to determine LTDS .
SECTION GEOSYNTHETICS .E Silt Fence Fabric Silt fence fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Silt Fence Fabric Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Woven Nonwoven Grab breaking load inch grip in each direction min lb ASTM D Apparent elongation in each direction min percent ASTM D Water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft ASTM D Permittivity min sec ASTM D . .
Apparent opening size average roll value max inches ASTM D . . UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D .F GravelFilled Bag Gravelfilled bag must comply with the requirements shown in the following table GravelFilled Bag Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Grab breaking load inch grip in each direction min lb ASTM D Water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft ASTM D Permittivity min sec ASTM D . Apparent opening size average roll value max inches ASTM D . UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D .G Sediment Filter Bag The sediment filter bag must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Sediment Filter Bag Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Woven Nonwoven Grab breaking load inch grip in each directionmin lb ASTM D Apparent elongation in each direction min percent ASTM D Water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft ASTM D Permittivity min sec ASTM D . .
Apparent opening size average roll value max inches ASTM D . . UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D SECTION GEOSYNTHETICS .H Temporary Cover Temporary cover must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Temporary Cover Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Woven Nonwoven Grab breaking load inch grip in each direction min lb ASTM D Apparent elongation in each direction min percent ASTM D Water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft ASTM D Permittivity min sec ASTM D . .
Apparent opening size average roll valuemax inches ASTM D . . UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D .I Rock Slope Protection Fabric RSP fabric must be a permeable nonwoven needlepunched geotextile .
The fabric must be manufactured from one of the following .
Polyester .
Polypropylene .
Combined polyester and polypropylene Polymers must be either virgin compounds or clean reworked material .
Do not subject virgin compounds to use or processing other than required for initial manufacture .
Clean reworked material must be previously processed material from the processors own production that has been reground pelletized or solvated .
The fabric must not contain more than percent of clean reworked material by weight .
Do not use recycled materials from either postconsumer or postindustrial sources .
RSP fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table RSP Fabric Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Class Class Massmin ozsq yd ASTM D . .
Grab breaking load inch grip in each direction min lb ASTM D Apparent elongation in each direction min percent ASTM D Permittivity min sec ASTM D . .
Apparent opening size min and max US Standard sieve size ASTM D UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D .J Paving Fabric Geosynthetics used for paving fabric must be nonwoven .
SECTION GEOSYNTHETICS Paving fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Paving Fabric Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Mass per unit area min ozsq yd ASTM D . Grab breaking load inch grip in each direction min lb ASTM D Apparent elongation in each direction min percent ASTM D Hydraulic bursting strength min psi ASTM D Melting point min F ASTM D Asphalt retention min galsq yd ASTM D . .K Paving Mat Geosynthetics used for paving mat must be a nonwoven fiberglass and polyester hybrid material .
Paving mat must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Paving Mat Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Breaking force min lb inch cut strip ASTM D Ultimate elongation max percent ASTM D Mass per unit area min ozsq yd ASTM D . Melting point min F ASTM D Asphalt retention min galsq yd ASTM D . .L Paving Grid Geosynthetics used for paving grid must be a geopolymer material formed into a grid of integrally connected elements with openings .
Paving grid must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Paving Grid Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Class I Class II Class III Tensile strength at ultimate min lbina ASTM D x Aperture size min inch Calipered .
. . Elongation max percent ASTM D Mass per area min ozsq yd ASTM D . Melting point min F ASTM D a For Class I machine direction x cross direction .
For Class II and Class III both directions .
.M Paving Geocomposite Grid Paving geocomposite grid must consist of a paving grid specified in section .L bonded or integrated with a paving fabric as specified in section .J .
Paving geocomposite grid must have a peel strength of at least lbft when tested under ASTM D. .N Geocomposite Strip Membrane Geocomposite strip membrane must be various widths of strips manufactured from asphaltic rubber and geosynthetics .
SECTION GEOSYNTHETICS Geocomposite strip membrane must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Geocomposite Strip Membrane Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Strip tensile strength min lbinch ASTM D Elongation at break min percent ASTM D Resistance to puncture min lb ASTM E Permeance max perms ASTM EEM .
Pliability inch mandrel with sample conditioned at F ASTM D No cracks in fabric or bitumen Melting point F ASTM D .O Subgrade Enhancement Geotextile Subgrade enhancement geotextile must be either polyester or polypropylene .
Subgrade enhancement geotextile must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Subgrade Enhancement Geotextile Quality characteristic Test method Requirementa Class A Class A Class B Class B Class B Elongation at break percent ASTM D Grab breaking load inch grip in each direction min lb ASTM D Wide width tensile strength at percent strain min lbft ASTM D Wide width tensile strength at ultimate strength min lbft ASTM D Tear strength min lb ASTM D Puncture strength min lb ASTM D Permittivity min sec ASTM D . . . . .
Apparent opening size min inches ASTM D . . . . . UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D aValues are based on minimum average roll value in the weaker principal direction except apparent opening size is based on maximum average roll value .
.P Biaxial Geogrid Geosynthetics used for biaxial geogrid must be a punched and drawn polypropylene material formed into an integrally formed biaxial grid .
SECTION GEOSYNTHETICS Biaxial geogrid must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Biaxial Geogrid Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Aperture size min and max incha Calipered .. x .. Rib thickness min inch Calipered .
Junction thickness min inch Calipered .
Tensile strength strain min lbfta ASTM D x Tensile strength at ultimate min lbfta ASTM D x UV resistance retained tensile strength hours min percent ASTM D Junction strength min lbfta ASTM D x Overall flexural rigidity min mgcm ASTM D Torsional rigidity at cmkg min mmkgdegb GRI GG .
aMachine direction x cross direction bGeosynthetic Research Institute Test Method GG Torsional Behavior of Bidirectional Geogrids When Subjected to InPlane Rotation .Q Geosynthetic Bond Breaker Geosynthetic bond breaker must be nonwoven needle punched not heat treated polypropylene polyethylene material .
Geosynthetic bond breaker material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table Geosynthetic Bond Breaker Quality characteristic Test method Requirement Mass per unit area min ozsq yd ASTM D . Thickness at psi min mm ASTM D . Tensile strength at ultimate min lbft ASTM D Elongation max percent ASTM D Permittivity at .
psi min ms ASTM D . Hydraulic transmissivity at psi min ms ASTM D . UV resistance retained grab breaking load hours min percent ASTM D .R.Y Reserved .
CONSTRUCTION Not Used .
PAYMENT Not Used RESERVED DIVISION XII BUILDING CONSTRUCTION BUILDING CONSTRUCTION Reserved INDEX A abandon Abbreviations Abrasives blast cleaning Access gates Access openings bridge Act of God Activity Addresses adjust Adjust frames covers grates and manholes inlets Admixtures dispensing liquid types Aerially deposited lead Aggregate coarse fine gradations minor concrete washing Aggregate bases approach slabs compacting grade tolerance spreading subgrade Aggregate subbases grade tolerance Agreements Air pollution control Air quality Air release valve assembly Alternative dispute resolution Alternative earth retaining systems Alternative slotted pipe Alternative sound wall systems Anchor assemblies overside drains steel Antitrust Claims Apprentices Approach slabs cementitious material content coefficient of friction compressive strength rapid strength concrete smoothness Type N Type R Arbitration Archaeological resources archaeological monitor archaeological monitoring area Arches structural metal plate INDEX Areas for use Armorclad conductors irrigation systems Asbestos Asbuilt drawings Asphalt binders Asphalt concrete Asphalt rubber binder hot mix asphalt seal coats Asphalt treated permeable base spreading and compacting Asphalt treated permeable material Asphaltic emulsions nonpolymer seal coats polymer seal coats seal coats Asphaltic plug joint seals Authorized Facility Audit List Authorized laboratory Authorized Material List Authorized Material Source List B Backfill structure cement treated for slotted corrugated steel pipe Backflow preventer assembly irrigation systems Ball valves irrigation systems Barricades Barrier thrie beam Barriers concrete Base Basement material Bases aggregate cement treated permeable Bending reinforcement Bent plates steel structures Bid item Bid Item List Bid items applicable sections Bid items incidental Bidders bonds insurance security bidding Bids protest Biological resources bird protection Contractorsupplied biologist fish protection natural resource protection plan species protection INDEX Wetland protection Bird protection Bituminous seals Blast cleaning painting Blasting earthwork Bolted connections steel structures Bonded wearing course Bonded wearing coursegap graded Bonding materials magnesium phosphate concrete modified highaluminabased concrete portlandcementbased concrete Bonds Booster pumps Borrow Bracing wood structures Bridge Bridge deck surface texture Bridge deck drainage system Bridge joint restrainers Bridge railings cable railing California bridge rail chain link railing pipe handrailing tubular handrailing Bridge rehabilitation remove asphalt concrete surfacing remove concrete deck surface Bridge removal protective covers Bridges wood Buildingconstruction contract Buried manmade objects earthwork Buy America C Cable railing California bridge rail California Test Cam coupler assembly irrigation system Casings for bridges miscellaneous drainage facilities Castings carbon steel gray iron malleable iron Castinplace concrete piles CIDH concrete piles CISS concrete piles driven steel shells filled with concrete Cattle guards Cement Cement mortar reinforced concrete pipe joints INDEX Cement treated permeable base spreading and compacting Cement treated bases compacting construction joints curing seal grade tolerance operation time requirement plantmixed roadmixed subgrade Cement treated permeable material Cement treated structure backfill for slotted corrugated steel pipe Cementitious material content concrete structures corrosive environment freezethaw area minor concrete precast concrete rapid strength concrete Certificate of compliance Certifications Certified Industrial Hygienist Certified payroll records certify backflow preventers Chain link fence Chain link railing Change Order approval bills Change order work Changeable message signs portable Changes work character Channelizers Charpy Vnotch testing structural steel Check testing Check valves irrigation systems Checks Chemical adhesives CIDH concrete piles CISS concrete piles Class surface finish Class surface finish Class N steel pipe piles Class R steel pipe piles Cleanup Clearing and grubbing Closure Coated welded steel pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Coatings Coatings miscellaneous Cofferdam waterfilled Cofferdams Cold planing asphalt concrete pavement Colored concrete INDEX Column casings Commercial quality Commercial source Compaction Compaction equipment cement treated permeable bases Compaction equipment earthwork Composite steel spiral rib pipe with smooth interior Compressive strength concrete concrete structures minor concrete rapid strength concrete selfconsolidating concrete Concrete admixtures aggregate aggregate gradations backfill pipe trenches cementitious material content cementitious materials channel lining compressive strength corrosive environment curing deicing chemicals exposed to ditch lining form liners freezethaw area gutter depressions gutter lining members prestressing minor mixing pavement portland cement pavement sealed joints precast precast members prequalification proportioning protecting rapid strength selfconsolidating shrinkage slope paving slope protection supplementary cementitious materials textured and colored transporting uniformity water mixing water quantity of Concrete anchorage devices installation materials Concrete backfill Concrete barriers Concrete removal Concrete structures INDEX cementitious material content compressive strength construction joints finishing pier columns placing concrete precast members prequalification seal course sealed joints sliding joints waterstops Concretedrock slope protection Cones traffic Confined space Construction area signs Construction surveys Containment systems painting Contract acceptance award compliance failure execution failure of enforcement form hierarchy of components intent termination time Contract time Contractor representative Contractorgenerated hazardous waste Contractorsupplied biologist Control pump booster pump pumping plant electrical equipment Control and neutral conductors irrigation systems Controlled lowstrength material Controlling activity Conversion table asphaltic emulsions Coordination other entities Core and pressure grout dowels Core concrete Corrugated aluminum pipe Corrugated metal pipe aluminum steel Corrugated metal pipe arch Corrugated metal pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Corrugated steel pipe Costs flagging Cottonwood cuttings Coupling bands corrugated metal pipe Crack and Seat Crack treatment INDEX Crash cushion module temporary Crib walls Critical path Critical path method Critical path method schedule Level Level Level Crumb rubber modifier hot mix asphalt seal coats Cultivation Cultural resources Culvert Culvert beddings Culvert rehabilitation machine spiral wound PVC pipeliners Curb construction extruded slipform Curbs and sidewalks existing Curing compound testing water loss Curing concrete concrete structures curing compound method formsinplace method precast steam water for water method waterproof membrane method Curing seal cement treated bases Cuttings planting D Damage repair and restoration Dampproofing Data cores Data date Deck bleeder drain Deck seal Decks bridge bleeder drains cementitious material content coefficient of friction crack intensity curing placing concrete rapid strength concrete removing forms smoothness Decomposed granite Deduction Deficiency thickness aggregate bases INDEX thickness aggregate subbases thickness cement treated bases Delay Delineators portable Delivery storage and handling steel structures Density cores Department Departmentfurnished material Departmentgenerated hazardous waste Departmentowned float Depressions concrete gutter Described interpretation Determination of pile length Detour Detours obliterating Devices temporary traffic control Differing site conditions Direct design method reinforced concrete pipe Director Disabled veteran business enterprise Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Disposal material on nonhighway property District Disturbance of existing paint systems on bridges Divided highway Douglas fir Downdrains pipe aluminum plastic steel Drainage inlets Drainage appurtenances miscellaneous drainage facilities Drainage inlet markers miscellaneous drainage facilities Drainage pumping equipment Drains horizontal overside plastic pipe horizontal subsurface Drill and bond dowel chemical adhesive Drill and bond dowels Drilled holes drilling to assist pile driving predrilled holes Drip irrigation tubing irrigation systems Drip valve assemblies irrigation systems Driven piles precast prestressed concrete piles steel pipe piles steel sheet piles steel shells structural shape steel piling Driven steel shells INDEX Driving system submittal Drums traffic plastic Dynamic monitoring E Early completion time Earth retaining systems alternative Earthwork borrow material cofferdams compaction deficiency material ditch excavation embankment construction ground anchor walls relative compaction roadway excavation selected material settlement periods slides and slipouts slopes soil nail walls soldier pile walls structure excavation and backfill surcharge surplus material Edge drains Edging landscape Elastomeric bearing pads Electrical systems falsework lighting painting pavement illumination falsework pedestrian walkway illumination through falsework Embankment mechanically stabilized Embankment construction Emissions reduction Emulsions asphaltic Enclosures painting Engineer authority by the to the Entrance tapers aluminum steel Environmentally sensitive area Epoxy binder bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete pressure injection grouting of concrete pavement rapid set for pavement markers sealant for inductive loops INDEX standard set for pavement markers Epoxy crack injection bridge Epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement reinforcement Epoxycoated and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement Equipment booster pumps drainage pumping identification pumping and controls pumping plant electrical Erosion control quality assurance submittals Erosion control application bonded fiber matrix compost compost socks drill seed dry seed duff fiber rolls hydromulch hydroseed incorporate materials rolled erosion control products straw topsoil Erosion control materials compost compost socks duff fasteners fertilizer fiber fiber rolls imported topsoil local topsoil rolled erosion control products blankets jute mesh netting turf reinforcement mats seed straw tackifier bonded fiber matrix topsoil Erosion control payment Estimated cost Excavation regional notification center Existing curbs and sidewalks Existing asphalt concrete Existing facilities abandon adjust INDEX culvert rehabilitation culvert rehabilitation machine spiral wound PVC pipeliners modify remove drainage facilities remove irrigation facilities Existing Irrigation facilities Existing planting Existing Planting Existing plants maintaining pruning of transplanting Existing structures access opening bridge deck rehabilitation bridge removal bridge removal protective covers core concrete epoxy crack injection methacrylate resin bridge deck treatment polyester concrete overlay prepare concrete deck surface rapid setting concrete patch refinish bridge deck rehabilitate structures remove chip seal remove unsound concrete repair spalled surface area structure removal Expanded polystyrene Expansion joints concrete sidewalks Exploratory work horizontal drains Extra work Extra work performed by specialists Extruded curb construction F Fabrication steel structures Falsework lighting pavement illumination pedestrian walkway illumination portal illumination steel structures Fastener threads Fasteners steel structures Faying and bearing surfaces steel structures Federalaid contract Fences chain link existing fences gates high visibility temporary INDEX Type CL Types BW and WM Fertilizer Field tests irrigation systems Filter fabric Final pay item Finished grade Finishing roadway Fish protection Fixed cost Flag trees telescoping Flagging costs Flared end sections miscellaneous drainage facilities Flashing arrow signs Flexible hose irrigation systems Float Flow sensors irrigation systems Flume downdrains aluminum steel Foliage protectors Force account equipment rental general labor material Force account work Form panels Form panels concrete structures Formed relief texture Forms Forms concrete structures Foundation preparation Fractured rib texture Framed bents wood structures Framing wood structures Freezethaw areas Full Depth ReclamationCement Full Depth ReclamationFoamed Asphalt G Gabions Galvanized reinforcement Galvanizing Gammagamma logging Garden valve assemblies irrigation systems Garden valves irrigation systems Gate valves irrigation systems Geocomposite drain systems Geocomposite strip membrane Geosynthetic pavement interlayer Geosynthetic reinforced embankment Geosynthetic reinforcement Geosynthetics filter fabric geocomposite strip membrane geosynthetic reinforcement INDEX gravelfilled bag paving fabric paving geocomposite grid paving grid paving mat rock slope protection fabric sediment filter bag silt fence fabric subgrade enhancement geotextile temporary cover wall drain Grade tolerance aggregate bases tolerance cement treated bases Grade tolerance earthwork Grading plane Grates Gravel mulch Gravelfilled bag Groove and grind pavement Ground anchor walls earthwork Ground anchors load testing submittals Ground covers inert Grout Guarantee Gutter depressions concrete H Handrailing pipe Handrailing tubular Hardware wood structures Hazardous waste and contamination Hazardous waste management Headed bar reinforcement Headings Heavy abrasive blast texture HemFir High strength fasteners steel structures Highway Holiday definition document submittal Horizontal drains Hot mix asphalt bonded wearing course bonded wearing coursegap graded bridge decks data cores density cores dispute resolution edge treatment geosynthetic pavement interlayer job mix formula modification renewal INDEX verification joints longitudinal leveling lime treatment liquid antistrip material transfer vehicle method compaction miscellaneous areas and dikes open graded friction course plants plasticity index production startup reclaimed asphalt pavement rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded smoothness corrections superpave tack coat Hot mix asphalt Type A hours of darkness I Idle equipment Imperative mood Indemnification Inertial profiler Informalbid contract Information Handout Inlet depressions miscellaneous drainage facilities Inspection access final request Inspection job site Installation tension testing steel structures Insurance Irrigation conduit irrigation systems Irrigation controllers irrigation systems Irrigation supply line irrigation systems Irrigation system testing Irrigation systems armorclad conductors backflow preventer assembly cam coupler assembly certify backflow preventers check and test existing irrigation facilities conductors flow sensors irrigation conduit irrigation controller enclosure cabinet irrigation controllers irrigation supply line pipe pressure tests sprinkler assemblies temporary testing INDEX trenching and backfilling valve boxes and covers valves wiring plans and diagrams J Jacking pavement Job mix formula Job site Job site appearance Job site management Joint seal assemblies MR inches Joint seal assemblies MR inches Joints culvert and drainage pipe culvert and drainage pipe performance specifications expansion concrete sidewalks plastic pipe culvert rubber gasketed reinforced concrete pipe siphons corrugated metal pipe slip overside drains aluminum steel L Labor Code Labor Surcharge and Equipment Rental Rates Lagging timber Landscape cultivation definition irrigation landscape elements pesticides plant damage plant establishment work planting repair of damage roadside clearing weed germination Landscape elements decomposed granite edging gravel mulch inert ground cover and mulches rock blanket site furnishings wood mulch Laws federal Lead compliance plan Lean concrete backfill Legal actions against the Department License contractor federalaid contract contractor nonfederalaid contract INDEX joint venture bidder subcontractors Licenses Lighting falsework falsework portal illumination pavement illumination falsework portal illumination walkway illumination through falsework Lime Stabilized Soil Lime treatment Liquid antistrip Liquidated damages Lists Load limits Load test piles Location marker irrigation systems M Magnesium phosphate concrete Mailboxes relocating resetting Maintaining traffic bridge painting and cleaning operations Maintaining Traffic Maintenance and protection relief Manhole frames and covers Markings existing markings Mass concrete Material control of Department furnished found on the job site furnishing of local new on hand procurement from nonhighway property proportioning source source inspection source testing storage Material hauling equipment lane Material shortage Material transfer vehicle Materials steel structures structural steel Materialsource facility audit Measurement aggregate imported top soil mulch roadway material soil amendment INDEX Measuring devices Mechanically stabilized embankment Median Members prestressed concrete Membrane waterproofing and protective cover asphalt deck seal preformed Methacrylate resin bridge deck treatment Methacrylate resin treatment bridge Method compaction Microsurfacing Midwest guardrail system end anchor assembly rail tensioning assembly steel posts wood posts Milestone Mineral grit blast cleaning Minor concrete Minor hot mix asphalt Minor structures Miscellaneous areas and dikes Miscellaneous bridge metal bolted connections construction materials Miscellaneous drainage facilities casings for bridges corrugated metal pipe drainage appurtenances drainage inlet markers flared end sections inlet depressions precast concrete pipe welded steel pipe Miscellaneous iron and steel Miscellaneous metal Miscellaneous traffic control devices delineators pavement markers Mobilization Modified highaluminabased concrete modify Modify inlets manholes and risers pipes Mortar cement reinforced concrete pipe joints Mulch landscape N Narrative report Natural resource protection plan Near critical path Noise control INDEX Nondiscrimination Nonhighway facilities Nonskid abrasive finish Nonsmall business substitution Numeric action level O obliterate Open graded friction course Ordinary surface finish OSHA Outlets edge drains underdrains Overside drains P Paint Painting antigrafitti coating application concrete containment sytems electrical systems enclosures faying surfaces galvanized surfaces machinery painting quality work plan preparing structural steel sign structures steel soldier piles steel structures structural steel thermal spray coating timber ventilated containment systems weather conditions wood structures zinc coatings Paints miscellaneous Paleontological resources Parking area seals Parking bumpers Partnering Pavement grind groove jacking portland cement concrete replacement subsealing transition tapers Pavement markers Pavement smoothness inertial profiler INDEX straightedge Paving fabric Paving geocomposite grid Paving grid Paving mat Paving notch extension Payment alternatives eliminated items progress scope PC concrete members cementitious material content PC drainage inlets PCC pavement side forms for slip form construction Perforated pipe aluminum underdrains plastic underdrains steel underdrains Permanent steel casings Permanent steel deck forms Permeable base asphalt treated cement treated Permeable material asphalt treated cement treated untreated Permits Personal liability Pervious backfill material Pesticides Pier columns Pile driving equipment Pile reinforcement Pin connections steel structures Pipe alternative slotted arches structural metal plate composite steel spiral rib with smooth interior corrugated metal corrugated metal aluminum corrugated metal arch corrugated metal bituminous coated corrugated metal bituminous lined corrugated metal coupling bands corrugated metal paved inverts corrugated metal polymeric sheet coating corrugated metal protective coatings linings and paving corrugated metal steel corrugated metal thickness corrugated steel damaged aluminum coating corrugated steel damaged galvanizing corrugated steel siphons downdrains aluminum downdrains plastic INDEX downdrains steel end finish corrugated aluminum end finish corrugated steel irrigation supply line joints culvert and drainage pipe exfiltration and infiltration testing joint systems and couplers low pressure air test other tests performance specifications plastic pipe rubber gasketed watertightness metal liner plate perforated aluminum underdrains perforated plastic .
underdrains perforated steel underdrains plastic culvert plastic horizontal drains reinforced concrete reinforced concrete circular reinforced concrete class reinforced concrete direct design method reinforced concrete joints cement mortar resilient material rubber gasketed reinforced concrete marking reinforced concrete oval shaped reinforced concrete siphons slotted corrugated steel slotted plastic edge drains spiral rib structural metal plate temporary culverts Pipe handrailing Pipe irrigation systems PLACs Plans project plans revised standard plans standard plans Plant establishment period plant establishment work Plant group designations Plant stakes Plant ties Plant pumping Plant pumping electrical equipment Planting materials watering Planting work planting plants preparing planting areas Plantmixed cement treated bases Plants maintenance of pruning INDEX replacement of staking of watering Plaster sand Plastic pipe culvert underdrain couplings Plastic lumber composite reinforced recycled structures unreinforced recycled Plastic traffic drums Plugs edge drains Polyester concrete expansion dams Polyester concrete overlay bridge Portable changeable message signs delineators signs Portal illumination falsework Portland cement Portland cement concrete pavement Portland cement concrete PCC pavement Potential claims Full and Final Potential Claim Record Initial Potential Claim Record Supplemental Potential Claim Record Precast concrete Precast concrete members Precast concrete pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Preconstruction conference Preconstruction scheduling conference Predrilled holes Premolded expansion joint filler Prepare concrete deck surface Preparing planting areas Prepaving grinding Prepaving inertial profiler Prequalification concrete rapid strength concrete selfconsolidating concrete Preservative treatment of lumber timber and piling Pressure regulating valves irrigation systems Pressure relief valves irrigation systems Pressure rinsing Pressure tests irrigation systems Pressure washing Prestressing concrete anchorages and distribution ducts equipment and calibration grout prestressing steel shop drawings test samples vents Price adjustment INDEX changed quantities for changed quantities quantity decreases of more than percent quantity increases of more than percent Price index fluctuations Production startup Proportioning automatic concrete minor concrete volumetric Protecting cementitious materials concrete Protecting concrete structures Protection stray current Protest Pruning PTFE spherical bearings Public convenience Public safety Public works contractor registration number Pull boxes irrigation systems Pulverized Roadbed Pumping booster pumps equipment and controls equipment drainage plant electrical equipment Pumping equipment and controls Pumping plant electrical equipment Pumping plant metal work Pumps booster drainage use of before contract acceptance Q QC inspector welding QC manager welding QC plans welding QC procedure certification Quality characteristic Quality control welding Quality control plan Quick coupling valves irrigation systems R Railings cable railing California bridge rail chain link railing midwest guardrail system INDEX pipe handrailing tubular handrailing Type DTB transition railing Type K temporary Type STB transition railing Type WB transition railing railroad relations Railroads property Rapid setting concrete patch bridge Rapid strength concrete Reclaimed asphalt pavement Reclaimed Pavement crack and seat full depth reclamationcement full depth reclamationfoamed asphalt pulverized roadbed reconstruct Reconstruct metal bridge railing Records auditing change order bills copying cost accounting inspection retention Recycled water identification irrigation systems Redwood Reference to a code to a department to a document to a law Refinish bridge deck Regulated species Rehabilitate structures Reinforced concrete extensions Reinforced concrete pipe Reinforcement epoxycoated epoxycoated and epoxycoated prefabricated galvanized headed bar prefabricated epoxycoated splicing stray current protection welded wire relocate Remote control valves irrigation systems Removal of yellow traffic stripe and pavement marking with hazardous waste residue remove Remove asphalt concrete surfacing bridge concrete deck surface drainage facilities guardrail irrigation facilities Remove asphalt concrete dike INDEX Remove base and surfacing Remove chip seal bridge Remove unsound concrete bridge Replace asphalt concrete surfacing Request for information Required Contract Provisions FederalAid Construction Contracts reset Resilient joint material reinforced concrete pipe Resources furnishing of Retaining wall type Retroreflective bands portable delineators cone sleeves sheeting Revised standard specifications RFI Risers underdrains Roadbed Roadmixed cement treated bases Roadmixing machines cement treated bases Roads obliterating Roadside Roadside clearing Roadside signs constructing roadside signs existing roadside signs and markers Type N CA Type P CA and Type R CA marker panels Roadway Rock blanket Rock slope protection Rock slope protection fabric Root barrier Root protectors Root stimulant Rotational capacity testing steel structures Rubber gasketed joints reinforced concrete pipe Rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded Rumble strips S salvage Salvage guardrail Salvaging facilities Sand blast cleaning Schedule baseline critical path method revised updated Schedule of values Scheduled completion date Seal coat claims Seal coats INDEX asphalt rubber binder asphaltic emulsions asphaltic emulsions nonpolymer asphaltic emulsions polymer flush coats fog seal coat stress absorbing membrane interlayer Sealed joints asphaltic plug joint seals joint seal assemblies MR inches joint seal assemblies MR inches Type A and AL joint seals Type B joint seals Seals bituminous slurry Sediment filter bag Selfconsolidating concrete mockup Settlement periods earthwork Shear connectors Shop drawings steel structures Shotcrete structural Shoulder Shoulder backing Shown interpretation Side form PCC pavement Sign panels and markers existing roadside signs and markers fabricating and installing markers furnishing sign panels sign overlays Sign structures fabrication welding Signs bridge painting and cleaning operations construction area flashing arrow portable portable changeable message stationary mounted construction area Signs removal of warning regulatory or guide Silt fence fabric Siphons corrugated steel pipe reinforced concrete pipe Site furnishings landscape Slab replacement Sliding joints Slip form curb construction Slip form PCC pavement Slope paving exposed aggregate finish Slope protection concrete slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining concretedrock INDEX gabions rock slope paving smallrock Slopes earthwork Slotted corrugated steel pipe Slotted pipe edge drains horizontal drains Slurry mineral slurry synthetic slurry Slurry cement backfill Slurry leveling course Slurry seal Small business participation report Small tool Smallrock slope protection Smoothness Snowplow deflectors Sod Soil amendment Soil nail walls earthwork Soil nails load testing submittals Soldier pile walls Solid waste disposal and recycling Sound walls alternative sound wall systems masonry block Source inspection expense deductions Southern yellow pine Spall repair Special provisions Specifications Specified interpretation Spiral rib pipe Splicing reinforcing steel Sprinkler assemblies irrigation systems Stabilized Soil Stabilized Soils Lime Staining concrete rock sculpted shotcrete shotcrete textured concrete Staking plants Standard specifications Standards and poles fabrication welding Start of job site activities State State Parks State Reclamation Board INDEX State Specification Stationary mounted signs construction area Steam cleaning Steel lists reinforcement prestressing Steel grit blast cleaning Steel pipe piles Class N Class R Steel sheet piles Steel shot blast cleaning Steel soldier piles painting Storm water pollution prevention plan numeric action level sampling and analysis day Stormwater pollution prevention plan construction site monitoring program rain event action plan sampling and analysis reports stormwater annual report Stray current protection Stress absorbing membrane interlayer Stringers wood structures Strip waterstops Structural aluminum plate pipe Structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches Structural metal wood structures Structural shotcrete Structural steel erection painting thermal spray coating Structural steel plate pipe Structural timber and lumber wood structures Structure approach drainage systems Structure backfill Structure Design Structure excavation and backfill Structures plastic lumber wood Stud connectors Subbase Subbases aggregate Subcontracting Subgrade aggregate bases aggregate subbases cement treated bases treated permeable bases Subgrade enhancement geotextile Submittals action informational Subsealing INDEX pavement Substantial defects Substructure Subsurface drains Superstructure supplemental information Supplemental project information Supplementary cementitious materials concrete corrosive environment deicing chemicals exposed to freezethaw area minor concrete precast concrete Supply line on structures Surcharge earthwork Surface Mining and Reclamation Act Surfacing Survey monuments T Tack coat Tapered inlets overside drains aluminum steel Telephone Numbers Telescoping flag trees Temporary active treatment systems Temporary concrete washouts Temporary cover Temporary culverts Temporary facilities construction mats general job site water control miscellaneous pedestrian Temporary irrigation systems Temporary linear sediment barriers Temporary sediment control Temporary soil stabilization Temporary steel casings Temporary structures Temporary tracking control street sweeping temporary construction roadways and entrances Temporary traffic control Temporary traffic control devices Termination Contract Contractors control Test borings Test panels Test samples check testing Testing job site Thrie beam barrier Timber INDEX catwalk lagging painting Time impact analysis timerelated overhead Timescaled network diagram Topsoil erosion control Total bid Total float Trade name Traffic cones Traffic lane Traffic stripes and pavement markings glass beads painted traffic stripes and pavement markings thermoplastic traffic stripes or pavement markings with enhanced wetnight visibility twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings Transition railings Type DTB Type STB Type WB Traveled way Treated permeable bases asphalt cement grade tolerance subgrade Treated timber wood structures Treated wood waste Treatment of lumber timber and piling preservative Tubular handrailing Tunnel Type A and AL joints seals Type B joint seals Type DTB transition railing Type K temporary railing Type STB transition railing Type WB transition railing U Unauthorized work Underdrains outlets perforated aluminum pipe perforated plastic pipe perforated steel pipe risers Unions irrigation systems Units Unsuitable material Use of pumps before contract acceptance Utilities Utility facilities V Value analysis INDEX Value engineering change proposal Valve boxes irrigation systems Valves irrigation systems Vehicle Code Verification tension testing steel structures Volume conversion table asphalt binder asphaltic emulsions Volumetric proportioning W Wages Wall drain Wall drains Warm mix asphalt technology Water control and foundation treatment earthwork water meter charges Water pollution control Water pollution control manager Water pollution control program Water quality monitoring report Water erosion control Watering planting Watering plants Waterproofing asphalt membrane deck seal membrane and protective cover preformed membrane Waterstops Watertightness culvert joints Weather conditions painting Websites Weed germination Weep holes Welded steel pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities Welded wire reinforcement Welding quality control sign structures standards and poles steel structures structural steel Wetland protection Wheel guards and railings wood structures Wildlife passage way Willow cuttings Withhold Withholds Wood mulch Wood structures Work alternatives assignment completion control of INDEX description maintenance means and methods noncompliant rejection scope unauthorized Work plan colored concrete deck placement painting quality thermal spray coating quality Work zone Worker character Working hours Writing from the Contractor from the Department Wye strainer assemblies irrigation systems Wye strainers
