MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION ST. PAUL MINNESOTA STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION EDITION Minnesota Standard Specifications i DIVISION I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND COVENANT Definitions and Terms Wording of Specifications Abbreviations and Measurement Units Definitions Bidding Requirements and Conditions Prequalification of Bidders Contents of Proposal Package Access to Proposal Package Interpretation of Quantities in Bid Schedule Examination of Proposal Package and Site Of Work Preparation and Delivery of Proposal Irregular Proposals Proposal Guaranty Blank Revision of Proposal Package or Withdrawal of Proposals Conditional Proposals Opening of Proposals Disqualification of Bidders Bidding Requirements and Covenants Consideration of Proposals Award of Contract Cancellation of Award Return of Proposal Guaranty Requirement of Contract Bond Execution and Approval of Contract Failure to Execute Contract Scope of Work Intent of Contract Contract Revisions Notification for Contract Revisions Maintenance of Traffic Use of Materials Found on The Project Preservation of Historical Objects Final Cleanup Value Engineering Incentive ii Minnesota Standard Specifications Control of Work Authority of The Engineer Plans and Working Drawings Conformity with Contract Documents Coordination of Contract Documents Cooperation by Contractors Supervision by Contractor Utility Property and Service Construction Stakes Lines and Grades Blank Authority and Duties of The Inspector Inspection of Work Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work Restrictions on Movement and Storage of Heavy Loads and Equipment Maintenance During Construction Control of Haul Roads Acceptance Claims for Compensation Adjustment Control of Material Source of Supply and Quality Natural Material Sources Materials Specifications Samples Tests and Acceptance Plant Inspection Commercial Facility Substitute Materials Storage of Materials Handling Materials Unacceptable Materials DepartmentProvided Material Legal Relations and Responsibility to the Public Laws To Be Observed Permits Licenses and Taxes Patented Devices Materials and Processes Restoration of Surface Opened by Permit FederalAid Provisions Employee Health and Welfare Public Convenience and Safety Railroad Highway Provisions Navigable Waterways Traffic Control Devices Use of Explosives Protection and Restoration of Property Forest Protection Responsibility for Damage Claims Insurance Opening Sections of The Roadway to Traffic Before Completion of The Project Contractors Responsibility for Work Minnesota Standard Specifications iii Air Land and Water Pollution Furnishing Right of Way Personal Liability of Public Officials No Waiver of Legal Rights Audits Prosecution and Progress Subletting of Contract Qualifications of Workers Progress Schedules Prosecution of Work Methods and Equipment Determination and Extension of Contract Time Failure to Complete The Work on Time Default of Contractor Termination of Contract Measurement and Payment Measurement of Quantities Scope of Payment Compensation for Altered Quantities Compensation for Contract Revisions Compensation for Eliminated Items Partial Payments Payment for Surplus Material Final Estimate and Payment Conditions and Process Assignment of Payments Cost Escalation DIVISION II CONSTRUCTION DETAILS General Mobilization Field Office and Laboratory Maintenance and Restoration of Haul Roads Grading Clearing and Grubbing iv Minnesota Standard Specifications Pavement Marking Removal Building Removal Removing Pavement And Miscellaneous Structures Excavation and Embankment Excavation and Embankment Compacted Volume Method Test Rolling Subgrade Preparation Aggregate Surfacing Equipment Rental Application of Water for Dust Control Application of Calcium Chloride Base Construction Aggregate Base Drainable Aggregate Base Reclamation Shoulder Base Aggregate Bituminous Surface Reconditioning Mill Pavement Surface Pavement Construction Concrete Pavement Ultrathin Bonded Wearing Course UTBWC MicroSurfacing Bituminous Fog Seal Bituminous Seal Coat and Bituminous Underseal Bituminous Tack Coat Bituminous Prime Coat Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Stress Relief Course PASSRC Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Base PASB Stone Matrix Asphalt SMA ColdInPlace Recycled CIR Bituminous and Cold Central Plant Recycling CCPR Bituminous Pavement Surface Smoothness Bridges and Structures Concrete Bridge Construction Steel Bridge Construction Wood Bridge Construction Concrete Wearing Course For Bridges Prestressed Concrete Beams Bridge Approach Panels Minor Concrete Structures Precast Concrete Box Culverts Structure Renovation Removal of Existing Bridges Structure Excavations and Backfills Minnesota Standard Specifications v Piling Structural Concrete Precast Concrete Structural Metals Metal Reinforcement Organic ZincRich Paint System Inorganic ZincRich Paint System Waterproofing Miscellaneous Construction Pipe Culverts Subsurface Drains Pipe Sewers Manholes And Catch Basins Culvert Liner Riprap Gabions and Revet Mattresses Slope Paving Revetment Systems Cellular Concrete Grout Controlled Low Strength Material CLSM Lean Mix Backfill Walks Concrete Curbing Concrete Median Barriers Bituminous Curb Lighting Systems Traffic Management System Traffic Barriers Fencing Traffic Signs And Devices Traffic Control Signals Plant Installation and Establishment Protection and Restoration Of Vegetation Storm Water Management Soil Preparation Establishing Vegetation and Controlling Erosion Soil Bioengineered Systems Interim Pavement Marking Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape Pavement Markings vi Minnesota Standard Specifications DIVISION III MATERIALS Cementing Materials Portland Cement Slag Cement Blended Hydraulic Cement Bagged Portland Cement Concrete Patching Mix U And UM Hydrated Lime Masonry Mortar Admixtures for Concrete Fly Ash for Use in Portland Cement Concrete Aggregates Fine Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete Fine Aggregate for Bituminous Seal Coat Aggregate for Use in Masonry Mortar Intermediate Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete Modified Aggregate Bases Drainable Bases Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete Aggregate for Surface and Base Courses Graded Aggregate for Bituminous Mixtures Mineral Filler Binder Soil Granular Material Bituminous Material Bituminous Material AntiStripping Additive Asphalt Primer for Dampproofing and Waterproofing Asphalt for Dampproofing and Waterproofing Bituminous Products Saturated Fabric for Waterproofing Premolded Asphalt Plank Culvert Pipe and Sewer Pipe Corrugated Aluminized Steel Pipe Type Corrugated Aluminum Pipe Minnesota Standard Specifications vii Corrugated Steel Pipe Polymeric Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe Galvanized Steel Structural Plate for Pipe PipeArches And Arches Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate for Pipe PipeArches And Arches Reinforced Concrete Pipe Precast Concrete Box Culverts Precast Concrete Manufacturing Thermoplastic Pipe Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe Polyethylene Liner Cast Iron Soil Pipe Subsurface Drainage Units Corrugated Polyethylene Drainage Tubing Metals and Metal Products Reinforcement Bars Dowel Bars Steel Fabric Spiral Reinforcement LowCarbon Structural Steel General Requirements For Structural Steel HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel HighStrength LowAlloy ColumbiumVanadium Steel Stainless Steel Hot Rolled Bar Steel ColdFinished Bar Steel Steel Forgings High Performance Steel Y.S .
ksi High Performance Steel Y.S .
ksi Gray Iron Castings Carbon Steel Castings Alloy Steel Castings Malleable Iron Castings Wrought Bronze Plates Bronze Castings Type Bronze Castings Type Lubricated Bronze Bearing Plates And Bushings Sheet Brass Sheet Copper Sheet Lead Wrought and Extruded Aluminum Stainless Steel Clad Plate SevenWire Strand for Prestressed Concrete Sheet Steel Products Signs Delineators and Markers Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Permanent Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends viii Minnesota Standard Specifications Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends Preformed Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Structural Steel Tubing Structural Steel Pipe Aluminum Tube for Pipe Railing Wrought Steel Pipe Ductile Iron Pressure Pipe Copper Water Tube and Fittings Steel Shells for Concrete Piling Steel Piling Steel Sheet Piling Fence Wire Fence Gates Wire Rope And Fittings for Cable Guardrail Steel Plate Beams and Fittings for Traffic Barriers Guardrail Anchor Rods Fasteners Galvanized Hardware Galvanized Structural Shapes Flap Gates Posts Flanged Channel Sign Posts Square Tubular Sign Posts HotRolled Steel Fence Posts Structural Metal Fence Posts Wood Guardrail Posts Wood Fence Posts Treated Structural Wood Lumber Timber Piling and Wood Treatment Lumber Plank for Wearing Course Timber Piling Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products Paints and Enamels Basic Requirements for Paints ZincRich Paint Systems Exterior Polyurethane Paint Aluminum Polyurethane Paint Exterior Masonry Acrylic Emulsion Paint MultiComponent Liquid Pavement Markings WaterBased Traffic Paint DropOn Glass Beads Minnesota Standard Specifications ix Stone and Brick Riprap Material Gabions and Revet Mattresses Materials Precast Articulated Concrete Concrete Armor Units Sewer Brick Clay Building Brick Clay Or Shale Building Brick SandLime Building Brick Concrete Sewer Brick Concrete Precast Concrete Units Concrete Masonry Units Sectional Concrete Manhole and Catch Basin Units Precast Concrete Median Barriers Joint Fillers and Sealers Preformed Joint Fillers HotPoured CrumbRubber Type Crack Sealer Preformed Elastomeric Compression Joint Seals for Concrete Silicone Joint Sealant HotPoured Elastic Type Joint and Crack Sealer HotPoured Extra Low Modulus Elastic Type Joint and Crack Sealer Preformed Gasket Seals for Concrete Pipe Bituminous Mastic Joint Sealer for Pipe Caulking Compound Geotextiles Elastomeric Bearing Pads Concrete Curing Materials Burlap Curing Blankets Type D Membrane Curing Compound PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound Plastic Curing Blankets Membrane Waterproofing System Insulation Board Polystyrene Electrical Systems Materials Rigid Steel Conduit RSC Intermediate Metal Conduit NonMetallic Rigid PVC and HDPE Conduit Liquid Tight Flexible NonMetallic Conduit LFNCB x Minnesota Standard Specifications PVC Coated Hot Dipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit PVC Coated RSC Underground NonDetectable Marking Tape Luminaires Light Poles Lighting System Equipment Lighting System Anchorages Emergency Vehicle PreEmption EVP Equipment Cables and Conductors Air Obstruction Lights Navigation Lanterns Grounding Electrodes Handholes Pulling Vaults Splice Vaults Traffic Control Signal Mast Arm Poles Mast Arms Luminaire Pole Extensions and Luminaires Traffic Control Signal Pedestal Accessible Pedestrian Signal APS Push Buttons and Mounting Hardware Vehicle Signal Heads Pedestrian Signal Heads Stainless Steel Woven Wire Cloth Service Equipment Junction Boxes Conduit Expansion and DeflectionExpansion Coupling Fittings Wood Poles Sponge Rubber Expansion Joint AntiSeize and Lubricating Compound Bridge Grease AntiOxidant Joint Compound Labels Lighting Service Cabinet Planting Materials Plant Stock Filter Berm Water Treatment Seed Topsoil Material Sod Agricultural Lime Fertilizer Mulch Material Hydraulic Erosion Control Products Rolled Erosion Control Products Silt Fence Flotation Silt Curtain POLY Sheeting Compost Temporary Slope pipe Drain Sandbags Soil and Root Additives Sediment Control Log Minnesota Standard Specifications xi Flocculants Miscellaneous Materials Form Coating Material Water for Concrete and Mortar Rock Salt Calcium Chloride Magnesium Chloride Solution Traffic Management Center Buried Cable Signs Minnesota Standard Specifications DIVISION I GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND COVENANT Definitions and Terms WORDING OF SPECIFICATIONS Since the edition the Minnesota Department of Transportations Standard Specification for Construction Standard Specifications has emphasized the active voice .
In Division the Contractors and Departments responsibilities are written in the active voiceindicative mood .
In a sentence written in the active voiceindicative mood someone acts on something .
For example The Engineer will take a sample .
In Divisions and only the Departments responsibilities are written in the active voiceindicative mood .
In Divisions and the Contractors responsibilities are written in active voiceimperative mood the Department states its requirements or directions for performing the work to the Contractor .
The imperative mood is used when the party issuing an instruction and the party receiving it are already understood .
Such statements have the same force as if they contained the word shall and are considered mandatory .
In an imperative sentence such as Pour the concrete the Department is indicating that it requires the Contractor to pour the concrete .
In the material specifications in Division the subject may also be the supplier fabricator or manufacturer supplying the materials products or equipment for use on the project .
ABBREVIATIONS AND MEASUREMENT UNITS .
GLOSSARY OF ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS Acronyms and abbreviations in the Contract documents represent the full text shown in Table .
Table Acronyms and Abbreviations Used Acronym or Short Form Full Name or Meaning AA Aluminum Alloy AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials AITC American Institute of Timber Construction AC Alternating Current ACI American Concrete Institute ADA American with Disabilities Act AES Area of Environmental Sensitivity AGC Associated General Contractors of America Inc. AISC American Institute of Steel Construction AISI American Iron and Steel Institute AITC American Institute of Timber Construction ALR Areas of Localized Roughness AMS Alpha Methylstyrene ANSI American National Standards Institute APS Accessible Pedestrian Signal ARTBA American Road Transportation Builders Association ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASR Alkali Silica Reactivity ASTM ASTM International formerly American Society of Testing and Materials ATR Automatic Traffic Recorder AWG American Wire Gauge AWPA American Wood Protection Association AWS American Welding Society BMP Best Management Practice CA Corrugated Aluminum CAS Corrugated Aluminized Steel CCTV Closed Circuit Television .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Acronyms and Abbreviations Used Acronym or Short Form Full Name or Meaning CIP CastInPlace CLSM Controlled Low Strength Material CMP Communications Plenum Cable or Corrugated Metal Pipe CMS Changeable Message Sign COAX Radio Frequency Transmission Cable Coaxial Cable CP Corrugated Polyethylene CPR Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation CRCP Continually Reinforced Concrete Pavement CRSI Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute CS Corrugated Steel CV Compacted Volume DBE Disadvantage Business Enterprise DBR Dowel Bar Retrofit DCP Dynamic Cone Penetrometer or Penetration Index Method DFT Dry Film Paint Thickness DTI Direct Tension Indicator EEO Equal Employment Opportunity EIA Electronic Industries Alliance EV Excavated Volume EVP Emergency Vehicle PreEmption FAA Fine Aggregate Angularity FAA Federal Aviation Administration FDR Full Depth Reclamation FHWA Federal Highway Administration U.S. Department of Transportation HDPE High Density Polyethylene HE High Early HH Handhole HMA Hot Mix Asphalt ICEA Insulated Cable Engineers Association IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers IES Illuminating Engineers Society IMC Intermediate Metal Conduit IRI International Roughness Index ISO International Organization for Standardization or formerly Insurance Services Office depends on context ISSA International Slurry Surfacing Association ITC Information Transmission Capacity ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers ITS Intelligent Transportation System JMF Job Mix Formula used in the Bituminous Specifications .
kVA Kilovolt Ampere LV Loose Volume for Measurements or Leveling Course for Bituminous MAR Maintenance Access Route MDA Minnesota Department of Agriculture MDR Mixture Design Report used in the Bituminous Specifications MGal Gallons MnDOT Minnesota Department of Transportation MN MUTCD Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MN Statutes Minnesota Statutes MPCA Minnesota Pollution Control Agency MSDS Material Safety Data Sheets NCR Noncompliance Report NEC National Electrical Code NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association NMC NonMetallic Conduit No .
When reference is to wire it is the AWG gauge number .
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System NRTL National Recognized Testing Laboratory OGAB Open Graded Aggregate Base .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Acronyms and Abbreviations Used Acronym or Short Form Full Name or Meaning OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration P Planned Quantity as Defined in PAR Pedestrian Access Route PASB Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Base PASSRC Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Stress Relief Course PCC Portland Cement Concrete PCI PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute PCCS Polymeric CoatedCorrugated Steel PE Polyethylene PG Performance Grade for bituminous PLS Pure Live Seed PROWAG Proposed Rightofway Accessibility Guidelines PTL Plan Thickness Lot PVC Polyvinyl Chloride or Probe Verification Core QA Quality Assurance QAC Quality Acceptance Core QAI Quality Assurance Inspector QC Quality Control QCP Quality Control Plan or Quality Control Probing RAP Recycled Asphaltic Pavement RAS Recycled Asphalt Shingles REA Rural Electrification Administration RLF Rural Lighting and Flasher RSC Rigid Steel Conduit SAE SAE International formerly the Society of Automotive Engineers SAP Stateaid Project Number SFDR Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SI International System of Units The Modernized Metric System SP State Project Number SSPC Society for Protective Coatings SV Stockpiled Volume SWPPP Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan TGB Targeted Group Business TH Trunk Highway TMS Traffic Management System TP Thermoplastic UL Underwriters Laboratories Inc. USCG United States Coast Guard USDA United States Department of Agriculture UV Ultraviolet VAC Volt Alternating Current Hz VDC Volt Direct Current VT Verification Test WC WaterCement Ratio XHHW Moisture and Heat Resistant Cross Linked Synthetic Polymer .
UNITS OF SIZE AND MEASUREMENT The Contract documents show sizes and measurements in both inchpound U.S .
Customary and International System SI or Metric units .
Inchpound units appear first followed by a metric counterpart inside square brackets .
When reading the Contract documents use the system of measurements used by the Department on the bid schedule .
Do not mathematically convert the units from one system of measure to another the Department does not intend its measurement values to be equivalent and does not consider values interchangeable. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Symbols for Metric Prefixes Symbol Prefix Magnitude M mega k kilo m milli µ micro n nano p pico Table Symbols for English Measurement Units Symbol Units Kind of Quantity Measurement A ampere electric current F farad electric capacitance oz ounce mass H henry inductance acre acre area Hz hertz frequency cycles or impulses per second cal calorie energy MGal gallons volume Mph Miles per hour velocity mi square mile area gal gallon volume fts feet per second velocity yard yard length yd square yard area yd cubic yard volume Gpm Gallons per minute flow rate lbf Poundforce force ft lbf foot pound torque Psi Pounds per square inch pressure stress S second time S siemens electrical conductance T ton mass V volt electric potential W watt power Ω ohm electric resistance F degree Fahrenheit temperature Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Symbols for Metric Measurement Units Symbol Units Kind of Quantity Measurement A ampere electric current cd candela luminous intensity F farad electric capacitance g gram mass H henry inductance ha hectare area Hz hertz frequency cycles or impulses per second J joule energy kmh kilometer per hour velocity km square kilometer area L liter volume ms Meters per second velocity m meter length m square meter area m cubic meter volume ms cubic meters per second flow rate N newton force Nm newton meter torque Pa pascal pressure stress s second time S siemens electrical conductance t metric ton mass V volt electric potential W watt power Ω ohm electric resistance C degree Celsius temperature DEFINITIONS Unless another intention clearly appears words and phrases including technical words and phrases and such others as have acquired a special meaning shall be construed according to rules of grammar and according to general usage .
Wherever the following terms or pronouns in place of them are used in the contract documents the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows ADDENDUM .
A supplement to the Proposal Package covering additions corrections or changes in the bidding conditions for the advertised Work that is issued by the Department to prospective Bidders before the date and time for opening Proposals .
ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS .
The public announcement as required by law inviting Proposals for the Work to be performed or Materials to be furnished .
AGGREGATE .
Natural materials such as sand Gravel crushed rock or taconite tailings and crushed concrete or salvaged bituminous mixtures usually with a specified particle size for use in base course construction paving mixtures and other applications .
APPROVEDQUALIFIED PRODUCTS LIST .
A list of products that the Department has preapproved or pre qualified for use on a project .
The Department uses this list to verify the acceptability of products used in the performance of the work .
Products on an Approved Products Lists have been approved for a specific use as defined in the relevant technical section of the specifications whereas products on a Qualified Products List are qualified as having met specific minimum requirements as defined in the relevant technical section of the specifications but the specifications may require further sampling testing and inspection specific to the product use .
AREA OF ENVIRONMENTAL SENSITIVTY .
An area on the project that the contract has identified to need special protection during construction including but not limited to areas needing protection of habitat wildlife recreational or cultural resourcesproperties ecological significance geological features visual quality or its sensitivity to disturbance .
AUXILIARY LANE .
The portion of the Roadway adjoining the Traveled way for parking speedchange or other purposes supplementary to through traffic movement .
AWARD .
The Departments selection of a Bidders Proposal subject to execution and approval of the Contract .
BASELINE SCHEDULE .
The first Progress Schedule for the entire Project submitted by the Contractor and accepted by the Department .
Minnesota Standard Specifications BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES BMP .
Management practices for erosion prevention sediment control dust control and water quality that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling preventing and minimizing degradation of surface water including avoidance of impacts constructionphasing minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed prohibitions and other management practices published by state or designated areawide planning agencies .
BID SCHEDULE .
A listing of Contract Items in the Proposal Form showing quantities and units of measurement that provides for the Bidder to insert Bid Unit Prices .
BIDDER .
An individual firm or corporation submitting a Proposal for the advertised Work .
BITUMINOUS ENGINEER .
The Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on bituminous mixtures and pavements .
This individual has responsibilities delegated from the Materials Engineer .
BITUMINOUS MANUAL .
A Department manual that contains the requirements governing quality and use of materials related to bituminous applications the fundamental principles involved in bituminous surfacing descriptions of procedures for practical application and information on bituminous mixtures equipment and calibrations and sampling and testing methods .
References to the Bituminous Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
BRIDGE .
Per MN Rule Subpart a Bridge is defined as a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water Highway or railway and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic or other moving loads and having an opening measured horizontally along the center of the roadway of ten feet or more between undercopings of abutments between spring line of arches or between extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
Bridge also includes multiple pipes where the clear distance between openings is less than half of the smaller contiguous opening .
BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION MANUAL .
A Department manual that promotes uniform inspection and interpretation of the specifications related to bridge construction .
The Bridge Construction Manual contains information on surveying and staking preparation of foundations and backfill pile driving false work and forms reinforcement concrete bridge construction steel construction timber construction surface preparation painting of structural steel construction on railroad right of way and conduit systems .
References to the Bridge Construction Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
BRIDGE ENGINEER .
The Director of the Departments Office of Bridges and Structures acting directly or through an authorized representative within the scope of the particular duties or functional unit referenced in the Contract .
BRUSH .
Shrubs trees and other plant life having a diameter of inches or less at a point inches above the ground surface as well as fallen trees and branches .
BUILDING BRIDGE DEMOLITION and RELOCATION WEBSITE .
A Department website that provides assistance on building demolitionrelocation and bridge demolitionrehabilitation projects to ensure proper identification and management of regulated materials .
BUSINESS DAY .
Every day on the calendar except Saturday Sunday and Holidays .
CALENDAR DAY .
Every day on the calendar .
CARBONATE .
Sedimentary rock composed primarily of carbonate minerals including dolostone dolomite CaMgCO limestone calcite CaCO and mixtures of dolostone and limestone .
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE .
A certificate obtained by the Contractor from the manufacturer producer or supplier of a product and submitted to the Department that certifies that the product as provided to the Contractor complies with the relevant Contract requirements in accordance with Materials Specifications Samples Tests and Acceptance .
CERTIFIED CCTV TECHNICIAN .
An individual certified by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer to perform all work associated with a CCTV system .
CERTIFIED TEST REPORT .
A test report obtained by the Contractor from the manufacturer producer or supplier of a product and submitted to the Department that indicates actual results of tests or analyses covering elements of the Contract documents for the product or workmanship and includes validated certification .
CHANGE ORDER .
A written agreement between the Department and the Contractor executed on the prescribed form and approved as required by law covering the performance of extra work or other alterations or adjustments to the Contract .
CITY COUNTY OR TOWNSHIP .
A political subdivision of the State used to designate or identify the location of the proposed Work .
COMMISSIONER .
The Commissioner of the Department or the chief executive of the political subdivision governmental body board commission office department division or agency constituted for administration of the Contract within its jurisdiction .
CONCRETE ENGINEER .
The Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on concrete mixtures and pavements .
This individual has responsibilities delegated from the Materials Engineer .
CONCRETE MANUAL .
A Department manual that establishes fundamental principles of concrete construction provides test methods and inspection procedures for control of concrete production and placement and includes materials and Minnesota Standard Specifications materials testing properties and mix designations mix design batching and mixing placement operations reports and work sheets charts and other data .
References to the Concrete Manual from the Contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
CONSTRAINT CPM only .
A restriction placed on an activity that may override logic or restrict or distribute Float for a network or subnetwork of logic .
CONTRACT .
The written agreement between the Department and the Contractor setting forth their obligations including but not limited to the performance of the work the furnishing of labor and materials the basis of payment and other requirements contained in the contract documents .
The contract documents include the advertisement for bids proposal contract form contract bonds standard specifications supplemental specifications special provisions plans notice to proceed work orders and supplemental agreements that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized extensions all of which constitute one instrument .
CONTRACT BONDS .
The approved forms of security executed by the Contractor and Suretyies including the Payment Bond the Performance Bond and a Warranty Bond when required by the Contract PAYMENT BOND .
A bond furnished in accordance with Minnesota Statutes .
and meeting the terms specified in Minnesota Statutes .
subdivision .
PERFORMANCE BOND .
A bond furnished in accordance with Minnesota Statutes .
and meeting the terms specified in Minnesota Statutes .
subdivision .
Warranty Bond .
A bond furnished to secure the Contractors performance of warranty obligations .
CONTRACT ITEM Pay Item .
A specifically described unit of Work for which the Contract defines a Unit Price .
The sum of the scopes of work for all contract items equals the scope of work for the contract .
MAJOR CONTRACT ITEM .
A contract item with an original value equal to or greater than percent of the original contract amount .
A major contract item at the time of bid will remain a major item .
MINOR CONTRACT ITEM .
A contract item with an original value less than percent of the original contract amount .
A minor contract item does not become a major item through overruns Supplemental Agreements etc .
CONTRACT STARTING DATE .
The latest date specified for the beginning of construction operations as set forth in the Proposal Package .
CONTRACT TIME .
The completion date number of working days or number of calendar days allowed for completion of the contract and any intermediate milestones including authorized extensions in accordance with Determination and Extension of Contract Time .
CONTRACTOR .
The individual firm or corporation contracting for and undertaking prosecution of the prescribed Work the party of the second part to the Contract acting directly or through a duly authorized representative .
CONTROLLING ACTIVITY .
The first incomplete activityies with the earliest start date that resides on the Critical Paths .
COUNTY .
See City County or Township .
CRITICAL ACTIVITY .
An activity with zero or negative total float .
CRITICAL PATH .
The longest continuous sequence of work establishing the scheduled completion date of the Project or a milestone .
CULVERT .
A Structure constructed entirely below the elevation of the Roadway surface and not a part of the Roadway surface which provides an opening under the Roadway for the passage of water or traffic .
DATA DATE .
The date from which a schedule is calculated and in schedules other than the Baseline Schedule the date up to which progress is reported .
DEPARTMENT .
The State Department of Transportation or the political subdivision governmental body board commission office department division or agency constituted for administration of the Contract within its jurisdiction .
DETOUR .
A Road or system of Roads usually existing designated as a temporary route by the Department to divert through traffic from a section of Roadway being improved .
DISTRICT MATERIALS LABORATORY .
A Department laboratory located within a district having responsibilities delegated from the Materials Engineer .
DISTRICT MATERIALS ENGINEER .
A Department engineer located within a district having responsibilities delegated from the Materials Engineer .
DISTRICT TRAFFIC ENGINEER .
A Department engineer located within a district having responsibilities delegated from the Traffic Engineer .
DIVIDED HIGHWAY .
A Highway with separated Traveled Ways for traffic in opposite directions .
Minnesota Standard Specifications DORMANT SEEDING .
Seeding allowed in the late fall when the ground temperature is too low to cause seed germination so that the seed remains in a dormant condition until spring .
DORMANT SODDING .
Sodding allowed in the late fall when the ground temperature is too low so that normal rooting does not take place until spring .
EASEMENT .
A right acquired by the Department to use or control property for a designated purpose .
ENGINEER .
A Department engineer authorized as the Departments representative responsible for the engineering supervision of the work and delegated with those duties and authorities defined in the contract .
The contract may redefine the Engineer as a specific Department engineer i.e .
Concrete Engineer Bridge Engineer Materials Engineer Traffic Engineer Roadway Engineer etc .
with jurisdiction over the engineering details of specific construction items however the Engineer is the main point of contact for the Contractor and should receive copies of all correspondence between the Contractor and other Department representatives .
EQUIPMENT .
All machinery tools and apparatus together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work within its intended scope .
EROSION CONTROL SCHEDULE .
A written document weekly by the Contractor illustrating construction sequences and schedule of proposed methods to control erosion and manage sediment .
ERRORS AND OMISSIONS .
A deficiency in the Contract that results in multiple interpretations of a requirement as determined by the Engineer except for those resolved by the orders of precedence in Coordination of Contract Documents .
EXTRA WORK .
Any work not required by the Contract as awarded but found essential to the satisfactory completion of the Contract within its intended scope .
Such work shall be authorized and performed in accordance with Contract Revisions .
FLOATTOTAL FLOAT .
The number of days by which an activity may be delayed without delaying the Project or a Milestone .
FREE FLOAT .
The number of days by which an activity may be delayed from its early dates without delaying the early start date of a successor activity .
Free Float is a unique attribute of an activity .
FRONTAGE ROAD or STREET .
A local Road or Street auxiliary to and located on the side of a Highway for service to abutting property and adjacent areas and for control of access .
GRADE SEPARATION .
A Bridge with its approaches that provides for Highway or pedestrian traffic to pass without interruption over or under a railway Highway Road or Street .
GRADING AND BASE ENGINEER .
A Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on grading and base .
This individual has responsibilities delegated from the Materials Engineer .
GRADING AND BASE MANUAL .
A Department manual that serves as a tool to assist Department personnel in measuring the quality of materials and evaluate the work as construction progresses .
References to the Grading and Base Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
GRAVEL .
Naturally occurring rock or mineral particles produced by glacial and water action .
Particle size ranges from inches diameter to the size retained on a No. . mm sieve .
HIGHWAY ROAD ROADWAY OR STREET .
General terms denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the right of way .
HOLIDAYS .
The days of each year set aside by legal authority for public commemoration of special events and on which no public business shall be transacted except as specifically provided in cases of necessity .
Unless otherwise noted holidays shall be as established in MS .. IMPACT SCHEDULE .
A schedule prepared to demonstrate the impact of a proposed change .
When accepted by the Department an Impact Schedule becomes the Progress Schedule .
INCIDENTAL .
Whenever the word incidental is used in the Contract it shall mean no direct compensation will be made .
INDUSTRY STANDARD .
An acknowledged and acceptable measure of quantitative or qualitative value or an established procedure to be followed for a given operation within the given industry .
This will generally be in the form of a written code standard or specification by a creditable association valid on the date of the Advertisement for Bids .
INSPECTION AND CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION MANUAL FOR MnDOT LANDSCAPE PROJECTS ICAMMLP .
A Department manual that provides clear objective and measurable criteria on decisionmaking and payment criteria for those responsible for plant installation and establishment design or inspection .
References to the ICAMMLP from the Contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
INSPECTOR .
The Engineers authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspections of Contract work .
Minnesota Standard Specifications INTERCHANGE .
A gradeseparated Intersection with one or more turning Roadways for travel between intersection legs .
INTERSECTION .
The general area where two or more Highways join or cross within which are included the Roadway and roadside facilities for traffic movements in the area .
LABORATORY MANUAL .
A Department manual that outlines laboratory test procedures for materials testing .
References to the Laboratory Manual from the Contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
LAYER .
The total embankment thickness for each material type composed of a single or multiple lifts .
LIFT .
A unit of material within a layer that is placed for compaction .
LIGHTING ENGINEER .
A Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on lighting .
This individual has responsibilities delegated from the Traffic Engineer .
LIMESTONE .
See Carbonate .
LOOP .
A oneway turning Roadway that curves about degrees to the right primarily to accommodate a leftturning movement but which may also include provisions for another turning movement .
MAINTENANCE ACCESS ROUTE MAR .
An authorized maintenance equipment route used for snow and ice removal that has a foot minimum clear width between any raised obstacles such as push button stations foundations buildings V curb utility poles sign posts etc .. MAJOR CONTRACT ITEM .
See Contract Item .
MATERIALS .
Any substances specified for use in the performance of the work .
MATERIALS ENGINEER .
The Director of the Departments Office of Materials and Road Research acting directly or through an authorized representative within the scope of the particular duties or functional unit referenced in the Contract .
MATERIALS LABORATORY .
The Departments Central Materials Laboratory .
MAXIMUM DENSITY .
The maximum density of a particular soil as determined by the method prescribed in the Grading and Base Manual .
MILESTONE .
A dated specified in the Contract such as the date that the Contract Time expires .
MINNESOTA MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES MN MUTCD .
A Department manual that establishes the standards for traffic control devices that regulate warn and guide road users along all roadways within the State .
References to the MN MUTCD from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
MINNESOTA SEAL COAT HANDBOOK .
A manual published by the Minnesota Local Road Research Boards Research Implementation Committee that provides tools for roadway designers and technicians to design and implement seal coat operations .
MINOR CONTRACT ITEM .
A contract item with an original value less than percent of the original contract amount .
A minor contract item does not become a major item through overruns Change Orders etc .
NARRATIVE REPORT .
A descriptive report submitted with each schedule .
The required contents of this report are specified in .. C. Narrative Reports for Bar Chart schedules and .. C. Narrative Reports for CPM schedules .
NEARCRITICAL ACTIVITIES .
Activities with Total Float equal to or less than working days .
NOMINAL .
The intended named or stated value as opposed to the actual value .
The nominal value of something is the value that it is supposed or intended to have or the value by which it is commonly known .
NONCONFORMANCE REPORT NCR .
A report the Contractor submits to the Engineer that documents any deviation from the Quality Control Plan QCP accepted shop drawings or Contract requirements .
NOTICE TO PROCEED .
Written notice to the Contractor to proceed with the work including if applicable the date of beginning of contract time .
Notice to Proceed NTP occurs upon the Departments acceptance of the Contractors first Preliminary Schedule .
Notice to Proceed NTP occurs upon the Departments acceptance of the Contractors Baseline Schedule .
NPDES PERMIT .
The general permit issued by the MPCA that authorizes the discharge of storm water associated with construction activity under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Program .
OPTIMUM MOISTURE .
The moisture content of a particular soil at maximum dry density as determined by the method prescribed in the Grading and Base Manual .
P. A designation in the summary of quantities on the plans meaning that the plan quantity will be the quantity for payment .
The Department will not measure or recalculate plan quantities except as provided in Measurement of Quantities .
Minnesota Standard Specifications PAVEMENT STRUCTURE .
The combination of layers placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
PAY ITEM .
See Contract Item .
PAYMENT BOND .
See Contract Bonds .
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS ROUTE PAR .
A paved pedestrian walkway with a foot minimum width and no raised objects within it and a maximum cross slope .
PERFORMANCE BOND .
See Contract Bonds .
PERMANENT EROSION CONTROL MEASURES .
Soilerosion control measures such as curbing culvert aprons riprap flumes sodding erosion mats and other means to minimize erosion on the completed project while establishing permanent perennial vegetation .
PLANS .
The plans profiles typical crosssections and Standard Plans and Standard Plates that show the locations character dimensions and details of the work .
PLAN QUANTITY .
The quantity listed in the summary of quantities on the plans .
The summary of quantities will usually be titled Statement of Estimated Quantities Schedule of Quantities for Entire Bridge or Schedule of Quantities .
PREDECESSOR .
An activity that is defined by schedule logic to precede another activity .
A predecessor may control the start or finish date of its Successor .
PRELIMINARY SCHEDULES .
All schedules submitted before acceptance of the Baseline Schedule .
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER .
A person registered and licensed by the State of Minnesota to practice one or more branches of engineering .
The Contract may require that the Contractor provide a Professional Engineer registered and licensed in a specific branch of engineering to perform certain responsibilities .
PROFILE GRADE .
The trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the roadbed or pavement structure usually along the longitudinal centerline of the traveled way .
Profile grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context .
PROGRESS SCHEDULE .
The schedule submitted by the Contractor and accepted by the Department for managing the Project .
For example the Baseline Schedule is the Progress Schedule from the Data Date of the Baseline Schedule to the Data Date of the first Update Schedule .
The first Update Schedule is the Progress Schedule from its Data Date to the Data Date of the next accepted Update Schedule and so on .
PROJECT .
The specific section of the highway the location or the permanent construction improvements as defined by the contract .
PROJECT SITE .
The area available to the Contractor for use in performing the work as defined on the plans by the rightofway and the end and beginning of the project .
PROPOSAL .
The offer of a bidder on the prescribed proposal form to perform the work and furnish the labor and materials at the bid unit prices .
PROPOSAL FORM .
The approved form on which the Department requires proposals to be prepared and submitted for the work in accordance with Preparation of Proposal .
PROPOSAL PACKAGE .
All documents and information provided by the Department to prospective bidders in accordance with Contents of Proposal Package .
PROPOSAL GUARANTY .
The security furnished with a proposal to guarantee that the bidder will enter into the contract if the Department awards the contract to the bidder .
PURE LIVE SEED PLS .
A percentage calculated by multiplying the percent of viable seed total germination and hard seed or dormant seed when applicable by the percent of pure seed and dividing the product by .
QUALIFIED LABORATORY .
A laboratory accredited through the AASHTO Accreditation Program AAP andor an AASHTO accredited laboratory .
QUALITY ASSURANCE QA .
The activities performed by the Department that have to do with making sure the quality of a product or process meets the relevant contract requirements .
QUALITY COMPACTION .
A compaction method as defined in .. F. Quality Compaction .
QUALITY CONTROL QC .
The activities performed by the Contractor that have to do with making the quality of a product or process meets the relevant contract requirements .
QUESTIONNAIRE .
The specified forms on which a bidder may be required to furnish information as to ability to perform and finance the work .
RAMP .
A connecting roadway for travel between intersection legs at or leading to an interchange .
Minnesota Standard Specifications RELATIONSHIP .
The interdependencies among activities .
Relationships link an activity to its Predecessors and Successors .
A schedules relationships are sometimes referred to as the logic of the schedule .
Examples of relationships are finishtostart starttostart and finishtofinish .
Relationships are implied in bar chart schedules and explicit in CPM schedules .
REVISED SCHEDULE .
A schedule prepared and submitted by the Contractor and accepted by the Department that includes a significant modification to the schedule logic activity durations or other significant attributes of a schedule .
The Revised Schedule is usually prepared for the purpose of depicting a significant change in the Contractors plan .
Once accepted by the Department the Revised Schedule becomes the Progress Schedule .
RIGHT OF WAY .
A general term denoting land property or interest therein usually in a strip acquired for or devoted to a highway .
ROAD .
See Highway Road Roadway or Street .
ROADBED .
The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulders .
ROADWAY .
See Highway Road Roadway or Street .
ROAD DESIGN MANUAL .
A Department manual that establishes uniform design policies and procedures in preparation of road plans .
References to the Road Design Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
SCALE .
A device used to measure the mass or the proportion of a liquid or solid .
This definition includes metering devices .
SCHEDULE OF MATERIALS CONTROL .
A Department schedule that outlines the minimum sampling and testing requirements for most materials used in highway construction .
References to the Schedule of Materials Control from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
SEEDING MANUAL .
A Department manual that provides guidance on seed mixtures specified by the Department and methods for their installation and establishment .
References to the Seeding Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
SHOULDER .
The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of the pavement structure .
SIDEWALK .
That portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians .
SIEVE .
A woven wire screen meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the size required by the contract .
SIGNING ENGINEER .
A Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on signing .
This individual has responsibilities delegated from the Traffic Engineer .
SITE MANAGEMENT PLAN .
A Contractorprovided written amendment to the Departments SWPPP that indicates the means and methods the Contractor will use for performing work in or adjacent to waters of the State .
SPECIAL PROVISIONS .
Additions and revisions to the standard specifications and supplemental specifications that cover conditions specific to a contract .
SPECIFICATIONS .
The Standard Specifications the Supplemental Specifications the Special Provisions and any Departmentapproved changes to these Contract documents .
SPECIFIED COMPLETION DATE .
The date on which the work is specified to be completed .
SPECIMEN TREE .
A tree indicated in the contract or identified by the Engineer that is notable and valued because of its species size condition age longevity durability crown development function visual quality and public or private prominence or benefit .
STANDARD PLANS and STANDARD PLATES .
Department provided drawings consisting of sheets or details of design and construction for various structures and products .
STANDARD SIGNS MANUAL .
A Department manual that establishes determines and communicates standards and specifications concerning standard dimensions colors and other requirements of the various types of highway signs and pavement messages .
References to the Standard Signs Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS .
The current edition of this book .
Standard Specifications are approved for general repeated use .
STATE .
The State of Minnesota acting through its elected officials and their authorized representatives .
STORMWATER POLUTION PREVENTION PLAN SWPPP .
A comprehensive plan required by the NPDES Permit to identify sources of pollution and describe BMPs to reduce pollution from stormwater runoff at a construction site .
The construction plan sheets and contract documents are a part of the SWPPP that includes both temporary and permanent BMPs during construction .
Minnesota Standard Specifications STREET .
See Highway Road Roadway or Street .
STRUCTURAL METALS ENGINEER .
A Department engineer responsible for the overall direction supervision and management of the Structural Metals Inspection Unit .
This individual has responsibilities delegated from the Bridge Engineer .
STRUCTURES .
Bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other manmade features .
SUBCONTRACTOR .
An individual firm or corporation to whom the Contractor sublets part of the contract .
SUBGRADE .
The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed .
Also a general term denoting the foundation upon which a base course surface course or other construction is to be placed in which case reference to subgrade operations may imply depth as well as top surface .
SUBSTRUCTURE .
The part of a bridge below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks or arches and tops of footings for rigid frames together with the backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
SUCCESSOR .
An activity that is defined by schedule logic to succeed another activity .
The start or finish date of a Successor may be controlled by its Predecessor .
SUPERINTENDENT .
The Contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
SUPERSTRUCTURE .
The entire bridge except the substructure .
SUPPLEMENTAL AGREEMENT .
See Change Order .
SUPPLEMENTAL SPECIFICATIONS .
Additions and revisions to the standard specifications that are formally approved and printed subsequent to issuance of the printed book of standard specifications .
SURETY .
The corporation partnership or individual other than the Contractor executing a bond furnished by the Contractor .
TEMPORARY BYPASS .
A section of roadway usually within existing right of way provided to temporarily carry all traffic around a specific work site .
TEMPORARY EROSION CONTROL MEASURES .
Soilerosion control measures to temporarily protect the project from erosion before and during the installation of permanent erosion control measures .
TEMPORARY SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURES .
Sediment trapping and filtering devices such as sediment control logs silt fence sediment basins inlet protection and other means to temporarily control sediment until installation of permanent erosion control measures .
TEMPORARY TRAFFIC CONTROL ZONE LAYOUTS FIELD MANUAL .
A Department manual that contains typical traffic control layouts .
References to the Temporary Traffic Control Zone Layouts Field Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
TOWNSHIP .
See City County or Township .
TRAFFIC ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS ENGINEER .
A Department engineer responsible for statewide guidance on traffic electrical systems .
This individual has responsibilities delegated from the Traffic Engineer .
TRAFFIC ENGINEER .
The Director of the Departments Office of Traffic Engineering acting directly or through an authorized representative within the scope of the particular duties or functional unit referenced in the Contract documents .
TRAFFIC LANE .
The portion of a traveled way for the movement of a single line of vehicles .
TRAFFIC ENGINEERING MANUAL .
A Department manual that establishes uniform guidelines and procedures to aid road users in recognizing and understanding various traffic control devices .
References to the Traffic Engineering Manual from the contract are to the edition in effect on the letting date .
TRAVELED WAY .
The portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
TURN LANE .
An auxiliary lane for left or right turning vehicles .
TWOWEEK LOOKAHEAD SCHEDULE .
Schedule that spans a forward looking rolling period of at least calendar days .
UNIT PRICE .
The price per unit of a contract item .
UPDATE SCHEDULE .
A schedule prepared at least monthly by incorporating the actual progress of the previous month into the Progress Schedule .
VERIFICATION TESTING .
Sampling and testing performed by the Department to validate the quality of the product per Title Highways Code of Federal Regulation . . Minnesota Standard Specifications WORK .
The furnishing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the project and the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the Contractor by the contract .
Also used to indicate the construction required or completed by the Contractor .
WORKING DAY .
A calendar day exclusive of Saturdays Sundays and Holidays on which weather and other conditions not under the control of the Contractor will permit construction operations to proceed for at least hours with the normal working force engaged in performing the progresscontrolling operations .
WORKING DRAWINGS .
Stress sheets shop drawings erection plans falsework plans framework plans cofferdam plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel or any other supplementary plans or similar data that the Contractor is required to furnish and submit to the Engineer .
WORK ORDER .
A written order signed by the Engineer of a contractual status requiring performance or other action by the Contractor without negotiation of any sort .
Bidding Requirements and Conditions PREQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS The Department will not require prequalification of the Bidders before submission of Proposals but the Department may require a written statement from the apparent low Bidder before Award .
If the Department requires a written statement the statement shall include the following Bidder experience Bidder certifications Bidder licenses and The amount of capital and equipment available for performance of the proposed Work .
CONTENTS OF PROPOSAL PACKAGE The Proposal Package will include the following The location and description of the proposed construction The Bid Schedule The Contract Time The amount and nature of the required Proposal Guaranty The basis for comparison of proposals if other than by total cost The date time and place for opening Proposals also defined in the Advertisement for Bids Any Special Provisions and other supplementary requirements and The Plans Specifications and other documents included in the Proposal Package .
The bidder shall not alter the contents of the Proposal Package unless authorized in writing by the Department .
The Department considers alterations to include any unauthorized additions deletions or changes .
ACCESS TO PROPOSAL PACKAGE The Department will provide Bidders with access to the Proposal Package through the online EPlan Room .
The Department may require a fee for Bidders to purchase and download copies of the Proposal Package .
INTERPRETATION OF QUANTITIES IN BID SCHEDULE The quantities in the Bid Schedule are estimates only .
The Department will use these quantities to compare Proposals in accordance with Consideration of Proposals .
During the Project the Department may increase decrease or eliminate quantities of Contract Items in accordance with Contract Revisions and will measure and pay for accepted quantities of Contract Items in accordance with Measurement of Quantities .
EXAMINATION OF PROPOSAL PACKAGE AND SITE OF WORK .
PROPOSAL PACKAGE AND SITE OF WORK Before submitting a Proposal the Bidders shall carefully examine the Proposal Package and perform a reasonable investigation of the site of Work .
Submitting a Proposal is considered an affirmative statement that the Bidder has examined the .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Proposal Package and performed a reasonable investigation of the site of Work and is satisfied as to the character quality quantities and conditions to be encountered in performing the Work .
A reasonable site investigation includes investigating or reviewing the following Project Site Borrow sites Haul routes Utility property in accordance with Utility Property and Service All other locations related to the performance of the Work and Any additional information the Department makes available in accordance with .
Additional Information .
The Bidder shall immediately notify the Department of any apparent defect in the Proposal Package .
The Department will determine if a defect exists and if necessary will issue an Addendum to all prospective Bidders to address the correction. . ADDITIONAL INFORMATION When available the Department may make the following additional information available to Bidders All Department boring logs and other records of subsurface investigation Record drawings Results of other preliminary investigations and Other documents .
A review of this additional information is not a substitute for a Bidders own evaluation interpretation or judgment in preparing a Proposal .
Bidders shall understand that this additional information is not part of the Proposal Package and will not become part of the Contract .
The Department makes this additional information available for the Bidders information only and warns the Bidders not to rely on any included estimates or quantities .
If not included in the Proposal Package the additional information may be available upon request and Bidders shall be deemed to have knowledge of the availability of this additional information .
Bidders are solely responsible for all assumptions deductions and conclusions that they may reach .
The Department does not make or imply a warranty as to the accuracy sufficiency or reliability of this additional information .
If the Department has taken test borings on the Project the Department may or may not include the test boring information on the Plans .
If the Department includes test boring information on the Plans the Bidders shall understand the following with regard to the test boring information The Department takes borings by ordinary and conventional methods and with care deemed adequate for the Departments design purposes .
The logs of the borings may have been edited or abridged and may not reveal all information that might be useful or of interest to the Contractor .
The Department will make any field logs and laboratory logs relating to the borings available to the Bidders or Contractor .
The Department may have taken some borings to gather information for purposes other than those related to the construction of the Project .
The Department does not warrant that the information is complete but believes that the information as to the conditions and materials reported within each test hole was accurate at the time the boring was taken .
The Department does not warrant that conditions adjacent to test borings will necessarily be the same as shown on the logs because subsurface conditions outside of each individual test hole are unknown to the Department and soil rock and water conditions can not be relied upon to be consistent and uniform .
The Department will not be responsible for any interpretations made by the Contractor .
The absence of notations on the logs regarding water does not necessarily mean that the borings were dry or that the Contractor will not encounter subsurface water during the course of construction .
PREPARATION AND DELIVERY OF PROPOSAL .
PREPARATION AND DELIVERY The Bidder shall use the electronic submittal process .
The Bidder shall submit the electronic Proposal in accordance with AASHTO Project Bids software and the Bid Express website www.bidx.com .
The Bidder shall submit its Proposal by the date and time for opening Proposals .
Bid Express will not accept Proposals past the date and time of the opening of proposals .
The Bidder shall submit the Proposal Guaranty electronically or file a hard copy of the Proposal Guaranty with the Department by the same date and time .
Minnesota Standard Specifications If a Bidder fails to provide a Unit Price for any Pay Item on the Bid Schedule except for Lump Sum Pay Items the Department will reject the Proposal .
If a Pay Item in the Proposal requires the Bidder to choose an alternate Pay Item the Bidder shall indicate its choice in accordance with the Specifications for that Pay Item. . ALLOWABLE SUBSTITUTIONS When directed by the Department the Bidder shall submit a disk Proposal using AASHTO Project Bids and EBSX files .
The Bidder shall label the disk with the company name proposal number and the state project number .
The Bidder shall deliver the Proposal and the Proposal Guaranty in a sealed envelope .
The Bidder shall mark the sealed envelope with the name of the Bidder the proposal number the Project number and the letting date .
The Bidder shall deliver the sealed envelope to the Department as specified in the Advertisement for Bids as follows To the address specified In care of the official receiving the Proposals and By the date and time for opening Proposals .
If the Department receives a Proposal after the date and time for opening Proposals the Department will return the Proposal to the Bidder unopened .
IRREGULAR PROPOSALS The Department may reject irregular Proposals .
The Department will consider a Proposal to be irregular for any of the following reasons The Bidder submits its Proposal on a form other than the Proposal Form The Bidder alters the contents of the Proposal Package as defined in Contents of Proposal Package The Proposal is incomplete indefinite or ambiguous as to the meaning The Proposal contains unauthorized alternate bids The Proposal is a conditional Proposal that does not meet the requirements in Conditional Proposals or Any Unit Prices in the Proposal are unbalanced in excess of or below the reasonable cost analysis values .
In accordance with Preparation and Delivery of Proposal the Department will reject any Proposal in which the Bidder fails to provide a Unit Price for any Pay Item or work on the Proposal Form except for Lump Sum Pay Items .
PROPOSAL GUARANTY The Bidder shall include with its Proposal a Proposal Guaranty that meets the following requirements Equal to percent of the total amount of the Proposal Made payable to the Department and In the form of a certified check a cashiers check or a bond .
If providing a Proposal Guaranty in the form of a bond the bond must meet the following requirements Issued by a corporation authorized by the Minnesota Department of Commerce to contract as a surety in the State of Minnesota and Conditioned on execution of the Contract in accordance with Execution and Approval of Contract .
BLANK REVISION OF PROPOSAL PACKAGE OR WITHDRAWAL OF PROPOSALS If submitting a Proposal electronically the Bidder may revise its Proposal an unlimited number of times and may withdraw its Proposal before the date and time for opening Proposals .
If submitting a Proposal in accordance with .
Allowable Substitutions the Bidder may revise or withdraw its Proposal after delivery to the Department if the Department receives the Bidders written request for withdrawal or revision before the date and time for opening Proposals .
The Department reserves the right to revise the Proposal Package at any time before the date and time for opening Proposals .
The Department will issue a numbered and dated Addendum for any revision of the Proposal Package .
The Department Minnesota Standard Specifications will electronically post each Addendum as announced in an email notification to each Bidder on the Departments list of Bidders .
The Department will include each Addendum with all Proposal Forms issued to the Bidder after the date of the Addendum .
If revisions made by an Addendum require change to Proposals or reconsideration by the Bidder the Department may postpone opening Proposals .
If the Department postpones opening Proposals the Department will specify the new date and time for opening Proposals in the Addendum .
The Bidder shall acknowledge receipt of each Addendum in the electronic proposal .
CONDITIONAL PROPOSALS The Department will accept conditional Proposals only as authorized by the Department in this section .
The Department will award the Contract to a Bidder with a conditional Proposal if doing so is in the best interest of the Department .
If the Bidder submits Proposals on multiple Projects and the amount of the Proposals for the multiple Projects is more than the Bidder is able to perform the Bidder may complete and include the following statement with each Proposal to limit the amount of Projects awarded This Bidder can only enter into a contract or contracts totaling no more than ______ and hereby authorizes the Department to determine which Proposal or Proposals to award and which to reject .
With each statement the Bidder shall provide the proposal number and all Project numbers for which the statement applies .
OPENING OF PROPOSALS The Department will open Proposals at the time date and place defined in the Proposal Package and the Advertisement for Bids .
The Department will electronically post Proposal results after the opening .
DISQUALIFICATION OF BIDDERS The Department may disqualify a Bidder and reject the Bidders Proposal for any of the following reasons If an individual firm or corporation either under the same or different name submits more than one Proposal for the same Project The Department finds evidence of collusion among Bidders or The Bidder failed to perform on a previous contract with the State .
Bidding Requirements and Covenants CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSALS After opening Proposals the Department will compare the Proposals based on the correct summation of the products of the scheduled quantities and unit bid prices .
If the lowest responsible Bidder has submitted prices on more than one alternate item the Department reserves the right to determine which alternate to accept .
If the extended bid item price obtained by multiplying the unit bid price by the bid item quantity is incorrectly calculated the Department will use the unit bid price to recalculate the extended bid item price .
The Department will not consider Proposals that do not include a Proposal Guaranty in accordance with Proposal Guaranty .
The Department reserves the right to Reject any or all Proposals Waive defects and technicalities in a Proposal or Advertise for new Proposals .
AWARD OF CONTRACT Within calendar days after opening Proposals the Department will Award the Contract to the lowest responsible Bidder provided that the lowest responsible Bidder complies with the Proposal requirements .
The Department may also decide not to Minnesota Standard Specifications make a Contract Award .
The Department will notify the lowest responsible Bidder electronically in writing or by other means that the Department has accepted the Proposal subject to execution and approval of the Contract as required by law .
The Department and the lowest responsible Bidder may mutually agree to extend the time within which the Department makes the Award .
CANCELLATION OF AWARD Before Contract execution the Department reserves the right to cancel the Award of the Contract without liability .
RETURN OF PROPOSAL GUARANTY After opening and auditing the Proposals the Department will immediately return Proposal Guaranties to all Bidders except for the two lowest Bidders .
The Department will retain the Proposal Guaranties of the two lowest Bidders until execution and approval of the Contract as required by law .
After execution and approval of the Contract the Department will return the Proposal Guaranties of the two lowest Bidders except in the case of forfeiture as specified in Failure to Execute Contract .
The Department will only return Proposal Guaranties that the Bidders submit as checks certified or cashiers .
REQUIREMENT OF CONTRACT BOND The lowest responsible Bidder shall submit with the signed Contract a Payment Bond and a Performance Bond each equal to the Contract Amount as required by MN Statute ..
The Department will review the Surety and form of the Contract Bonds and provide approval if acceptable .
EXECUTION AND APPROVAL OF CONTRACT The lowest responsible Bidder shall return the Contract to the Department with the required Payment and Performance Bonds within business days after Award .
If the Contract specifies the Contract Time as working days and the lowest responsible Bidder fails to return the signed Contract documents within business days the Department may reduce the Contract Time to reflect the delay caused by the Contractor .
If the Contract specifies the Contract Time as a completion date the lowest responsible Bidders delay in returning the signed Contract documents is nonexcusable delay under .. A NonExcusable Delays and the Contractor is not entitled to an extension of the Contract Time .
If the lowest responsible Bidder is unable to return the signed Contract documents within the specified time due to the absence of one or more of the required signers the Department may extend the time if the Contractor submits satisfactory evidence that the Contract documents will be signed .
A foreign or nonresident corporation that is awarded a Contract shall provide proof that it has met all legal requirements for transacting business in the State of Minnesota as a condition precedent to Contract approval .
The Department will provide the lowest responsible Bidder with a notice of approval or disapproval of the Contract and Contract Bonds within business days after the lowest responsible Bidder properly signs and returns the Contract documents to the Department .
The Award is not binding and the Contract is not effective until both parties fully execute the Contract and the Department approves the Contract as required by law .
FAILURE TO EXECUTE CONTRACT The Department will retain the Proposal Guaranty as liquidated damages sustained not as a penalty if the lowest responsible Bidder fails to perform any of the following within the time specified in the Proposal Package Sign the Contract documents Provide the required Contract Bonds or Comply with any other requirements imposed as a condition precedent to the Contract approval .
If the Department cancels the Award the Department may choose any of the following actions Award the Contract to the next lowest responsible Bidder Advertise for new Proposals or Otherwise perform the Work as decided by the Department .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Scope of Work INTENT OF CONTRACT The intent of the Contract is to provide for construction of the Project and compensation for the Work in accordance with the Contract documents .
The titles and headings of the various sections and subsections of the Contract are intended for convenience of reference .
The Contractor shall construct and complete the Project in every detail as described in the Contract .
The Department will require the Contractor to perform the Work diligently and vigorously to completion .
The Contractor shall consider the public interests and the obligations and rights of all other parties concerned .
The Contractor shall assume full responsibility for performance of the Work and shall furnish all labor materials equipment tools supplies transportation and other incidentals necessary or convenient for successful completion of the Project .
The Contract may not fully describe every detail .
When the Contract is silent or omits a detailed description the Contractor shall perform in accordance with the best general practice and provide materials and workmanship meeting the quality specified in the Contract .
The Departments failure to itemize every exception or condition in the Contract does not mean that the Contract provisions will be enforced equally under all conditions or on all parts of the Work .
In the interest of avoiding repetitious wording in the Specifications certain words and phrases have been omitted where reference is clearly related by expressions of authority or intention .
Where certain words and terms appear they are to be construed with reference to the definitions abbreviations heading titles item names and other pertinent provisions of the Contract documents as may be implied .
CONTRACT REVISIONS .
GENERAL The Engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the progress of the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project or for reasons of the Departments interest .
Revisions to the Contract will not add Work beyond the limitations imposed by law or beyond the termini of the proposed construction except as may be necessary to satisfactorily complete the Project .
Revisions to the Contract neither invalidate the Contract nor release the surety and the Contractor agrees to perform the Work as revised .
Either party to the Contract may assert that a Contract revision has occurred .
If the Contractor believes it has encountered a Contract revision as set forth in .
Differing Site Conditions .
Significant Changes to the Character of Work .
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer .
Extra Work or .
Eliminated Items the Contractor shall provide notice as required by these clauses and as required by Notification for Contract Revisions .
Failure to provide notice as specified in Notification for Contract Revisions constitutes a waiver of the Contractors entitlement to compensation or a time extension and releases the Department from responsibility for providing compensation or a time extension .
If the Engineer concludes that a Contract revision is necessary the Department will compensate the Contractor for the revision in accordance with Compensation for Contract Revisions Compensation for Eliminated Items and Payment for Surplus Material .
No payment except as specifically provided by the payment provisions of the Contract will be made for any increased expenses loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or asserted by the Contractor whether resulting directly from revisions in the Work or indirectly from unbalanced allocation of expenses among the Contract Items for any variation between the quantities in the Bid Schedule and the actual quantities ordered and performed or from any other cause .
If necessary the Engineer may extend time in accordance with Determination and Extension of Contract Time .
In .
Differing Site Conditions .
Significant Changes to the Character of the Work and .
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer the term adjustment means compensation in accordance with Compensation for Contract Revisions Compensation for Eliminated Items and Payment for Surplus Material and the granting of a time extension in accordance with Determination and Extension of Contract Time . .
DIFFERING SITE CONDITIONS During the progress of the work if one of the following subsurface or latent physical conditions is encountered at the site the party encountering such conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of the specific differing conditions before they are disturbed and before the affected work is performed Differ materially from those indicated in the Contract or .
Minnesota Standard Specifications If unknown physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the Work provided for in the Contract .
Upon written notification the Engineer will investigate the conditions .
If the Engineer determines that the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of any Work under the Contract the Engineer will make an adjustment excluding loss of anticipated profits and will modify the Contract in writing accordingly .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the Contract is warranted .
The Department will not allow a Contract adjustment that results in a benefit to the Contractor unless the Contractor has provided the required written notice . .
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES TO THE CHARACTER OF WORK The Engineer reserves the right to make in writing at any time during the progress of the work such changes in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessary to satisfactorily complete the project .
Such changes in quantities and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the Surety and the Contractor agrees to perform the work as altered .
If the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under contract whether those alterations or changes are in themselves significant changes to the character of the work or by affecting other work cause such other work to become significantly different in character an adjustment excluding loss of anticipated profits will be made to the contract .
The Contractor and Department shall agree on the basis for an adjustment in writing before the performance of the work .
If the Contractor and Department can not agree the Engineer will make an adjustment either for or against the Contractor in such amount as the Engineer determines to be fair and equitable .
If the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work under the contract the Department will pay for the altered work as provided elsewhere in the contract .
The term significant change shall be construed to apply only to the following circumstances When the character of the work as altered differs materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or When a major contract item of work is increased in excess of percent or decreased below percent of the original Contract quantity .
Any allowance for an increase in quantity shall apply only to that portion in excess of percent of the original contract item quantity or in case of a decrease below percent to the actual amount of work performed. . SUSPENSIONS OF WORK ORDERED BY THE ENGINEER If the performance of all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the Engineer in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the Contractor believes that additional compensation or contract time or both are due as a result of such suspension or delay the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer in writing a request for adjustment no later than calendar days after receipt of notice to resume work .
The request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
Upon receipt the Engineer will evaluate the Contractors request .
If the Engineer agrees that the cost or time required for the performance of the Contract or both have increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the Contractor its suppliers or subcontractors and not caused by weather the Engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor of the determination whether or not an adjustment of the contract is warranted .
The Department will not allow a contract adjustment unless the Contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed .
The Department will not allow a contract adjustment under this clause to the extent that performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other term or condition of this Contract . .
EXTRA WORK If the Contractor believes that it has been required to perform Extra Work the Contractor shall notify the Engineer in accordance with Notification for Contract Revisions .
Failure to provide notice as specified in constitutes a waiver of the Contractors entitlement to compensation or a time extension and releases the Department from responsibility from providing compensation or a time extension .
If the Engineer determines in the Engineers sole discretion that Extra Work is required the Department will compensate the Contractor for Extra Work in accordance with Compensation for Contract Revisions and determine the appropriate time extension if any in accordance with Determination and Extension of Contract Time .
The Department and the Contractor shall execute a Change Order specifying the location and nature of the work to be performed and the basis of payment before the Contractor is authorized to perform Extra Work .
The Contractor shall perform Extra .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Work in accordance with the specifications unless otherwise specified in the Change Order authorizing the Extra Work .
The Change Order authorizing Extra Work shall not become effective until it has been fully executed and approved as required by law .
If the Contractor performs Extra Work before a Change Order is fully executed the Department may consider this as unauthorized work and as having been done at the Contractors expense .
The Department will compensate the Contractor for this work only if the Engineer determines that the work is acceptable and necessary and the Change Order has been fully executed . .
ELIMINATED ITEMS If the Department eliminates any Contract Items from the Contract the Department will reimburse the Contractor for all costs incurred before notification that are not the result of unauthorized Work .
The Department will compensate the Contractor in accordance with Compensation for Eliminated Items .
NOTIFICATION FOR CONTRACT REVISIONS .
GENERAL The following notification requirements apply to all potential Contract revisions including those defined in Contract Revisions .
The Engineer will consider requests for Contract revisions only if the notification procedures in this section are followed .
The specified time limits may only be extended through a written jointlysigned agreement between the Contractor and the Engineer .
The Engineer will address the underlying issue prompting the notification in a timely manner. . FIRST NOTICE BY CONTRACTOR The Contractor shall notify the Engineer as soon as a Contract revision appears necessary .
The Contractor shall not start or continue with an activity or Contract Item for which a Contract revision may be necessary without authorization from the Engineer . .
WRITTEN NOTICE BY CONTRACTOR If the Contractor disagrees with the Engineers response or the Engineer does not respond to the first notice the Contractor shall provide a written notice .
Provide this written notice within business days of first notice if Engineer has not responded or within business days of receiving the Engineers response to the first notice .
The written notice shall include the following A description of the situation The time and date the situation was first identified The location of the situation if appropriate A clear explanation of why the situation represents a Contract revision including appropriate references to the pertinent portions of the Contract or law A statement of the revisions deemed necessary in the Contract Unit Prices delivery schedules phasing time etc .
Because of the preliminary nature of this notice the Department recognizes that this information may rely on estimates An estimate of the time by which the Engineer must respond to minimize cost or delay and Anything else that will help achieve timely resolution . .
WRITTEN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT BY ENGINEER The Engineer will provide a written acknowledgment of receipt of the Contractors written notice . .
FINAL WRITTEN RESPONSE BY ENGINEER Within business days of receiving the Contractors written notice the Engineer will provide a written response that includes one of the following Confirmation of the need for a contract revision .
The Contractor shall pursue time extensions in accordance with Determination and Extension of Contract Time and compensation in accordance with Compensation for Contract Revisions or Denial of the request for a contract revision in which case the Engineer will make clear by reference to the Contract why the issue does not represent a revision to the contract .
A request for additional information in which case the Engineer will state clearly what is needed and by when the Engineer will respond within business days of receiving the additional requested information . .
CONTRACTORS RECOURSE If the Contractor disagrees with the Engineers final written response or the Engineers response is untimely the Contractor may pursue a claim in accordance with Claims for Compensation Adjustment .
The Contractor shall give the Engineer written notice of the intent to pursue a claim within business days of receiving the Engineers final written response .
Minnesota Standard Specifications MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC .
GENERAL Unless the Contract requires otherwise the Contractor shall keep Roads undergoing improvements open to traffic at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall direct traffic over a Departmentapproved Detour route as required by the Contract or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall maintain the portions of the Project being used by public traffic in a condition that accommodates the public traffic at all times .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain temporary approaches crossings intersections with trails Roads Streets and abutments with businesses parking lots residences garages farms and other property .
The Department will not require the Contractor to remove snow from roads open to traffic . .
PLANNED DETOURS The Department will maintain without any cost to the Contractor Detour Roads established by the Commissioner for through traffic diverted from the Project if the Plans Special Provisions or the Engineer directs Project Road closures . .
CONTRACTORS REQUEST FOR DETOUR The Contractor may request from the Engineer a Detour for through traffic .
The Contractor shall specify the Detour routes and submit justification information with the Detour request .
The Department will consider and may at its sole discretion approve the Detour request and establish a Detour in accordance with the following The Contractor shall design provide install maintain and remove traffic control devices on the Detour Roads at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall submit the proposed Detour layout to the Engineer for approval at least calendar days before the Contractor begins to use the Detour .
The Contractor shall maintain and restore Detour Roads at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will remove snow from Detour Roads at the Departments expense .
The Contractor shall provide install and maintain traffic control devices and other traffic protection measures required to maintain local traffic . .
CONTRACTORS REQUEST FOR TEMPORARY BYPASSES The Contractor shall design construct maintain and remove other Temporary Bypass facilities requested by the Contractor and accepted by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department . .
CONTRACTORS USE OF CROSSOVERS Unless otherwise prohibited by the Engineer and in accordance with pertinent traffic laws and regulations the Contractor may use freeway or expressway maintenance crossovers in or near the construction area to change the travel direction of the construction equipment. . TRAFFIC CONTROL DURING AND AFTER WINTER SUSPENSION As directed by the Engineer during periods of winter suspension the Contractor shall open the Projects Roads to traffic to eliminate the need to accommodate traffic on Detour Roads during the suspension period .
During authorized winter suspension the Department will maintain traffic control devices in accordance with Traffic Control Devices .
If Contractorowned traffic control devices are damaged or destroyed the Department will pay the Contractor for the value of the traffic control device as determined by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall not suspend operations for the winter until meeting the requirements of Traffic Control Devices and .
Temporary Suspensions .
When resuming Work after winter suspension the Contractor shall remove and replace or correct Work lost or damaged during the suspension as directed by the Engineer and must remove items used for Road maintenance in accordance with Maintenance During Construction .
The Department will pay for this work at the Contract Unit Prices or as Extra Work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
USE OF MATERIALS FOUND ON THE PROJECT The Contractor shall not destroy or use Materials found on the Right of Way or on other land acquired for the Project for any other purposes than those specified in the Contract .
The Engineer may authorize the Contractor in writing to temporarily use Materials salvaged for the Department from existing structures .
The Contractor is responsible for all damage to the Materials used temporarily .
The Contractor shall repair replace or otherwise correct by means acceptable to the Engineer the Materials damaged by the temporary use or the Department will deduct from any moneys due or becoming due to the Contractor an amount equivalent to the reasonable value or replacement cost of the Material .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer may authorize the Contractor in writing to use acceptable Material found on the Project as a substitute for Material required by the Contract and provided by the Contractor from outside sources .
Authorization to remove and use the substitute Material for unspecified purposes to the Contractors advantage is at the sole discretion of the Engineer subject to the conditions established by the Engineer and the requirements of the Contract .
The Department will make Material found on the Project available for use on the Project to the best advantage and without charge to the Contractor in the interest of providing maximum utilization of existing Materials .
The Department will not incur additional costs resulting from the use of this Material .
If Contractor needs this Material for other construction purposes on the Project the Contractor shall provide replacement Material acceptable to the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
PRESERVATION OF HISTORICAL OBJECTS Immediately upon discovery of potential historical objects of an archeological or paleontological nature within the Project Site the Contractor shall do the following Restrict or suspend operations in the immediate area of the discovery to preserve the potential historical objects and Notify the Engineer of the presence of potential historical objects .
The Engineer will make arrangements for their disposition or record the desired relevant data .
The Contractor shall support the preservation and salvage effort directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall not perform work related to the preservation and salvage efforts that the Contractor considers Extra Work without the written approval of the Engineer .
The Department may restrict or suspend the Contractors operations in the immediate area of the historical objects for a period not to exceed h without a Contractor claim for damages .
The Department will not impose restrictions over h unless agreed by the Contractor and the Department in writing .
FINAL CLEANUP Before requesting final inspection in accordance with .
Project Acceptance the Contractor shall remove the following from the Project Site and other locations outside of the Project Site used in performing the Work Surplus and discarded Materials Equipment Rubbish Temporary structures and Other items not on the Project Site before execution of the Contract .
The Contractor shall also leave the Project Site including borrow pits in a condition acceptable to the Engineer .
The cost of final cleanup is included in the Contract Unit Prices of the Contract Items .
VALUE ENGINEERING INCENTIVE Value engineering provisions provide an incentive to the Contractor to initiate develop and present cost reduction proposals involving changes in the Contract requirements to the Department for consideration .
Value engineering provisions only apply if the Contractor specifically submits a proposal for consideration as a value engineering proposal .
The cost reduction proposals shall produce a net savings to the Contract by providing less costly items or methods than those specified in the Contract without impairing essential functions and characteristics .
The Contractor shall submit value engineering proposals to the Engineer with the following information A statement that the Contractor is submitting a value engineering proposal A description of the proposal An itemization of the proposed changes to the Contract requirements and a recommendation of how to make each change An estimate of the reduction in performance costs that will result from adoption of the proposal A prediction of any effects the proposed changes would have on other costs incurred by the Department A statement of the time by which an agreement for adoption of the proposal must be executed to obtain the maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the Contract and the reasoning for this time schedule Minnesota Standard Specifications The dates of any previous submissions of the proposal including Contract numbers and the actions of the Department and A statement as to the effect the proposal would have on the time for completion of the Contract .
The Department will not assume any liability for not meeting the statement of the time described in the Contractors value engineering proposal .
The Contractor may withdraw in whole or in part any value engineering proposal not accepted by the Department within the period identified in the proposal .
The Departments acceptance or rejection decision on a value engineering proposal shall be final and the provisions of Claims for Compensation Adjustment will not apply .
The Department will notify the Contractor in writing of its decision regarding each value engineering proposal .
Until the Department accepts the proposal the Contractor shall continue to perform Work in accordance with the requirements of the Contract .
If the Department accepts the proposal the Department will execute a Supplemental Agreement setting forth the terms conditions and costs of the proposal .
If the Contractor performs any Work performed in accordance with the value engineering proposal before the execution of the Supplemental Agreement the Department will consider that unauthorized work as specified in Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Supplemental Agreement will establish the Contract modifications and the agreed net savings .
The Department will calculate the net savings by subtracting the Contractors value engineering proposal cost from the Contractors original bid price for the work covered in the value engineering proposal .
A Contractors value engineering proposal cost .
B Contractors original bid price for the work covered in the value engineering proposal .
B A Net Savings .
The department reserves the right to reject any value engineering proposal that does not reflect the reasonable costs to perform the work covered in the value engineering proposal .
The Department will provide a lump sum payment of percent of the net savings from the value engineering proposal to the Contractor as the Contractors share of the value engineering incentive .
The Department will not revise the lump sum payment even if the final accepted quantities vary .
The Department may include conditions for consideration approval and implementation of the cost reduction proposal in the Supplemental Agreement .
The Contractor shall design and develop the proposal at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will not include the costs incurred for reviewing approving and implementing the proposal in the net savings calculations .
After the Department accepts the cost reduction proposal any restrictions imposed by the Contractor on its use or disclosure of the information submitted shall be void and the Department will have the right to use duplicate and disclose any data necessary to use the proposal .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Control of Work AUTHORITY OF THE ENGINEER .
DECIDING QUESTIONS The Engineer will in the Engineers sole discretion decide all questions regarding Quality and acceptability of Materials provided and Work performed Manner of performance and rate of progress of the Work Interpretation of the Contract Measurement control of quantities and the amount of any payment deductions or adjustments and Acceptable fulfillment of all Contract provisions on the part of the Contractor .
The Engineers acceptance does not waive the Departments right to pursue legal remedies for defective Work or Work performed by the Contractor in an unworkmanlike manner . .
SUSPENDING WORK The Engineer may suspend the Work if the Contractor fails to Correct conditions unsafe for the Project personnel or the general public Carry out the Contract provisions Carry out any lawful orders or Comply with the requirements of all permits for the Project .
The Engineer may also suspend work for the following Unsuitable weather Conditions unsuitable for prosecution of the Work or Other conditions or reasons deemed to be in the best public State Department or national interest . .
BASIS OF DECISION The Engineer will make decisions based on engineering judgment in accordance with the following Facts and inferences Inherent variations of Materials and processes Risks associated with drawing inferences from test results on small samples that may not truly represent the Material or workmanship provided Past experiences relating to the question at issue Regulations instructions and guidelines established by the Department to administer the Work and Other factors the Engineer determines to have a bearing on the issue .
The Engineer may require additional tests to provide a statistically sound basis for judgment .
The Engineer may accept satisfactory evidence of proper and adequate process control if the end result characteristics can not be practically measured .
PLANS AND WORKING DRAWINGS The Department will provide the Plans showing details and directions to provide a comprehensive description of the construction contemplated .
The Department will not provide all necessary detail drawings for structures .
The Department will include the following information in the Plans Summary of all Contract Items General features Typical cross sections Alignment and grades Structure locations and dimensions Layout diagrams and Special details .
The Department will provide Supplemental Drawings in the form of Standard Plates or Standard Plans .
The Department may include earthwork cross sections and contours with the Plans .
Before performing the Work the Contractor shall prepare schedules documents and Working Drawings necessary to complete the Work and shall submit to the Engineer for review .
The Contractors Progress Schedule shall anticipate sufficient time not less than calendar days for the Engineer to review and comment on the submittal and to allow the Contractor to respond to the Engineers comments before starting the Work .
The Contractor shall provide additional information including permits detail Minnesota Standard Specifications drawings and calculations as necessary for the Engineer to complete the review .
The Contractor shall provide submittal copies in the requested number to the Engineer for review and inspection of the work .
The Contractor shall not alter the submittals without written consent from the Engineer .
After completing the Work the Contractor shall provide digitally reproducible copies to the Engineer upon request .
The Contract Unit Prices for the relevant Contract Items include the cost of preparing and submitting the submittals .
The Engineers review of the submittals does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for the following Accuracy of dimensions and details Agreement and conformity with the Contract Successful completion of the Work Proper and safe design Proper and safe construction of the Work and Means and methods of performing the Work .
CONFORMITY WITH CONTRACT DOCUMENTS The Contractor shall perform all Work including providing all Materials in conformance with the requirements of the Contract .
Dimensions and values required by the Contract are target dimensions or values .
The Department will accept deviations from these targets within the tolerances required by the Contract .
Materials and workmanship shall be uniform in character and shall conform to the target or to the middle portion of the tolerance range .
The purpose of the tolerance range is to accommodate occasional minor variations from the target or middle portion of the tolerance range that are unavoidable for practical reasons .
If the Contract requires a maximum or minimum dimension or value the Contractor shall control the production and processing of Material and the performance of the Work so that the Material or workmanship is not of borderline quality or dimension .
If the Contract does not specify a tolerance for a requirement the Engineer will accept an industry standard tolerance .
If the Engineer determines that Materials or workmanship are consistently of borderline quality the Engineer may direct the Contractor to suspend operations and may declare future Work of borderline quality to be unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
In constructing temporary facilities that do not become a part of the permanent improvement the Engineer may waive requirements that the Engineer considers unnecessary in fulfilling the intended service or function of the facility .
The Engineer may accept alternative designs from those required for temporary construction provided that costs to the Department do not exceed those that the Department would have incurred with the design required by the Contract .
COORDINATION OF CONTRACT DOCUMENTS A requirement appearing in one of the Contract documents is as binding as though the requirement appears in all .
If discrepancies exist between the Contract documents the following order of precedence applies Addenda Special Provisions ProjectSpecific Plan Sheets Supplemental Specifications Standard Plan Sheets and Standard Plates Standard Specifications .
If discrepancies exist between dimensions in the Contract documents the following order of precedence applies Plan dimensions Calculated dimensions Scaled dimensions .
The Department and Contractor shall inform each other as to any discrepancy or defect they discover .
Neither the Contractor nor the Engineer shall take advantage of any discrepancy or defect .
The Engineer will review the alleged discrepancy or defect to determine if a contract revision is necessary in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Engineer will decide all issues concerning a discrepancy or defect .
COOPERATION BY CONTRACTORS The Department may authorize work by other contractors and agencies within the Project Site during the Contract Time .
The Contractor shall cooperate with the Engineer utility owners and other contractors concurrently performing work on the Project .
The Contractor shall coordinate work with utility owners for the following Allow removal and rearrangement operations to progress in a reasonable manner Minnesota Standard Specifications Minimize duplication of Work and Avoid unnecessarily interrupting services rendered by those parties .
When performing work of separate contracts within the limits of a project each contractor shall avoid interfering and hindering the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
Contractors working on the same Project shall cooperate with each other as required by their respective Contracts .
The Contractor shall assume the risk of delay inconvenience or loss resulting from the presence and operations of other contractors working within the same Project Site and shall make no claim for such delay inconvenience or loss .
SUPERVISION BY CONTRACTOR The Contractor is responsible for the following Keeping a complete set of the Contract documents on the Project while Work is in progress Assuming full responsibility for supervising the Work irrespective of the quantity of Work subcontracted and Facilitating the Work progress and ensuring Project completion as required by the Contract .
At the Preconstruction Conference the Contractor shall designate in writing a competent Superintendent and a competent individual if different for the Project .
The competent Superintendent and the competent individual may be the same person if constantly available in person on the Project and qualified in accordance with the requirements in this section .
The Contractor may change the designated competent Superintendent or designated competent individual during the Project by submitting an authorized change in writing to the Engineer .
The Engineer must receive the authorized change in writing before the designated Superintendent or competent individual performs Work on the Project . .
COMPETENT SUPERINTENDENT For the duration of the Contract the Contractor shall act as a competent Superintendent or provide a competent Superintendent to act on the Contractors behalf .
Ensure availability of the competent Superintendent on the Project within h notice to perform the following Conduct business with the Subcontractors Negotiate and execute Supplemental Agreements Execute the orders and directions of the Engineer without delay and Promptly supply the materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary to complete the Work . .
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL For the duration of the Contract the Contractor shall provide a competent individual on the Project during the Work who is Authorized and capable to manage direct and coordinate the Work in progress Experienced in the type of Work being performed Capable of reading and understanding the Contract and Authorized to receive instructions from the Engineer .
If the Contractor does not employ the competent individual the Contractor shall authorize the competent individual in writing to perform the functions of the competent individual specified in this subsection .
UTILITY PROPERTY AND SERVICE .
GENERAL The Contract will specify the utilities affected by the Project .
The Department will direct the utility owners affected by the project to relocate or adjust their facilities and related appurtenances within the Project Site at no additional cost to the Contractor unless the Contract makes the Contractor responsible for relocating or adjusting designated utility facilities .
The Department expects utility owners to complete utility relocations and adjustments as indicated in the Contract .
The Contractor shall provide adequate notification of the scheduled Work to utility owners relocating or adjusting facilities during construction to prevent conflict with the Contractors schedule of operations .
By submitting a Proposal for the Project as a Bidder the Contractor has acknowledged that it has considered the following The temporary and permanent utility facilities identified in the Contract The existing location and the designed relocations of all utility facilities as shown on the Plans and The precautions required to protect utility facilities in the Project site during construction activities .
Minnesota Standard Specifications If utility owners fail to relocate or adjust their facilities as required by the Department and the Contractor sustains losses that could not have been avoided by the judicious handling of forces equipment and plant or by reasonable revisions to the schedule of operations the Engineer will adjust the Contract in accordance with Contract Revisions .
All utilities related to this Project are classified as Level D. This utility quality level was determined according to the guidelines of CIASCE entitled Standard Guidelines for the Collection and Depiction of Existing Subsurface Utility Data .
The Contractor agrees that it shall use the Plan to identify the location of MnDOT storm water drainage facilities in order to meet the requirements of Minnesota Statutes Ch .
D and Minnesota Rules .
which apply to MnDOT storm water drainage facilities . .
NOTIFICATION The Contractor shall fulfill all the obligations of an excavator in Minnesota Statutes Chapter D and rules adopted to implement that statute .
The Contractors obligations include but are not limited to marking the proposed excavation contacting Gopher State One Call at least h before starting excavation operations excluding Saturdays Sundays and Holidays and providing support and protection for underground facilities in and near the construction area .
When the Contractor works near electric power lines the Contractor must provide for protection of personnel and the electrical power lines .
The Contractor may work with the lines energized if the work can be done safely otherwise the Contractor must Make arrangements with the power company at no expense to the Department to a temporarily shut off the power b temporarily insulate the power lines c bypass the power from the work area or Make other arrangements necessary for a safe work place .
The Department makes no promises or representation as to whether the utility will temporarily shut off power insulate its lines or charge the Contractor a fee for preparing a safe work area for the Contractor .
The Contractor shall employ special equipment or construction methods and hand labor if necessary to accomplish the planned work adjacent to utility facilities without damaging them .
Any work performed by the Contractor that does not comply with MnDOT .
may be considered Unauthorized Work in accordance with MnDOT .. .
LIABILITY If the existence and approximate location of utility property was available to the Contractor before the damage occurred the Contractor shall reimburse the utility owner for damage to the utility property caused by the Contractors operations at no additional cost to the Department .
CONSTRUCTION STAKES LINES AND GRADES The Engineer will set construction stakes to establish lines slopes elevations and continuous profile grades for grading base and pavement construction to establish the field control for the Project .
The Engineer will also set construction stakes to establish location line and grade controls for drainage facilities traffic control and protection devices and other accessory structures and appurtenances .
For Bridge construction the Engineer will set stakes to establish the field control and working points as shown on the Bridge layout sheet in the Plans .
The Engineer will set at least one bench mark in the vicinity of each Substructure unit for the Contractors reference when excavating these units .
The Engineer will set grade points for the Substructure and Superstructure forms and provide beam stool heights as deemed necessary for performance of the Work .
From the field control the Contractor shall establish other necessary controls detail dimensions and measurements required for proper layout and performance of the Work .
The Contractor shall assume full responsibility for all measurements made from the stakes and marks established by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall preserve all stakes and marks .
If the Contractor carelessly or willfully destroys or disturbs any of the field control stakes or marks the Engineer will deduct the Departments cost for replacing the damaged stakes or marks from the payment for the Work .
The Department is responsible for the accuracy of lines slopes grades and other engineering work performed by the Departments personnel as specified in this section .
The Contractor shall not knowingly take advantage of errors or omissions and shall report any discovered errors or omissions to the Engineer immediately upon discovery .
Minnesota Standard Specifications BLANK AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE INSPECTOR Inspectors have the authority to do the following Inspect the Work and the preparation fabrication or manufacture of Materials Notify the Contractor of nonconforming Work Reject nonconforming materials and Suspend portions of the Work for the following reasons that require a decision by the Engineer .
Interpretation of requirements in the Contract .
Performance of unacceptable or unauthorized Work in accordance with or .
Safety .
Inspectors do not have authorization to alter or waive requirements of the Contract or to issue instructions contrary to the Contract .
Inspectors do not have an obligation or have authorization to provide direction superintendence or guidance to the Contractor its crews its Subcontractors or suppliers to accomplish the Work .
Any action or inaction of the Inspector does not waive the Departments right to pursue any and all legal remedies for defective Work or Work performed by the Contractor in an unworkmanlike manner .
INSPECTION OF WORK The Engineer may inspect Materials and the Work .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer or the Engineers representative access to the Work information and assistance necessary to conduct a complete inspection .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer at least h before required inspections .
The purpose of Department inspections is to determine whether the Work meets the requirements of the Contract .
The Department inspections do not supplement or replace the Contractors own quality control and do not relieve the Contractor of its responsibility to correct nonconforming Work .
If directed by the Engineer the Contractor shall remove or uncover completed Work for inspection .
After the Engineers inspection the Contractor shall restore the Work as required by the Contract .
If the inspected Work meets the Contract requirements the Department will consider the Work to uncover or remove and restore the Work as Extra Work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
If the inspected Work does not meet the Contract requirements the Department will not pay for the Work to uncover or remove and restore the Work .
The Department is not responsible for Contractor losses if the removals or uncovering of completed Work revealed nonconforming Work or Materials .
The Department will determine the level of inspection for any item of Work .
The Contractor is responsible for the quality of Work and compliance with the Contract requirements regardless of the Departments level of inspection .
The Department will consider any Work performed or Materials used without the required certification testing or inspection by the Department as unauthorized Work in accordance with .
Unauthorized Work .
The Engineers failure to reject nonconforming Work or Materials from lack of discovery of the nonconforming Work or Materials or for any other reason will not Prevent the Department from rejecting the nonconforming Work or Materials upon later discovery or Obligate the Department to issue final acceptance of the Contract in accordance with .
Final Contract Acceptance .
Inspection of Work may include inspection by representatives of other government agencies railroad corporations or utility owners that pay a portion of the cost of the Work .
This inspection will not make these other government agencies railroad corporations or utility owners a party to the Contract and will not interfere with the rights of the Contractor or Department .
UNACCEPTABLE AND UNAUTHORIZED WORK .
UNACCEPTABLE WORK The Department will consider all Work and Materials that do not meet the Contract requirements to be unacceptable .
For unacceptable Work resulting from poor workmanship use of nonconforming materials damage through carelessness or any other cause existing before final acceptance of the Work the Department will take one of the following actions at the Engineers sole discretion Minnesota Standard Specifications Require the Contractor to acceptably correct the Work and Materials immediately upon receipt of written order to do so or Allow the work to remain in place at an adjusted Contract Unit Price or Decide the extent of acceptance for the Work to remain in place if a Contract Item fails to meet Contract requirements but is adequate to serve the design purpose and document the basis of acceptance by Change Order to adjust the Contract Unit Price the adjusted Contract Unit Price will be determined at the Engineers sole discretion or Require the Contractor to remove and replace the unacceptable Work at the Engineers sole discretion .
The Department may provide notice of default in accordance with Default of Contractor after the Contractor has been given proper notice to acceptably correct the Work and Materials and has failed to do so .
The Contractor shall remove and replace the unacceptable Work or correct the work at no additional cost to the Department if a Contract Item does not meet specified requirements and results in Work that does not serve the design purpose . .
UNAUTHORIZED WORK The Department will consider Work performed contrary to the direction of the Engineer or any work performed beyond that specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer to be unauthorized .
The Department may consider the following as unauthorized Work Work performed before the Engineer provides lines or grades or required inspections of Materials Work performed before the Departments approval of the Contract as required by law Extra Work performed before Engineer approval of a Change Order .
The Contractor shall remove unauthorized Work upon receipt of a written order to do so at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department may pay for unauthorized Work only if the Engineer determines the work to be acceptable or the Work is authorized in a Change Order. . NONCOMPLIANCE If the Contractor fails to comply immediately with any order issued by the Engineer in accordance with the requirements in this section the Engineer may direct the following and deduct the costs from moneys due or becoming due to the Contractor under the Contract or any other contract with the Department The correction or removal and replacement of unacceptable Work and The removal of unauthorized Work .
RESTRICTIONS ON MOVEMENT AND STORAGE OF HEAVY LOADS AND EQUIPMENT The Contractor shall haul Materials and move and store equipment in accordance with the Minnesota Highway Traffic Regulation Act and applicable provisions of Minnesota Rules when using public Roads or completed Structures base courses and pavements within the Project that are open to traffic and becoming a part of the permanent improvement .
The Contractor shall comply with legal load restrictions and with special restrictions required by the Contract when hauling or storing Materials and moving or storing equipment on Structures completed Subgrades base courses and pavements within the Project under construction or completed but not yet open to traffic .
The Contractor shall complete and place a cab card in each vehicle used for hauling bituminous mixture aggregate batch concrete or grading material including borrow and excess before starting work .
This cab card shall identify the truck or tractor and trailer by Minnesota or prorated license number and shall contain the tare maximum allowable legal gross mass supporting information and the signature of the owner .
The Contractor shall make the card available to the Engineer upon request .
The Contract Unit Prices include Contractorrelated costs in providing verifying and spot checking the cab card information including weighing empty and loaded trucks on certified commercial scales .
The Contractor shall not operate equipment mounted on crawler tracks or steeltired wheels on or across concrete or bituminous surfaces .
When construction operations require crossing an existing pavement Bridges or completed portions of the Pavement Structure with otherwise prohibited equipment or loads the Contractor shall submit methods of load distribution or bridging in writing and obtain the Engineers written approval .
This approval does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for any damages to the Work .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractor will not be relieved of liability for damages resulting from the operation and movement of construction equipment because of the issuance of a special permit or by adherence to any other restrictions imposed .
The Contractor may temporarily store or park construction Materials and Equipment on a Bridge deck during Bridge construction .
Storage of Materials and Equipment shall be limited as follows No stockpiles weighing greater than lb per ft² No individual stockpiles of Materials including pallets of products reinforcing bar bundles and aggregate piles weighing greater than lb per ft² No single vehicle or Equipment exceeding lb and No combination of more than lb of vehicles Materials and other equipment per span with lengths greater than ft .
MAINTENANCE DURING CONSTRUCTION At the Contractors own expense and initiative the Contractor must maintain Project Roadway on which it has performed Work when the Contract requires placing Materials on or the use of constructed Subgrade base course pavement or Structure .
This responsibility for maintenance includes not only Roadway where construction is complete but also temporary unfinished Roadway surface used by traffic where the existing pavement has been removed but the final surface has not yet been placed .
The Contractor must maintain this work such that the surface is reasonably smooth dust free not rutted or potholed and provides for the safe and convenient use by the travelling public .
For Roadway on which the Contractor has performed Work the Engineer will notify the Contractor in writing of maintenance deficiencies .
The Contractor must correct deficiencies within hours of receipt of written notice from the Engineer or within hours of when the Contractor independently encounters deficiencies requiring repair whichever is earlier .
If the Contractor fails to do so the Department may immediately proceed to maintain the Work and deduct the cost of maintenance from money due or becoming due to the Contractor under the Contract or any other contract with the Department .
For maintenance work on all other highways and roads the Contractor must perform maintenance work or provide dust control as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor must promptly notify the Engineer if the Contractor encounters a deficiency that must be repaired to maintain the road such that the surface is reasonably smooth dust free not rutted or potholed and provides for the safe and convenient use by the travelling public .
The Contractor must comply with an Engineers directive to maintain the road within hours after receipt of written notice .
The Department will pay for the Engineerdirected work at Contract Unit Prices or as Extra Work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will not pay for Contractor maintenance Work performed on Contractorrequested Detours and Contractorselected haul roads .
During periods of authorized winter suspension the Department will perform routine maintenance on Project Roads .
When resuming Work after winter suspension the Contractor must remove to the extent directed by the Engineer any temporary construction or Materials that the Department used in Road maintenance during the suspension .
The Department will pay for this work at the Contract Unit Prices or as Extra Work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
If the Engineer partially accepts work under .
Partial Acceptance then the Contractor is relieved of responsibility for maintenance of that portion of the Work that has been partially accepted except as directed by the Engineer .
The Department will pay for the Engineerdirected work at Contract Unit Prices or as Extra Work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
CONTROL OF HAUL ROADS Haul Roads are those public Roads other than trunk Highways that the Contractor may use for the purposes specified in .
Maintenance and Restoration of Haul Roads Definitions .
Haul Roads do not include a connection between a natural material source and a public Road .
The Contractor must secure the Rights Of Way for construct and maintain such connections between a material source and a public Road without compensation from the Department other than payment received for the Contract Items .
The Department may but is not required to designate haul Roads in accordance with Minnesota Statutes ..
If the Department has made a written designation of a haul Road then the Department will have jurisdiction over the public Roads and Streets included in such designation .
The requirements of Maintenance and Restoration of Haul Roads will govern the maintenance and restoration of such haul Roads .
If the Department has not made a written designation of a haul Road then the Contractor will be responsible for the following Arranging for the use of Roads not under the jurisdiction of the Department Performing any maintenance and restoration as required by the applicable Road authority as a condition of use of such Road as a haul Road and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Paying any fees charges or damages assessed by the applicable Road authority as a condition of using such Road as a haul Road .
All actions and costs with respect to nondesignated haul Roads will be without compensation from the Department other than payment received for the Contract Items .
In preparing its Proposal the Contractor is not entitled to assume that the Department will designate a haul Road or that the haul Road designated will be the most convenient and direct route or not subject to reduced weight limits .
The Department will not consider its decision to designate or not designate a requested haul route as a basis for a contract revision .
ACCEPTANCE .
PARTIAL ACCEPTANCE After completing a substantial and discrete portion of Work the Contractor may request the Engineer to inspect that portion .
If the Engineer determines that the portion of the Work is complete in accordance with the Contract requirements the Engineer may accept the completed portion in writing .
Partial acceptance relieves the Contractor of further responsibility for maintenance of that portion of Work but does not invalidate or alter the terms of the Contract. . PROJECT ACCEPTANCE After completing the Work the Contractor shall notify the Engineer and request a final inspection .
If the Engineer determines that the Project is complete the inspection will constitute the final inspection and the Engineer will promptly provide written notice of Project acceptance effective on the date of the final inspection .
The notice of Project acceptance relieves the Contractor of further responsibility for the Work .
If the Engineer finds unacceptable or incomplete Work the Contractor shall immediately correct the deficiencies as directed by the Engineer .
After correcting the deficiencies the Contractor shall again request a final inspection .
Acceptance of the Project does not relieve the Contractor of financial liabilities imposed on the Contractor by statute and does not constitute final acceptance of the Contract . .
COMPLETION OF THE WORK The Department will consider the Work in all things completed when the Contractor has completed and submitted required documents certifications and affidavits including but not limited to the following MN IC Withholding Affidavit certified by Minnesota Department of Revenue demonstrating compliance with MN Statute .
Material certifications and warranties Written Department confirmation that known outstanding prevailing wage complaints have been resolved as approved by the Department Final Clearance Letter for DBE participation TGB participation or Veterans participation Payment of moneys owed to the Department if applicable Termination of NPDES permit if applicable and All other forms required by the Contract . .
FINAL CONTRACT ACCEPTANCE The Department will make final Contract acceptance when the following occur The Work has been in all things completed to the satisfaction of the Department and All parties have executed the Certificate of Final Acceptance .
CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENT The Contractor shall not file a claim until the Contractor has exhausted the requirements of Contract Revisions and Notification for Contract Revisions .
The Contractor is not entitled to compensation or time extensions for disputed work under this section unless the compensation or time extension is required or provided for elsewhere in the Contract . .
NOTIFICATION The Contractor shall notify the Engineer in writing of any intent to file a claim for compensation or time extension .
The Contractor shall not be entitled to compensation or a time extension if The Contractor fails to notify the Department .
The Contractors actions or inactions prevent the Department from keeping strict account of the impacts and costs of the disputed work .
The Contractors actions or inactions prevent the Department from mitigating the impacts and costs of the disputed work. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
CLAIM SUBMITTALS A Entitlement The Department requires that the Contractor establish entitlement for all claims before the Department will consider impact and cost .
The Contractor shall submit the following to the Engineer as a minimum to determine entitlement A detailed factual statement of the claim providing a description of the claim issues and all relevant facts including the events dates locations and a description of what Work was affected and how this Work was affected by the claim .
A narrative that identifies all of the specific Contract provisions that support the claim why they support the claim and how the details of the factual statement in item above establish entitlement based on the referenced Contract provisions .
All pertinent documents electronic files and the substance of any oral communications related to the information provided in item and above .
B Impact and Cost If the Department determines that the Contractor has established entitlement the Contractor shall submit the following to the Department as a minimum to determine impact and cost If a delay is alleged submit a narrative all documentation including applicable project schedules substantiating the delay and a schedule analysis in accordance with .
Determination and Extension of Contract Time General .
If additional costs are alleged submit a narrative and all documentation that substantiates the claimed costs .
The Contractor shall submit cost documentation for the claim submittal in a format that allows the Department to perform an audit under the authority of Audits .
The Contractor may not submit a claim that fails to establish the causal link between the Departments responsibility and the Contractors impacts and costs . .
REQUIRED CERTIFICATION OF CLAIMS The Contractor shall certify the claim attesting to the following The claim is made in good faith based on documented fact and the value is not knowingly overstated and Supportive data is true accurate and complete to the Contractors best knowledge and belief .
In complying with this requirement the Contractors claim submittal shall include the following fully executed certification Under the penalty of law for perjury or falsification the undersigned ___________________________ Name _____________________________ of Title ______________________________ Company hereby certifies that the claim for compensation and time if any made herein for work on this Contract is to the best of the Contractors knowledge and belief a true statement of the costs incurred and time sought and is fully documented and supported under the Contract between the parties .
Dated________________s___________________________ Subscribed and sworn before me this ____day of_______ .
Notary Public ______________________________________ My commission Expires ______________________________ .
REVIEW OF CLAIM SUBMITTALS All claim submittals filed will be subject to review by the Department at any time following the filing of the claim submittal .
The Contractor and Department shall exhaust the claim process reflected in this section before seeking compensation or extension of the Contract Time by filing an action in the courts of this State .
The Contractor Subcontractors or Suppliers shall cooperate with the Department and shall provide the Department access to the following relevant documents including but not limited to .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Daily time sheets and foremans daily reports .
Union agreements if any .
Subcontracts .
Insurance welfare and benefits records .
Payroll register .
Earnings records .
Payroll tax returns .
Material invoices purchase orders and all material and supply requisition contracts .
Material cost distribution worksheets .
Equipment records usage reports list of company equipment rates etc ..
Vendor rental agreements and Subcontractor invoices .
Subcontractor payment certificates .
Canceled checks payroll and vendors .
Job cost report .
Job payroll ledger .
General ledger general journal and all subsidiary ledgers and journals together with all supporting documentation pertinent to entries made in these ledgers and journals .
Cash disbursements journal .
Financial statements for all years reflecting the operations on this Project .
Income tax returns whether such records are maintained by the company involved its accountant or others for the years reflecting operations on the Project .
Depreciation records on all company equipment .
All other documents used to develop costs for the Contractors internal purposes in establishing the actual cost of owning and operating equipment .
All documents that reflect the Contractors actual profit and overhead during the time the Project was being performed and for each of the five years before the commencement of this Project .
All documents related to the preparation of the Contractors Proposal including the final calculations on which the Proposal was based unless the documents are placed in escrow as a provision of the Contract .
Worksheets used to prepare the claim submittal establishing the cost components of the claim including but not limited to labor benefits and insurance Materials equipment Subcontractors and all documents that establish the time periods individuals involved the hours and the rates for the individuals .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Control of Material SOURCE OF SUPPLY AND QUALITY The Contractor shall provide Materials for the Work from sources capable of producing and delivering uniformly acceptable Materials in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and the Progress Schedule .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer of intended sources of supply after award of the Contract and before Material delivery or use for the Engineer to inspect and test the Materials before delivery or use .
Unless otherwise specified the Contractor shall provide new Materials of the specified grade and type or kind .
The Contractor shall not use multiple Material sources to provide one kind or class of Material unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer .
If the Engineer approves the use of Material from more than once source the Engineer will set the conditions for each source change .
The Contractor shall provide Materials from alternative sources capable of producing uniformly acceptable Material as approved by the Engineer if during production the Engineer finds either of the following Supply sources of previously approved Materials do not produce uniformly acceptable Materials or Conditions require extraordinary inspection and testing by the Department to prevent delivery of unacceptable Material .
NATURAL MATERIAL SOURCES The Department may list possible sources of natural Materials in the Contract but does not warrant or imply the availability of sufficient quantities of acceptable Material in those sources .
The Department may also list the same sources as a possible source for other existing or future contracts .
The Contractor shall acknowledge the Departments inability to ascertain from samples the limits for an entire deposit and shall consider variations as usual and expected .
The Contractor shall determine the equipment and Work necessary to produce a Material meeting the Contract requirements .
The Contractor has the right to take Materials from those sources that the Contract lists as specified in the lease .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer in writing within days after Approval of the Contract if the Contractor intends to obtain Material from those sources .
The Contractor may not remove Material from the source until the Engineer receives this notice .
For all sources where the Department owns the Material or where the Contractor elects to obtain Material under the terms of a Department lease or permit the Contractor shall remove the Material in accordance with the following requirements and conditions The Contractor shall procure Material from the portion of the source as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer may reject unacceptable portions of the source .
The contractor must use the Material exclusively on the Contract Project .
The Contractor will perform clearing and grubbing as necessary in accordance with Clearing and Grubbing at no additional cost to the Department .
If others are operating concurrently in a pit used as a source of Materials for the Project the Contractor must cooperate in accordance with Cooperation by Contractors .
If the Contractors operations necessitate the relocation adjustment rearrangement or other Work on impacted drainage facilities or utility properties the Contractor shall perform this Work at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall blend Materials from various layers and areas within the source as directed by the Engineer even to the extent of blending Materials from the top of the deposit with those from the bottom of the deposit .
Within the areas owned or leased by the Department the Contractor shall spread or stockpile the strippings and rejected Materials as directed by the Engineer .
If the Contract includes a Material price tables the Contractor can only produce the Materials listed in the tables .
The Contractor shall not use Material suitable for the production of Class or Class base aggregate as borrow Material unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer .
If the Contract does not contain a separate Rock Price the Contractor may not screen off a coarse fraction No .
of Material and blend it with Material from a different source to produce an aggregate product the Contractor may not use rock from a source and blend it with sand from a different source to produce concrete bituminous or base etc ..
If the Contract contains a separate Rock Price the Contractor may screen off .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Material and will pay the indicated price for the rock fraction .
In addition the Contractor may not produce riprap unless there is a separate Rock Price for riprap included in the Contract .
After removing the Material and after completing the Work the Contractor shall leave the site in a condition acceptable to the Engineer .
The Contractor shall level waste piles trim slopes and pit bottoms replace the stripping and perform other cleanup work at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will provide the Contractor with statements showing the quantities of Material removed and the payment due .
The Department will require full reimbursement before making final payment on the Contract .
MATERIALS SPECIFICATIONS SAMPLES TESTS AND ACCEPTANCE .
SPECIFICATIONS The Department will sample test and inspect all Materials in accordance with the Contract at any time before being permanently incorporated in the Work .
The Department will approve or reject Materials based on the results of this sampling testing and inspection .
The material requirements that describe material sampling testing and inspection are normally referenced in Division II construction details the Plans or the Special Provisions .
In the absence of a specific material reference the governing material specifications in order of precedence will be Division III materials AASHTO ASTM and the applicable industry standard .
Unless otherwise required if the Contract cites specifications standards methods tests or practices from outside associations societies or governmental agencies the Department is referring to the versions of these references that are current at the date of the Advertisement for Bids .
If the Contract refers to other procedures practices or allowances established or approved by the Department the Department will refer to the versions of these references that are current at the date of the Advertisement for Bids .
The Department and Contractor may mutually agree to update the referenced provisions to the version current at the time of application. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Refer to the Schedule of Materials Control for sampling and testing of Materials on State and Federalaid Projects .
The Schedule of Materials Control sets the size of Material samples and the rate of testing .
The Schedule of Materials Control does not set Contract requirements for the Material .
The Schedule of Materials Control is included with the Proposal Package .
The Contractor shall provide all required samples at no additional cost to the Department and shall provide such facilities and assistance as the Engineer directs for collecting and forwarding samples .
If required by the Engineer the Contractor shall submit representative preliminary samples to the Engineer in accordance with the specified methods for examination and testing .
The Contractor shall label submitted preliminary samples with the following information Contractors name Project number The material source Suppliers name and Where the material fits into the Work .
For soil and aggregate samples the Contractor shall provide the following additional information The legal description of the property where the samples were taken and Pit numbers for single source bituminous and concrete aggregate products .
The Department will provide special instructions for sampling upon request from the Contractor . .
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE The Engineer may accept industry standardized products by a Certificate of Compliance in lieu of the required sampling and testing subject to the following The Certificate of Compliance must state that the provided Material meets the specification requirements identify the Specification number and include the Project number .
Attach the Certificate of Compliance to the invoice weigh bill or other shipping document and identify the supplier manufacturer product and quantities covered .
Deliver a copy of the Certificate of Compliance with the shipment of the covered Material .
Provide certified test reports to the Materials Engineer if requested .
Keep certified test results on file with the supplier and available to the Engineer for inspection upon request .
The Certificate of Compliance must be signed by a representative authorized to bind the company supplying the material covered by the certification .
The Department may require samples and test the Material for compliance regardless of prior certification by the supplier. . Minnesota Standard Specifications When the Contractor uses a Certificate of Compliance in lieu of required sampling and testing the Engineer will withhold percent of the Contract Unit Price of Work until the Contractor submits the Certificate of Compliance to the Engineer . .
ACCEPTANCE Department approval of preliminary samples will not constitute acceptance of the Material represented .
The Department will only consider the Materials actually delivered to the Project for acceptance .
The Department will base Material acceptance or rejection on the results of the tests and inspections made by the Engineer .
The Engineer will make final inspection and acceptance of Material at the Project .
The Department will not allow use of Material that must meet definite Contract requirements until completion of all required acceptance inspections and tests show the Material complies with the Contract requirements .
Pending determination of test results the Contractor may use Material having a satisfactory record of compliance with the test requirements at the Contractors risk with the understanding that the Department will apply the provisions of Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work if the material fails to meet the Contract requirements subsequent to placement .
PLANT INSPECTION COMMERCIAL FACILITY .
GENERAL The Engineer may perform plant inspection and test Material at the source before delivery to determine compliance with those test requirements and process controls required by the Contract during production .
The Engineer may retest Material at the site regardless of approvals given before final inspection and acceptance .
The Engineer will base Material acceptance on compliance with Contract requirements at the time of incorporation in the Work .
The Engineer may retest Material after delivery and will reject Material that fails to meet the Contract requirements .
The cost of facilities and assistance provided by the Contractor required for inspection of Materials at the source will be considered as part of the production costs and are included in the Contract Unit Prices applying to the work involved . .
INSPECTION PROCEDURES The Contractor shall meet the following conditions when the Engineer performs a plant inspection At least weeks before starting production notify the Engineer of the date and place of production to allow for arrangements for the plant inspection Notify the Engineer of the production schedule and other related information concerning inspection arrangements In partnership with the producer cooperate with and assist the Engineer in the inspection .
The Departments inspectors will not handle the Materials being inspected Arrange store and handle the Material as directed by the inspector Provide the Engineer with office space as defined in .
Requirements For Facilities at commercial production plants and other facilities tools deemed necessary for inspection and free entry to the plant locations where manufacturing or production occur and Provide and maintain safety measures as approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will terminate inspection at the source if conditions are deemed hazardous by the Engineer . .
REQUIREMENTS FOR FACILITIES Commercial plants producing bituminous mixture structural concrete or graded aggregates for state Projects shall have inplant inspection facilities meeting the following requirements Floor area of at least sq .
ft sq .
m with weatherproof exterior construction adequate natural lighting and convenient accessibility .
Equipped with at least one suitable table or workbench at least one stool and one chair an approved fire extinguisher for use intended and a suitable storage cabinet with lock .
Provided with adequate electric lighting and electrical outlets adequate heating system conveniently located sanitary facilities and convenient access to running water supply .
Furnished with at least a burner natural gas or electric stove for sample drying and with effective forcedair ventilation .
Provided with an electrically powered mechanical sieving apparatus to determine particle size distribution of fine aggregate less than No. . mm sieve capable of accommodating six full height No .
µm round sieves with pan and cover provided by the Department .
The Engineer will approve the apparatus after verifying that the sieving meets the requirements of AASHTO T . Minnesota Standard Specifications The producer shall make the inplant inspection facilities available to the Engineer before beginning production .
The producer shall maintain the inplant inspection facilities until the termination of production at no additional cost to the Department .
If the facilities do not meet the requirements specified in this subsection the Contractor shall provide an equivalent field laboratory unit at the plant site as directed by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
SUBSTITUTE MATERIALS When the Department classifies Material to be incorporated in the Work according to size strength type or other design classification for separate units courses sections or installations the intent is to specify the acceptable level of compliance quality or service .
The Contractor may provide Material exceeding the specified class quality service life or other Contract requirements to facilitate the Work .
The Contractor may use substitutions only as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will establish the revised basis for acceptance in writing .
STORAGE OF MATERIALS The Contractor shall store Materials in a manner that preserves the quality and fitness of the Materials for the Work .
The Department may inspect the stored Materials before use in the Work even though the Department may have approved the Materials before storage .
The Contractor shall store Materials to facilitate inspection .
The Contractor may use portions of the Project Site approved by the Engineer for storing Materials and for placing plant and Equipment .
The Contractor shall provide needed additional space at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall restore all portions of the Project Site used for storage or operations to acceptable condition at no additional cost to the Department before the Department will grant final acceptance of the Project .
The Contractor shall not use private property for storing Materials or Equipment without written permission of the owner or lessee .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer evidence of the written permission to use private property upon request .
The Department will only allow stockpiling of Materials within the Project Site that the Contractor will incorporate into the Work .
This Specification applies to manufactured and natural Materials including Materials stockpiled for crushing .
HANDLING MATERIALS The Contractor shall handle Materials to preserve quality and fitness for the Work .
The Contractor shall transport Materials in vehicles constructed to prevent loss of Material after loading and measuring .
The Contractor shall ensure the quantities of Materials as loaded are the same as the quantities received on the Project .
The Contractor shall use methods and Equipment to load and haul bulk Materials that prevent contamination or loss of Material after measurement and acceptance for the Work .
UNACCEPTABLE MATERIALS The Department considers Materials that do not meet the Contract requirements before being incorporated into the Work as unacceptable .
The Engineer will reject unacceptable Material .
The Contractor shall remove unacceptable Material from the Project unless otherwise directed by the Engineer as allowed by Materials Specifications Samples Tests and Acceptance .
If the Contractor corrects defects in Material that the Department determined was unacceptable and the Contractor brings the Materials into compliance with the Contract requirements the Contractor may use the Material if authorized by the Engineer .
DEPARTMENTPROVIDED MATERIAL The Department will deliver or make available Departmentprovided Material at the locations shown on the Plans or in the Special Provisions .
The Contract Unit Price for the relevant Contract Items includes the costs of handling transporting and placing the Materials .
The Contractor shall take responsibility for Departmentprovided Material after the Department delivers or makes the Material available to the Contractor .
The Department will deduct from moneys due the Contractor for shortages deficiencies or damage to the Material occurring after taking possession and for demurrage charges .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Legal Relations and Responsibility to the Public LAWS TO BE OBSERVED The Contractor shall observe and comply with all of the following relating to the conduct of Work on the Project or to individuals engaged in Work for the Project or employed on the Project All applicable State and Federal laws and regulations Orders and decrees of bodies and tribunals with lawful jurisdiction over the Work and Such local ordinances as are applicable to the Work as determined by the Department .
The Contractor shall hold harmless and indemnify the Department and its representatives against all claims and liabilities arising from or based on violations committed by the Contractor or anyone subject to the control of the Contractor .
The Contractor shall immediately report to the Engineer in writing any Contract requirements that are contrary to or inconsistent with any law regulation order decree or applicable ordinance .
The Contractor shall endeavor to comply with relevant and significant ordinances in consultation with the Engineer .
Work on the state trunk Highway system is generally not subject to regulation by political subdivisions of the State. . DATA PRACTICES Bidders are advised that all data created collected received maintained or disseminated by the Contractor and any subcontractors in performing the Work contained in this Contract are subject to the requirements of MN Statute Chapter the Minnesota Government Data Practices Act MGDPA .
The Contractor shall comply with the requirements of the MGDPA in the same manner as the Department .
The Contractor does not have a duty to provide access to public data to the public if the public data are available from the Department unless otherwise required by the Contract. . WORKER CONDUCT Bidders are hereby reminded of the Departments policy to provide a workplace free of violence threats of violence harassment and discrimination .
The Department has established a policy of zero tolerance for violence in the workplace .
Contractors performing work on Department construction Projects or local government entities or public agencies utilizing state funds on highway construction Projects shall maintain a workplace free of violence harassment and discrimination .
The Contractor shall immediately remove from the Project any employee of the Contractor or a Subcontractor in violation of the Departments Harassment Guidelines andor Zero Tolerance of Violence in the Workplace policy document until such time as the appropriate authority can complete an investigation. . FALSE CLAIMS ACT The provisions of the Minnesota False Claims Against the State Act Minnesota Statutes Chapter C apply to any claim by the Contractor under this Contract .
For the purpose of this section claim is defined in Mn Statute section C. subd . .
PERMITS LICENSES AND TAXES The Contractor shall obtain the licenses and permits required by State and Federal laws and regulations .
The Contractor shall pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the Work .
If requested by the Department the Contractor shall provide the Engineer with evidence of compliance with the permit license notice and tax requirements .
PATENTED DEVICES MATERIALS AND PROCESSES The Contract Unit Prices include the cost of all royalties and costs from patents trademarks and copyrights needed to complete the Work .
If the Contractor employs any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright the Contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the Department and any political subdivision department or third party affected from all claims for infringement by reason of its use .
RESTORATION OF SURFACE OPENED BY PERMIT The Department may issue permits to individuals firms public utilities or corporations wanting a surface opening trench or boring in the Highway .
The Contractor shall only allow parties with valid permits to make openings in the Highway as authorized by the Department .
The Department may Allow proper authorities of a political subdivision to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the Highway at any time and Issue permits for the construction or reconstruction of any utility service .
Minnesota Standard Specifications If the Proposal Package contained the permit and related work the Department will not pay the Contractor for damages or delays resulting from the related work .
If the Proposal Package did not contain the permit and related work and the related work impacts the Work the Engineer may revise the Contract in accordance with Contract Revisions .
FEDERALAID PROVISIONS The Contractor and all Subcontractors shall observe Federal laws rules and regulations if the Federal government pays for any portion of the cost of a Project .
The Federal requirements of a Federalaid Project will supersede conflicting provisions of State or local laws rules or regulations .
The Department will inspect the Work on Projects funded by the Federal government .
Inspection by the Department will not make the Federal government a party to the Contract or interfere with the rights of the parties to the Contract .
EMPLOYEE HEALTH AND WELFARE The Contractor shall provide and maintain sanitary and safety accommodations for the use and protection and health and welfare of the Contractors employees and suppliers in accordance with the following applicable safety and health codes and regulations Federal State Local and Other bodies and tribunals having jurisdiction .
The Contractor shall refer to the employee safety and sanitation regulations as specified in CFR Occupational Safety Health Administration OSHA Construction Industry Standards MN Statute Chapter and Minnesota Department of Labor Industry OSHA Division Minnesota Rules Chapters to inclusive .
The Contractor shall provide install maintain and remove required safety and health related Equipment and provisions at no additional cost to the Department .
The safety and health related Equipment and provisions shall comply with the applicable codes and regulations be in operable condition and allow Department personnel to perform required duties at the appropriate time .
The Contractor shall allow the entry of Federal State and local safety and health inspectors to perform inspections or investigations .
The Contractor shall perform construction operations in accordance with applicable laws regulations and industry standards as specified this section .
The Contractor is responsible for the development implementation and enforcement of safety requirements on the Project regardless of any actions the Department may take to help ensure compliance with these requirements .
The Contractor shall submit a written safety program to the Engineer at the preconstruction conference addressing safety issues for all Project activities .
The Contractor shall include the names of the persons identified as the Contractors Designees in the safety program .
Responsibilities of the Contractors Designees include the following Safety requirements Availability during performance of the Work and Correction of violations on the Project as observed by the Engineer .
PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND SAFETY The Contractor shall conduct operations and perform the Work in a manner that causes the least possible obstruction to traffic .
The Contractor shall provide for the safety of the general public and for the residents living beside the Highway .
The Contractor shall provide temporary facilities to allow pedestrian travel over or through obstructions at public walkways and at other locations designated by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall adequately fence and post conspicuous warning signs around hazardous open excavations or open excavations that contain water .
If performing Work in a municipality the Contractor shall notify the local fire and police chiefs to allow time to rearrange routes of emergency vehicles before blockading a street .
The Contractor shall keep the local fire and police chiefs informed about the status and removal of street blockades affecting emergency vehicle travel .
The Contractor shall not obstruct access to fire hydrants without the approval of the local fire chief .
Minnesota Standard Specifications RAILROAD HIGHWAY PROVISIONS .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS The Contractor shall perform Work in accordance with the Contract requirements in this section for the following Work within the railroad rightofway .
Work adjacent to the railroad rightofway if Materials or Equipment may extend into the railroad rightofway .
Work that includes a Contractor crossing for the movement of Equipment and Materials across the railroad rightofway and tracks .
The Contractor shall coordinate railroadhighway requirements with each Railroad Company and implement the railroad requirements and the requirements in this section before beginning the Work on railroad property .
The Contractor shall ensure each person providing labor material supervision or services connected with the Work on railroad property meets the Railroad Companys safety and security requirements before entering the railroad property .
Before entering the railroad property the Contractor shall prepare and implement a safety action plan if required by and as approved by the Railroad Company .
The Contractor shall also audit compliance with that safety action plan during the Work .
The Contractor shall keep a copy of the safety action plan and audit results at the Project Site .
The Contractor shall allow the Railroad Company to inspect the safety action plan at all reasonable times .
The Contractor shall not perform Work infringing on the statutory clearances in accordance with MN Statutes .
to .
without a clearance exception as may be granted in MN statute .. Variances to the statutory clearance requirements must be applied for and approved by the Commissioner before performing the Work .
Clearances for temporary obstructions within feet horizontal of the centerline of the track and vertical as measured from the top of the rail are subject to MN statute ..
This does not preclude Railroad Company approval for any construction work taking place on Railroad Company property Unless specifically approved by the Railroad Company before commencement of the Work the Contractor shall not perform Work that interferes with the constant continuous and uninterrupted use of the tracks property and facilities of the Railway its lessees licensees or others .
The Contractor shall not impair the safety of the tracks property and facilities of the Railway its lessees licensees or others .
When not in use the Contractor shall keep Equipment and Materials at least feet from the centerline of the nearest track unless the Railroad Company approves otherwise before commencement of the Work .
The Contractor shall not allow vehicles to cross the railroad track except at a crossing approved by the Railroad Company before commencement of the Work or at existing open public crossings .
The Contractor is responsible for arranging with the Railroad Company any temporary suspension of train traffic required to construct the Project .
Work windows requested by the Contractor to temporary suspend train traffic for construction purposes are granted at the sole discretion of the Railroad Company .
The Contractor shall be responsible for damages from unscheduled delays of freight or passenger trains caused by the Contractor .
If the Contractors operations cause the Railroad Company to perform extra work to maintain railroad traffic the Contractor shall reimburse the Railroad Company for the cost of the extra work and damages associated with delays to trains .
The Railroad Company may inspect Work on the railroad rightofway at any time to ensure that the Work will not adversely impact train traffic or safety . .
STRUCTURAL PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION METHODS The Contractor shall not perform Work affecting railroad traffic embankment drainage property or train crews before the Railroad Company approves the Contractors construction methods and protective measures .
The Department will consider costs resulting from compliance with the requirements of this section as incidental and the Contractor shall perform this Work at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall prepare detailed plans indicating the construction methods and protective measures intended for use adjacent to the Railroad Companys tracks or at any structures that are part of the Project .
The detailed plans shall indicate the protective measures used to safeguard railroad property embankment traffic and trainmen from damage and accident during construction operations adjacent to and over or under the Railroad Companys track .
The detailed plans and methods shall include the following Before excavating for any structure work adjacent to the Railroad Companys track the Contractor shall construct a railing approved by the Railroad Company before construction between the tracks and the structure excavation and at the ends of the excavation as approved by the Railroad Company .
If using sheeting for excavation adjacent to the Railways track the Contractor shall drive the sheeting before excavating for the structure .
The Contractor shall cut off the sheeting at or slightly below the ground level .
Minnesota Standard Specifications immediately after driving the sheeting .
The Contractor shall install and remove sheeting as approved by the Railroad Company .
The Contractor shall immediately backfill any excavation adjacent to Railway tracks after completion of structure construction .
The Contractor shall keep the railing in place until the completion of the backfill .
Any structure work including demolition or falsework placement that occurs above the tracks contractor plans and methods shall include track structure and train protection as approved by the Railroad Company .
Any structure or boring work occurs under the tracks contractor plans and methods shall include track structure and train protection as approved by the Railroad Company .
Any dewatering activities on Railroad property shall be approved by the Railroad Company .
The Contractor shall submit the detailed plans to the Engineer .
The Engineer will secure Department approval prior to submitting the plans to the MnDOT Office of Freight and Commercial Vehicle Operations .
The MnDOT Office of Freight and Commercial Vehicle Operations will coordinate Railroad Company approval .
The Contractor must allow fortyfive calendar days for Railroad Company plan review .
If contractor plans are required to be revised or modified by the Railroad Company the revised contractor plans are again subject to fortyfive calendar day review .
Contractors may not deviate from the approved engineered plans as approved by the Railroad Company without MnDOT and Railroad Company Approval .
For plans requiring modification for approval the Contractor must resubmit revised plans to the Engineer .
The Engineer will provide the final approved plans to the Contractor. . RAILROAD PROTECTIVE LIABILITY INSURANCE If performing Work on the railroad rightofway or hauling Material across a Railroad Company approved temporary crossing the Contractor shall provide Railroad Protective Liability Insurance in accordance with the following A Minimum Limits of Liability The Contractor shall provide the following minimum limits of liability each occurrence annual aggregate .
B Coverages The Contractor shall provide the following types of coverage Bodily Injury Liability Property Damage Liability Physical Damage to Property .
The Contractor shall provide an insurance certificate showing that the required insurance is in full force and effect before beginning Work .
The Contractor shall not cancel the insurance until the Engineer has accepted the Work requiring the insurance .
The Contractor shall submit one true and correct copy of the insurance policy to the Engineer and to each affected Railroad at least calendar days before beginning Work . .
FLAGGING PROTECTIVE SERVICES AND DEVICES The Railroad Company will provide flagging and other protective services and devices for Contractrequired Contractor Work to protect railroad facilities personnel equipment and traffic .
The Contractor shall arrange with the Railroad for flagging and protective services and devices if performing Work in accordance with the following On the railroad rightofway including work performed atgrade over or under the railroad .
For Materials hauled across railroad tracks over a temporary crossing approved by the Railway .
If using cranes or construction Equipment positioned outside of the railroad rightofway having component parts that if tipped or dropped could damage the Railway facilities and equipment .
If performing excavation below the bottom of the track elevation and if the Railroad representative determines that the track or other railroad facilities may move or settle .
If Work interferes with the safe operation of trains at timetable speeds .
If the presence of persons Materials Equipment or blasting operations present hazards to railroad track communications signal electrical or other facilities .
The Contractor shall notify the Railroad Company and the Engineer at least calendar days before the need for flagging and other protective services and devices .
The Contractor shall notify the Railway and the Engineer at least calendar days before the date flagging and other protective services and devices will no longer be necessary to allow the Railroad Company to remove the flagger position as required by Railroadunion agreements. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractor shall obtain special permission from the Railroad Company before moving heavy or cumbersome objects or Equipment across a temporary crossing that could damage the track structure .
Unless the Contract requires otherwise the Department will reimburse the Railroad Company for the costs of necessary flagging other protective services and devices required to protect the Railroad Companys facilities personnel equipment and traffic .
NAVIGABLE WATERWAYS The Contractor shall not interfere with free navigation of waterways or impair existing navigable depths when performing Work on navigable waters unless authorized by permit .
For information regarding permits that are required for this Work contact the MnDOT Office of Freight and Commercial Vehicle Operations .
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES .
GENERAL The Contractor shall provide traffic control devices and methods meeting the requirements of the MN MUTCD Part I and Part II of the Minnesota Standard Signs Manuals and the applicable Material Specifications .
The Contractor shall also provide traffic control devices and methods in accordance with the following Reflectorize all signs paddles and other traffic control devices including those used for daytime operations and Signs shall meet the crash testing requirements of NCHRP as specified by the MN MUTCD and the Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware MASH .
The Project Engineer may require the Contractor to provide a Letter of Compliance stating that all of the Contractors devices are NCHRP compliant and also meet the requirements of MASH .
The Letter of Compliance must also include approved drawings of the different signs and devices . .
PROVIDE MAINTAIN AND REMOVE The Contractor shall provide and maintain traffic control devices as required by the Department in accordance with the contract and the MN MUTCD that perform the following functions Advise warn and alert the traveling public of construction in advance of the Project termini and on all Roads Streets and public trails approaching or crossing the Project Control and guide traffic through the Project which may include using flag persons and pilot vehicles as required by the Contract and Protect warn and exclude traffic and protect workers at all work sites .
If the Contractor fails to properly provide install maintain or remove any of the required traffic control devices the Department reserves the right to correct the deficiency and to deduct the costs from any moneys due or becoming due to the Contractor in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work . .
PLANNED DETOURS The Department at its expense will design traffic control devices necessary to control and guide traffic over planned Detours required by the Contract. . BLANK .
TEMPORARY BYPASSES The Contractor shall construct maintain and remove traffic control devices on other temporary bypasses requested by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department . .
CONTRACTORS RESPONSIBILITY The Engineers approval of the traffic control devices and the Contractors method of application of traffic control measures as specified in this section will not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for protecting the work the workers and the traveling public in accordance with Inspection of Work .
The Contractor shall protect traffic signs not removed or relocated by the Department before construction in their original location for the duration of the work except as otherwise approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor may adjust or remove and reset a sign interfering with construction to a temporary location if approved by the Engineer and if the original location is not critical and the Contractor resets the sign at the permanent location as soon as construction operations allow .
The Contractor shall notify the Engineer before removing or disturbing a traffic sign. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will make no direct payment for removing protecting and replacing traffic signs as specified in this section unless provided for elsewhere in the Contract .
The Department will not provide additional compensation to the Contractor for delays inconvenience or damage from special construction required performing the work in the presence of traffic signs . .
ENGINEERS AUTHORITY In accordance with Authority of the Engineer the Engineer will accept or reject a traffic control device provided by the Contractor but not incorporated in the final construction based on acceptable day and night performance .
If requested by the Engineer the Contractor shall provide representative samples or remove traffic control devices for testing at no additional cost to the Department. . BLANK USE OF EXPLOSIVES If using explosives to complete the Work the Contractor shall not endanger life property or new Project Work .
The Contractor is responsible for property damage personal injury and death resulting from the use of explosives .
The Contractor shall use explosives securely store explosives and mark explosive storage locations in accordance with applicable laws .
If laws do not identify storage requirements the Contractor shall store explosives at least ft away from the Road or from places of human occupancy .
The Contractor shall notify property owners and public utility companies in the vicinity of the proposed detonation before using explosives to allow the property owners and public utility companies to protect property .
The Department advises the Contractor of the potential hazard of premature explosion of electric blasting caps due to propagation of radio frequency energy by transmitters of radio and related services such as television radar and wireless communications .
The Contractor shall provide advance notification of blasting operations and any other precautions in accordance with Minnesota Rule .. PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF PROPERTY .
PROPERTY The Contractor is responsible for the preservation of all public and private property of any character in performing the Work .
A Monuments The Contractor shall preserve all land and property corner monuments Right Of Way monuments and vertical and horizontal control point monuments indicated in the Contract or provided in writing by the Engineer before the start of Work in the vicinity of the monument .
If the Engineer determines that a monument designated for preservation was disturbed during construction activities the Department will deduct a charge of .
per monument from the moneys due or becoming due the Contractor .
The Engineer will determine the number of monuments disturbed or destroyed by the Contractor .
If the Engineer determines that a monument requires removal to allow construction the Department will not deduct the charge of .
per monument from moneys due or becoming due the Contractor .
B Utilities C Protection and Restoration of Vegetation D Preservation of Historical Objects .
ADVANCE NOTICE The Contractor shall give advance notice to the owners of all private property where the Contractors operations will interfere with the property .
The notice shall advise the private property owners of the nature of the interference and indicate the Contractors intention to arrange for the protection of their property. . BLANK .
GENERAL LIABILITY The Contractor is responsible for all damages to property of any character resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution or nonexecution of the Work .
The Contractor will not be responsible for property within the Project Site if The Contract did not specify the existence and approximate location of the underground property and The Contractor fulfilled its obligations under Minnesota Statute Chapter D. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractor shall restore property damaged by the Contractors act omission neglect or misconduct to a condition equal to or better than that existing before the damage occurred by repairing rebuilding or replacing the property or otherwise correcting the damage to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department and denial of a claim by the Contractors insurance carrier does not relieve the Contractor of its obligations in this regard .
FOREST PROTECTION If performing Work within or adjacent to State or National Forests the Contractor shall comply with all regulations of the USDA Forest Service State Fire Marshal Department of Natural Resources Division of Forestry or other authority having jurisdiction governing the protection of forests and the performance of Work within forests .
The Contractor shall keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse and obtain permits for the construction of field offices and other structures in accordance with the requirements of the Forest Supervisor .
The Contractor shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent and suppress forest fires and shall require employees and Subcontractors to take all reasonable measures within their power to prevent and suppress forest fires .
The Contractor shall make every possible effort to notify a Forest official at the earliest possible moment of the location and extent of a fire .
RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE CLAIMS INSURANCE .
GENERAL The Contractor shall indemnify defend and save harmless the Department its officers and its employees from all suits actions and claims of any character brought because of injuries or damages received or sustained by any person persons or property based on the following On account of the operations of the Contractor On account of or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the Work Use of unacceptable Materials in constructing the Work Any act or omission neglect or misconduct of the Contractor Claims arising or amounts recovered from infringements of patent trademark or copyright or Claims arising or amounts recovered under the Workers Compensation Act or under any other law ordinance order or decree .
The Department may retain money due to the Contractor under this or any other contract with the Department that the Department deems necessary to protect its interests with respect to suits actions or claims arising on account of the Contractors operations or in consequence of any act neglect omission or misconduct of the Contractor .
If no money is due to the Contractor the Department may hold the Contractors Sureties liable until the Department receives evidence that suits actions or claims have been settled .
The Contractor must identify a contact person for damage complaints from the public and maintain a log of all complaints and the Contractors response to each .
The Contractor must provide the log to the Engineer upon request .
When the Contractors act or omission neglect or misconduct causes property damage or when the Contractors failure to act in accordance with Maintenance During Construction causes property damage the Contractor must accept monetary responsibility for the property damage and promptly resolve the complaint. . WORKERS COMPENSATION INSURANCE The Contractor shall provide workers compensation insurance for all employees and shall require Subcontractors to provide workers compensation insurance in accordance with the Minnesota statutory requirements and the following Part Employers Liability including Stop Gap Liability for monopolistic states .
Provide the following minimum limits unless otherwise stated in the special provisions .
Bodily Injury by disease per employee .
Bodily Injury by disease aggregate and .
Bodily Injury by accident .
Coverage C All States Coverage If applicable USLH Maritime Voluntary and Foreign Coverage and Waiver of subrogation in favor of the Department .
If the Contractor is selfinsured for its obligation under the Workers Compensation Statutes in the jurisdiction where the Project is located the Contractor shall provide the Department with a Certification of the Authority to SelfInsure. . COMMERCIAL GENERAL LIABILITY INSURANCE The Contractor shall maintain insurance to cover liability from operations under the Contract whether such operations are by the Contractor Subcontractor or by anyone directly or indirectly employed under the Contract .
A Minimum Limits of Liability The Contractor shall provide the following minimum limits of liability .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Per occurrence Annual aggregate Annual aggregate applying to Products and Completed Operations Fire damage and Medical expense any one person per occurrence .
The liability limits specified above are the minimum limits required and any and all additional limits provided to the Contractor will be available on an excess umbrella or other basis to the Additional Insured for any and all covered claims .
B Coverages The Contractor shall provide the following types of coverage Premises and Operations Bodily Injury and Property Damage Personal and Advertising Injury Products and Completed Operations Liability Contractual Liability as provided in ISO form CG or its equivalent Pollution exclusion with standard exception as per ISO Commercial General Liability Coverage Form CG or equivalent Explosion Collapse and Underground XCU perils Broad Form PD Independent Contractors Let or Sublet Work Waiver of subrogation in favor of the Department Department named as an Additional Insured by endorsement ISO Forms CG and CG or their equivalent for claims arising out of the Contractors negligence or the negligence of those for whom the Contractor is responsible and Coverage under the General Liability Policyies of the Contractor will be as broadly construed for the Owner as is available to the Contractor . .
AUTOMOBILE LIABILITY INSURANCE A Coverage The Contractor shall maintain the following insurance coverages for liability arising out of the operations use or maintenance of all owned nonowned and hired automobiles Owned automobiles Nonowned automobiles Hired automobiles and Waiver of subrogation in favor of the Department .
B Minimum Limit of Liability The Contractor shall provide a minimum limit of liability of at least Per Occurrence Combined Single Limit for Bodily Injury and Property Damage . .
UMBRELLA OR EXCESS LIABILITY INSURANCE The Contractor may use an umbrella or excess liability insurance policy to supplement the Contractors policy limits to meet the full policy limits as required by the Contract. . ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS The Contractor shall provide primary and noncontributory insurance policies to any other valid and collectible insurance available to the Department with respect to any claim arising out of the Contract .
The Contractor shall file evidence of Subcontractor insurance .
The Contractor shall pay for Contractrelated insurance premiums and deductibles .
The Contractor shall provide policies from insurance companies meeting the following requirements AM Best rating of at least A Financial Size Category of at least VII and Authorized to do business in the State of Minnesota .
If the Contractor receives a cancellation notice from an insurance carrier affording coverage herein the Contractor agrees to notify the Department within five business days with a copy of the cancellation notice unless the Contractors policyies contain a provision that coverage afforded under the policyies will not be cancelled without at least thirty days advance written notice to the Department. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The insurance and insurance limits required herein will not be deemed a limitation on the Contractors liability with regard to the indemnities granted to the Department under this Contract. . NOTICE TO THE CONTRACTOR The failure of the Contractor to provide the Department with certificates of insurance for the policies or renewals and the failure of the insurance company to notify the Department of cancellation of policies as required by the Contract shall not constitute a waiver by the Department to the Contractor to provide insurance .
The Department reserves the right to terminate the Contract in accordance with Default of Contractor if the Contractor fails to meet the insurance requirements specified in this section .
The Department retains all rights to pursue any legal remedies against the Contractor .
In the event of a claims dispute the Contractor shall make all insurance policies available for the Departments inspection and shall submit copies of policies to the Departments authorized agent if requested by the Department in writing .
OPENING SECTIONS OF THE ROADWAY TO TRAFFIC BEFORE COMPLETION OF THE PROJECT The requirement of this section shall not relieve the Contractor of obligations for maintenance of traffic over Roads undergoing improvements as specified in Maintenance of Traffic .
Opening of a section of the Roadway to traffic shall not constitute acceptance of the incomplete portions of the Project nor shall opening a section of the Roadway to traffic before the completion of the entire Contract waive any provisions of the Contract .
The Special Provisions may require or the Engineer may direct the Contractor to open sections of the Roadway to traffic before the completion of that section or the entire Project .
When the Contractor is required to do so the following applies On sections of the Roadway that the Department requires the Contractor to open to traffic before completion of the entire Project the Department will relieve the Contractor of any expense for actions required under Maintenance of Traffic .
The Contractor is responsible for repair of damage to the Work not attributable to traffic .
The Contractor must perform highway maintenance work in accordance with Maintenance During Construction .
If a section of the Roadway is opened to traffic as directed by the Engineer for unforeseen reasons not the fault of the Contractor the Department will pay the Contractor for additional expenses incurred in completing the remaining Work under traffic .
The Department may extend the Contract Time if justified with a Change Order executed in advance of the traffic opening describing the agreed conditions .
If a section of the Roadway is opened to traffic before its completion as a requirement of the Contract or as directed by the Engineer as a result of failure or negligence by the Contractor the Contractor shall perform remaining construction operations with the least possible obstruction to traffic .
The Department will not provide the Contractor any additional compensation or extension of time due to increased costs or changed working conditions resulting from opening the Road to traffic before its completion .
CONTRACTORS RESPONSIBILITY FOR WORK The Contractor is responsible for the Work until the Engineer provides final project acceptance in writing .
The Contractor shall protect the Work against injury or damage from weather or other causes arising from the execution or nonexecution of the Work .
The Contractor shall rebuild repair and correct injuries or damages to the Work at no additional cost to the Department before the Engineer will grant issue acceptance of the Project unless Otherwise specified in the Contract or The damage to the Work was caused by unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the Contractor including acts of God such as earthquake tidal wave flood tornado hurricane other cataclysmic phenomenon of nature or acts of a public enemy or of governmental authorities .
If the Engineer suspends the Work the Contractor shall perform the following functions at no additional cost to the Department Take precautions to prevent damage to the Project Provide for normal drainage in accordance with Storm Water Management and Establishing Turf and Controlling Erosion Erect necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities in accordance with Maintenance of Traffic and Traffic Control Devices and Take precautions to protect new tree growth and other vegetative growth against injury as specified in Plant Installation and Establishment Protection and Restoration of Vegetation and Establishing Turf and Controlling Erosion .
If the Contractor fails to comply with these provisions the Engineer will notify the Contractor in writing of the unacceptable Work .
If the Contractor fails to take action as directed by the Engineer the Department may have the Work performed by others and will deduct the costs for this Work from moneys due the Contractor under this Contract or any other contract with the Department. . Minnesota Standard Specifications AIR LAND AND WATER POLLUTION .
GENERAL The Contractor shall schedule and conduct construction operations to prevent control minimize or abate pollution of air land and water in accordance with Laws to be Observed .
The Contractor shall obtain permits in accordance with Permits Licenses and Taxes .
A Discovery of Contaminated Materials and Regulated Waste If during the course of the Project the Contractor encounters any of the following conditions indicating the possible presence of contaminated soil contaminated water or regulated waste the Contractor shall immediately stop Work in the vicinity notify the Engineer and declares a differing site condition in accordance with .
Differing Site Conditions .
The Engineer will conduct a documented inspection and evaluation before resumption of Work .
The Contractor shall not resume Work in the suspected area until approved by the Engineer .
Some indicators of contaminated soil ground water or surface water include the following Odor including gasoline diesel creosote railroad ties mothballs or other chemical odor Soil stained an unusual color such as green or black for reasons other than organic content or soil with a dark oily appearance or any unusual texture or A rainbow colored sheen on water or soil .
Some indicators of regulated wastes include the following Cans bottles glass scrap metal and wood Concrete and asphalt rubble Roofing materials shingles siding vermiculite floor tiles transite or fibrous material possible indicators of demolition waste that could contain asbestos lead or other chemicals Culverts or other pipes with tarlike coating insulation or transite possible indicators of asbestos Ash possibly from burning of regulated materials that may contain lead asbestos or other chemicals Sandblast residue that could contain lead Treated wood including but not limited to products referred to as green treat brown treat and creosote Chemical containers such as storage tanks drums and filters and Old basements with intact floor tiles or insulation that could contain asbestos sumps that could contain chemical waste waste traps that could contain oil wastes and cesspools or any other underground structure that could contain chemical or oily wastes .
B Water Protection The Contractor shall take all practical precautions and actions necessary to prevent pollution of ground water and surface water with any particulate or liquid matter that may be harmful to fish wild life public health or cause a public nuisance .
The Contractor shall avoid the crossing of streams and rivers unless approved by the regulatory authority .
The Contractor shall minimize water pollution from haul roads work platforms temporary earth fills and other temporary staging areas used for construction .
The Contractor shall restore all temporary crossings to preexisting conditions or as shown in plan .
C Land Protection The Contractor shall implement practical actions to minimize erosion on the project .
The Department will consider all areas within the grading construction limits exclusive of roadbed areas that grading or grubbing operations have rendered natural vegetation ineffective as being exposed to probable erosion until such time that the Contractor completes final topsoil finishing and turf establishment operations .
D Air Protection The Contractor shall implement practical actions to minimize air pollution that may harm public health safety or the environment .
The Contractor shall comply with Best Management Practices in accordance with Definitions to control dust appropriate for the work. . STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL The Contractor shall schedule and conduct construction activities in a manner to minimize soil erosion and protect surface waters .
The Contractor shall install temporary sediment control measures in areas that contribute flow to surface waters. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractor shall Schedule install and maintain temporary and permanent sediment and erosion control measures Construct permanent and temporary storm water treatment basins Construct drainage facilities Phase and complete earthwork operations Implement good housekeeping measures Implement dewatering operations and Establish vegetation The Contractor shall minimize vehicle tracking of soil where vehicles exit the Project Site onto paved surfaces or off right of way .
The Contractor shall remove tracked soil from paved surfaces leaving the Project Site daily or more frequently to allow for safe passage of the traveling public .
The Contractor shall retrieve soil that has left the rightofway unless the Department has received landowner andor regulatory approval for depositing fill into adjacent properties or surface waters .
The Contractor shall remove deltas and sediment deposited in drainage ways pipes treatment areas or catch basins and stabilize the areas where sediment removal results in exposed soil .
The Contractor shall stabilize exposed slopes within days after Work in that area has ended or Stabilize slopes within days if the Project area is within mile of and drains to an impaired or special water or Stabilize slopes and temporary or permanent ditchesswales within hours when that area of the project discharges into surface waters or off the Project limits .
The contractor shall provide energy dissipation within hours when connecting pipe outlets to surface waters .
A Quality Control Program Unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer the Contractor shall submit a quality control program including the following The name of the individual responsible for the quality control program at the preconstruction meeting Once construction has commenced the Contractor shall a .
Submit a weekly erosion and sediment control schedule b .
Submit site management plans if applicable c. Conduct a weekly erosion control walkthrough including i .
Schedule the walkthrough and invite watershed districts and other permitting authorities ii .
Submit Corrective Action Report or equivalent as accepted by the Engineer that identifies locates and describes the following in text and picture .
Surface waters .
Turbid or brown water locations .
Highrisk pollutiongenerating activities .
Documentation on how deficiencies were corrected from previous week .
iii .
Amending the plans d. Report sediment discharges to the appropriate regulatory authority including the state duty officer e. Incorporate temporary or permanent erosion control into the Work and stabilize disturbed areas on a sectionbysection bases f. Ensure temporary erosion controls are kept in functional condition g. Maintain temporary sediment control devices h. Remove temporary sediment control devices after use and i .
Ensure that permanent treatment facilities are functioning as per plan .
The Engineer may review the Contractors quality control procedures .
The Contractor shall maintain the quality control records at the Project Site .
B Erosion and Sediment Control Schedule The Contractor shall submit a weekly schedule of proposed erosion and sediment control activities including the following Proposed erosion and sediment control installations and timeline Permanent turf establishment plan and timeline Incorporating grading operations into the erosion control plan Corrective Action plans from previous weeks Corrective Action Report and Proposed erosion control measures during work suspensions .
Minnesota Standard Specifications C Site Management Plan The Contractor shall provide a Site Management Plan in accordance with Definitions as shown in the Plans or within calendar days of receipt of written notice from the Engineer .
Site management plans are for specific construction operations in areas within feet of and drains to surface waters or Areas of Environmental Sensitivity AES .
The Site Management Plan shall Submit a schedule of work including work pursuant to forecasted weather events Provide a list of materials and equipment Provide staging plans or procedures that describe the locations of storm water and pollutant management Best Management Practices BMPs in accordance with Definitions Provide additional details of BMPs proposed for use .
The Contractor shall not start work in the affected areas until the Engineer accepts the Site Management Plan document and all material and equipment are on site .
FURNISHING RIGHT OF WAY The Department will provide the required Right Of Way for the Project before scheduled construction Work begins except as otherwise required by the Contract .
PERSONAL LIABILITY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS The Commissioner and other department personnel are acting solely as agents of the Department in administering this Contract .
Neither the Commissioner nor any other Department personnel assume any personal liability or responsibility in connection with this Contract .
NO WAIVER OF LEGAL RIGHTS The Department may correct measurements estimates or certificates made before or after completion and acceptance of Work after final acceptance of the Contract in accordance with .
Final Contract Acceptance .
The Department may recover overpayments and damages sustained from the Contractors failure to fulfill the obligations as required by the Contract from the Contractor or the Contractors sureties .
The Contractor shall not consider a waiver from the Department for any breach of any part of the Contract as a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
Notwithstanding final acceptance of the Contract the Contractor shall remain responsible for false claims latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards the Departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
AUDITS In accordance with MN Statute C. Subdivision the Department and the Legislative Auditor or the State Auditor may examine and audit the following for at least years after the end of the Contract Books Records Documents Accounting procedures and Accounting practices of the Contractor Subcontractors or suppliers .
Prosecution and Progress SUBLETTING OF CONTRACT The Contractor shall not sublet sell transfer delegate or assign the Contract or any portion of the Contract without written approval of the Engineer .
If approved by the Engineer and if the Contractor performs Work amounting to at least percent of the total original Contract Amount the Contractor may sublet a portion of the Contract .
The Contractor may subcontract Contract Items designated in the Contract as specialty items and the Department will deduct the cost of any specialty items performed by subcontract from the total original Contract Amount before calculating the percent of Work that the Contractor must perform .
On Contracts with Disadvantaged Business Enterprise DBE or Targeted Group Business TGB established goals or both the Contractor shall perform Work amounting to not less than percent of the total original Contract Amount .
The Department will deduct specialty items from the total original Contract Amount before calculating the amount of Work that the Contractor shall perform .
Minnesota Standard Specifications No Subcontractor shall further sublet its portion of the Work without the written approval of the Engineer .
If approved by the Engineer a first tier Subcontractor may sublet a portion of the Work no greater than percent of the Work originally sublet .
The Department will not allow second tier Subcontractors to sublet any portion of the Work .
The Contractor shall submit requests to sublet portions of the Contract to the Engineer on a Request to Sublet form provided by the Department at least business days before the Subcontractor intends to start Work .
If requested by the Department the Contractor shall provide one signed copy of each subcontract agreement to the Engineer .
The Contractor may omit subcontract prices when the Engineer requests a copy of the subcontract under this specification .
The Department will consider Work subcontracted without the approval of the Engineer and subcontracted Work exceeding the percentages specified in this section as unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Contractor shall not construe the Engineers approval as an endorsement of the subcontract the Subcontractor or the Subcontractors ability to complete the Work in a satisfactory manner .
The subcontract or the Engineers approval of the Request to Sublet form shall not relieve the Contractor of any responsibility to complete the Contract or relieve the Contractor of any obligations or liability under the Contract and the Contractors Contract Bonds .
The Engineer will conduct all transactions with the Contractor .
The Engineer will recognize Subcontractors only in the capacity of employees or workers subject to the Contract requirements regarding character and competence .
The subcontract does not create a contractual relationship between the Department and the Subcontractor or convey to the Subcontractor any rights against the Department .
The Contractor shall ensure that the subcontracts at least contain the following Federal State Special Provisions Division A or both Federal State certified prevailing wage determinations or both and State certified truck rental rates .
The Contractor shall ensure that all subcontracts supply or equipment contracts on FederalAid Contracts directly incorporate all of the provisions of Form FHWA Required Contract Provisions FederalAid Construction Contracts the provisions may not be incorporated by reference .
QUALIFICATIONS OF WORKERS The Contractor shall provide workers with sufficient skill and experience to perform the Work assigned to them .
Upon request by the Engineer the Contractor shall submit evidence of qualification for any person engaged in special Work requiring professional training or certification .
If any Subcontractor employed by the Contractor or any person employed by the Contractor or by a Subcontractor fails to perform assigned Work in a proper and skillful manner or becomes intemperate disorderly abusive or harassing the Contractor shall remove that Subcontractor or person from the Project as directed in writing by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall not employ that Subcontractor or person again on any portion of the Project unless approved in writing by the Engineer .
If the Contractor fails to remove a Subcontractor or person as directed by the Engineer or fails to provide suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the Work the Engineer may suspend the Work until the Contractor complies with the direction from the Engineer .
PROGRESS SCHEDULES .
ALL SCHEDULES A General Requirements The Contractor shall prepare the Progress Schedule as specified in .
Bar Chart Schedules or .
CPM Schedule .
If the Engineer determines that the Progress Schedule or any necessary Schedule Update does not provide the required information then the schedule will be returned to the Contractor for correction and resubmittal .
The Contactor shall give the Engineer at least hours advance notice before beginning any construction and at least hours advanced notice before beginning each major construction operation .
The Contractor shall inform the Department of the number of hours the Contractor intends to be working each day and provide hours advance notice of any changes to workday hours equipment forces or sequence of operations .
A .
Acceptance The Department allocates its resources to a Contract based on the total time allowed in the Contract .
The Engineer may accept a Progress Schedule indicating an early Physical Completion Date but can not guarantee the Departments resources will be available to meet an accelerated schedule .
No additional compensation will be allowed if the Contractor is not able to meet their accelerated schedule due to the unavailability of the Departments resources or for other reasons beyond the Departments control. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Review by the Department of a portion of a schedule or an incomplete schedule submittal will not indicate acceptance of the entire schedule the Department will return the accepted schedule to the Contractor as AcceptedAsNoted or No Exceptions Taken .
The Engineers acceptance of any schedule shall not transfer any of the Contractors responsibilities to the Department .
The Contractor alone shall remain responsible for adjusting forces equipment and Work schedules to ensure completion of the Work within the times specified in the Contract .
A .
Early Completion Early Completion is defined as an initial schedule baseline schedule or update schedule which anticipates completion of all work prior to the Completion Date established by the contract documents and the Contractor submits as an Early Completion Schedule .
In the event that an Early Completion Schedule is accepted the Engineer will initiate a Supplemental Agreement amending the Completion Date to the finish date shown on the accepted Early Completion Schedule .
The amended Completion Date will be effective upon execution of that Supplemental Agreement and all contract provisions concerning the Completion Date such as incentives disincentives excusable delays compensable delays and liquidated damages will be measured against the amended Completion Date .
The Contractor may elect not to execute the Supplemental Agreement amending the Completion Date however in so doing the Contractor waives its rights to delay damages in meeting the projected early Completion Date .
A. NonCompliance It is the Contractors responsibility to ensure that the Schedule submitted meets the requirements of .
Bar Chart Schedules or .
Critical Path Method CPM Schedules and accurately reflects the work progress .
The Engineer may suspend work under .A if the schedule does not accurately reflect the actual progress of the work the suspension may continue until accurate schedules are submitted .
The Department will withhold each monthly progress estimate for failure to submit an original or updated schedule on time and in the manner required .
Payment withheld for violation of the schedule requirements will be included in the next progress estimate following the Contractors submission of the required schedules .
The Project Engineers approval does not attest to the validity of the schedule .
A .
Should the Contractor fail to maintain satisfactory progress in accordance with Progress Schedules the Engineer will require that the Contractor provide additional resources labor materials equipment etc .
as necessary to bring the Work up to the level of progress reflected in the current accepted progress schedule .
The Department will consider any failure by the Contractor to adhere to the accepted progress schedule as a failure to provide sufficient resources to ensure completion of the Work within the Contract Time .
The Department may issue a notice of default to the Contractor in accordance with Default of Contractor if the Contractor fails to do either of the following Adhere to the current accepted progress schedule or Take action as ordered to remedy unsatisfactory progress. . BAR CHART SCHEDULES A General Requirements The Contractor shall submit a bar chart progress schedule as specified in .B Required Schedules .
The Contractor shall plan and execute the work to meet the contractrequired interim completion dates and the specified contract time or completion date .
The Engineer will use the schedule to monitor the progress of the work .
B Required Schedules B .
Initial Bar Chart Progress Schedule At least calendar days before the preconstruction meeting the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer for review an initial bar chart progress schedule conforming to the following minimum requirements Include activities that describe essential features of the work and activities that might potentially delay contract completion .
Identify activities that are controlling items of work .
Identify the contemplated start and completion dates for each activity .
Provide a duration ranging from one to working days for each activity .
Break longer activities into or more activities distinguished by the addition of a location or some other description .
Specify the sequencing of all activities .
Provide the quantity and the estimated daily production rate for controlling items of work .
Provide a Written Narrative WN .
Include in the WN .
The proposed work process sequence describing the relationship of the work activities listed in Section herein required to complete the contract including shop drawing submittals permits including estimated maximum waiting periods for all required permits fabrication and delivery activities. . A detailed description and the progress time of each work activity listed in Section herein measured by working day or calendar day as appropriate. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
A detailed description of the Bar Chart including holidays planned workdays per week number of shifts per day hours per shift size of work crews and resources used .
Show completing the work within interim completion dates and the specified contract time or completion date .
In addition to the required activities the contractor is encouraged to include other activities such as The procurement of materials equipment articles of special manufacture etc .
The furnishing of drawings plans and other data required in the contract for the engineers review .
The departments inspections of structural steel fabrication etc .
Third party activities related to the contract .
The Engineer will review the schedule and within calendar days of receipt and will either accept the schedule or provide the Contractor with comments .
If the contractor develops the initial schedule with scheduling software the Contractor is encouraged to provide the Engineer an electronic file of the schedule and the name of the scheduling software used .
B .
Weekly Look Ahead Schedule For each week that Work will be performed the Contractor shall submit a Weekly LookAhead Schedule showing the Contractors and all Subcontractors proposed Work activities for the next two weeks .
The Weekly LookAhead Schedule shall include the description duration and sequence of Work along with the planned hours of Work .
This schedule may be a network schedule bar chart or other standard schedule format .
The Weekly LookAhead Schedule shall be submitted to the Engineer by the midpoint of the week preceding the scheduled Work or some other mutually agreed upon submittal time .
B .
Monthly Progress Meetings and Bar Chart Progress Schedule Updates The Contractor and the Engineer will meet monthly to assess progress and jointly add update information to the initial schedule .
At a minimum updates will include the actual start and finish of each activity percentage complete and remaining durations of activities started but not yet completed .
B .
Revised Schedule The Engineer may request a Revised Update when any of the following events occur .
The project has experienced a change that affects controlling items of work . .
The sequence of Work is changed from that in the approved schedule . .
The project is significantly delayed . .
The Engineer has granted an extension of Contract Time .
The Contractor shall submit the Revised Schedule within calendar days of receiving a written request or when an update is required by any other provision of the Contract .
In addition to the other requirements of this Section Revised Schedules shall reflect the following information .
The actual duration and sequence of asconstructed Work activities including revised Work. . Approved time extensions. . Any construction delays or other conditions that affect the progress of the Work. . Any modifications to the asplanned sequence or duration of remaining activities . .
The Physical Completion of all remaining Work in the remaining Contract time .
B .
Recovery Schedule If the progress schedule projects a finish date for the Project more than calendar days later than the Completion Date the Contractor shall submit a revised schedule showing a plan to finish by the Completion Date .
The Engineer will use the schedule to evaluate time extensions and associated costs requested by the Contractor .
C Weather and Duration Contingency The Contractor shall allow for normal weather delays when developing the Progress Schedule .
The Department will extend the Contract Time except as limited by .
Extension of Contract Time Due to Weather on calendar Day and Completion Date Contracts for delays in excess of the anticipated work days lost to inclement weather as specified in Table the days in Table are cumulative and prorated when Contract Time starts or ends midmonth .
For example if Contract Time starts May and there are days lost to weather in May or June then the Contract must lose days to weather days from May and days from June in addition to the anticipated days in July before a time extension would be considered due to weather days lost in July. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Anticipated Work Days Lost Due to Weather Per Time Period Time Period Anticipated Work Days Lost January February March April April May June July August September October November November December .
CRITICAL PATH METHOD CPM SCHEDULES A General Requirements If the Contractor intends to use Critical Path Method CPM schedules or when the Department specifies the Work under this Contract shall be scheduled using CPM the Work shall be planned accomplished and reported using CPM for the Contractors Progress Schedules .
A .
Software The Department uses Primavera Project Manager P. If the Contractor uses software other than P the Contractor is responsible for any conversion discrepancies .
A .
Schedule Calculations Codes and Settings The Contractor shall not prepare a schedule with User Defined fields .
The Contractor shall use projectlevel calendars not Global or Resources Calendars .
The Contractor shall use projectlevel codes not Global or EPSlevel codes .
A. FileNaming Convention The Contractor shall use a filenaming convention as modeled in Table .
If the schedule in not accepted the Contractor shall resubmit under the file name as modeled for the nd version etc .
The indicates a placeholder for the State Project Number .
Table Progress Schedule Filename convention Schedules st Version nd Version rd Version st Baseline Schedule All Schedules until it is Accepted as Baseline BS BS BS st Update to Progress Schedule BSU BSU BSU nd Update to Progress Schedule etc .
BSU BSU BSU st Revised Schedule RE RE RE st Update to Revised Schedule REU REU REU nd Revised Schedule etc .
RE RE RE st Impact Schedule IS IS RE nd Impact Schedule etc .
IS IS IS A .
Float Suppression Sequestered Float The Contractor shall not suppress or sequester float .
Examples of prohibited float suppression or sequestration include but are not limited to Logic relationships that provide no tangible or sequential value between unrelated activities .
Logic relationships that demand completion of an activity that could otherwise continue beyond a Successors start or finish dates .
Excessively long durations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractor shall obtain the Engineers approval before using lags or leads .
The Contractor shall remove any lags or leads and replace with an activity identifying the lag or lead upon the request of the Engineer regardless of whether the Department allowed the lag or lead in a previous Progress Schedule .
The Contractor shall not be entitled to compensation or a time extension for delays that could have been avoided by revising activity durations or logic used to sequester float .
A .
Use of Float The Contractor acknowledges that all float including Total Float Free Float and Sequestered Float is a shared commodity available to the Project and is not for the exclusive benefit of any party float is an expiring resource available to accommodate changes in the Work however originated or to mitigate the effect of events that may delay performance or completion of all or part of the Work .
It is understood that identified contingencies as described in .. D Weather and Duration Contingency .
become available Float as time elapses and the contingency is not used .
B Required Schedules B .
Preliminary Schedule Acceptance of the first Preliminary Schedule is a condition of Contract Approval and NTP .
A delay in submitting the Preliminary Schedule is a nonexcusable delay under .. A NonExcusable Delays and the Contractor is not entitled to an extension of the Contract Time .
All schedules submitted before the Department accepts the Baseline Schedule will be considered Preliminary Schedules until the Preliminary Schedule is accepted as the Baseline Schedule in accordance with .. B. Baseline Schedule the Contractor shall continue to improve upon the Preliminary Schedules and show the status of Work actually completed by incorporating actual start and finish dates and by reasonably estimating the remaining duration for each incomplete activity .
At a minimum the Contractor shall include the following level of detail in the Preliminary Schedules First Preliminary Schedule show all Milestone dates are understood and provide a detailed schedule for a day lookahead period .
Subsequent Preliminary Schedules show all Milestone dates are understood and provide a detailed schedule for a day lookahead period .
Changes to the First Preliminary Schedule in subsequent submissions shall be closely coordinated with the Engineer and are subject to the Engineers review and acceptance .
B. Baseline Schedule Baseline Schedule acceptance is a condition of NTP .
The Baseline Schedule shall include the entire scope of work and how the Contractor plans to complete all work contracted .
The Engineer may review the resource allocations using historical data Means Productivity Standards or equivalents to determine if the Schedule is practicable The Baseline shall indicate Actual Dates of Work performed if the Contractor chooses to perform any Work prior to the Baseline being accepted .
All Contract Time dates Milestones and staging restrictions are understood and scheduled to complete within the Contract Time .
Each Activity shall .
Possess a unique activity description and include a VOL Verb Object and Location for each description. . Be expressed in working days with duration of not more or less than working days unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer. . Have at least one predecessor activity except for the first activity in the schedule. . Have at least one successor activity except for the last activity in the schedule .
No more than twenty percent Critical Activities nor more than thirty percent NearCritical Activities unless otherwise authorized by the Engineer .
The minimum following level of detail .
Mobilization .
Work to be performed by the Contractor Subcontractors and suppliers. . Work to be performed by the Department other contractors and third parties such as government agencies and authorities permitting authorities or other entities . .
The project Milestones start or finish dates specified in the Contract project highlights i.e .
traffic switches and phases availability dates specified in the Contract. . Submittal review and acceptance activities when applicable including time periods for the Departments acceptance as specified in the Contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Fabrication delivery installation testing and similar activities for materials plants and equipment. . Settlement or surcharge periods. . Utility notification and relocation . .
Installation erection and removal and similar activities related to temporary systems or structures such as temporary electrical systems or shoring . .
Installation erection and removal and similar activities related to temporary systems or structures such as temporary electrical systems or shoring. . Durations for receipt of permits . .
Substantial Completion .
Final Completion B. Update Schedule The Contractor shall update the last accepted schedule to create the Update Schedule .
The Contractor shall update the Progress Schedule by incorporating actual start and finish dates and by reasonably estimating the remaining duration for each in complete activity .
The Contractor shall minimize the number of changes .
The Contractor shall describe the reason for changes to the schedule in the Narrative Report submitted with the Update Schedule .
If the changes are significant then the Contractor shall submit the schedule as a Revised Schedule .
A significant schedule revision is defined as a revision that results in one of the following Alters the Critical Paths or Near Critical Paths .
Extends the scheduled Milestone dates compared to the dates shown on the Progress Schedule .
Disrupts the integrity or comparative relationship between the Progress Schedule and the Update Schedule .
An example of such a revision would be the renaming of activities or changing activity descriptions .
The requirements for the Update Schedule are otherwise the same as the Baseline Schedule .
B. LookAhead Schedule The Contractor shall submit a detailed TwoWeek LookAhead Schedule to the Engineer each week until all Work is completed .
The Contractor shall prepare the schedule in the bar chart format by hand or by using a computer .
This schedule shall span a forwardlooking rolling period of at least calendar days .
This schedule is intended to represent the Contractors best effort to fully communicate the Work planned for the rolling day period and shall not contain extraneous information .
The Work activities included in the TwoWeek LookAhead Schedule shall specifically reference the applicable Activity IDs in the Progress Schedule .
The TwoWeek LookAhead Schedule shall include at a minimum the following level of detail Bridges .
Test piling .
Test holes .
Embankment for each abutment location .
Fabrication and delivery of piling .
Structural Steel fabrication and delivery per structure .
Pile installation per bent per structure .
Drilled shaft installation per pier per structure .
Pile caps per bent per structure .
Footings per pier per structure .
Columns per pier per structure .
Caps per pier per structure .
End bents per structure .
Beam or girder erection per structure .
Diaphragms .
Deck placement per structure .
Parapets per structure .
Erection and removal of falsework and shoring Roadway .
Traffic switches .
Submission of job mix formula for asphalt pavement .
Delivery schedule for items such as drainage pipe guardrail sign structures and signs permanent lighting facilities and permanent traffic signals .
Internal access and haul roads location and duration inplace .
Clearing and grubbing by stationing and roadway .
Excavation .
Embankment placed for each roadway .
Drainage by run with structures for each roadway .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Retaining walls per location .
Subgrade for each roadway .
Base for roadway .
Curb barrier wall and sidewalks for each roadway .
Pavement asphalt andor concrete for each roadway .
Bridge approach slabs per location .
Guardrail for each roadway .
Slope pavement or riprap .
Roadway lighting for each roadway .
Signing for each sign structure location and for each roadway .
Striping for each roadway .
Traffic signals per location .
Topsoil sodding seeding and mulching for each roadway .
Landscaping .
Finishing roadway and final cleanup B .
Revised Schedule The Contractor shall not perform Work substantially different than depicted on the approved Progress Schedule in accordance with .
Prosecution Control and shall seek an Accepted Revised Schedule to become the new Progress Schedule .
The Contractor shall submit a Revised Schedule upon one of the following The Contractor desires to substantially deviate from the current Progress Schedule sequence or durations of planned Work .
An example would include but not limited to an altered Critical Path .
Departments Request. . Where the Department requires the Contractor to demonstrate how to recover any scheduled Milestone dates that differ from any dates established by the Contract or the Contract Time . .
The Department concludes that there is a substantial difference between the actual sequence or actual duration of the Work and the Work as depicted in the Progress Schedule .
The issuance of a Contract Revision document that changes the planned sequence of Work or the method and manner of its performance .
The requirement to prepare a Revised Schedule is not a directive by the Department to accelerate the Work but rather a directive for the Contractor to seek the Departments Acceptance of a proposal to revise the accepted Progress Schedule which may or may not include acceleration .
The requirements of the Revised Schedule are otherwise the same as the Baseline Schedule .
The requirements of the Revised Schedule are otherwise the same as the Baseline Schedule .
B .
Impact Schedule The Contractor shall prepare an Impact Schedule To quantify the effects of any contemporaneous or prospective impacts to the Progress Schedule To establish the need for a time extension to a Milestone At the Departments request .
An example of a reason is the negotiation of a potential Contract Revision document that changes the planned sequence of Work or the method and manner of its performance The standard for preparation of the Impact Schedule is specified in Determination and Extension of Contract Time concerning the analysis of delays using a prospective time impact analysis .
The requirement to prepare an Impact Schedule is not a directive by the Department to accelerate the Work but rather a directive for the Contractor to provide a proposal to demonstrate the effects of impacts to the accepted Progress Schedule .
The requirements of the Revised Schedule are otherwise the same as the Baseline Schedule .
C Schedule Submission Requirements The Contractor shall include the following with the CPM schedule in its schedule submission C. Narrative Reports The Contractor shall include a narrative for each schedule submittal to include and discuss Baseline Revised or Impact Schedules will include .
Explanation of the overall plan to complete the Project including where the Work will begin and how Work and crews will flow through the Project . .
The working days per week number of shifts per day number of hours per shift the holidays to be observed and how the schedule accommodates adverse weather days for each month or activity. . A statement describing the status of required permits . .
The quantity and estimated production rates for Critical Activities .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Activities requiring coordination with the Department andor rd parties i.e .
utilities .
A statement identifying Constraints and an explanation of the reason for and purpose of each constraint .
A statement describing the reason for the use of each lag or lead .
Update Schedules will include .
A description of the reasons for any changes made to the schedule. . A statement describing the status of permits . .
Status of Activities requiring coordination with The Department andor rd parties i.e .
Utilities .
A description of the status of the scheduled Milestone dates .
Elaborate on any differences from the previous submission. . A statement explaining why the scheduled Milestone dates are forecast to occur before or after the Contract Milestone date. . A description of unusual labor shift equipment or material conditions or restrictions encountered or anticipated since the previous Update Schedule. . A statement identifying any new Constraints and an explanation of the reason for and purpose of each constraint. . A statement describing the reason for the use any new lag or lead .
C. Gantt Chart C .. a Gantt Chart Names The Contractor shall include the following Gantt charts with each schedule submission .
Each schedule shall be sorted by Early Start .
The Engineer may require the contractor to submit a .pdf version as well as hard copy .
All Activities Chart .
All activities with the Longest Path indicated in red .
Milestone Charts .
Each Milestones Critical Path .
NearCritical Chart .
All NearCritical Activities .
Any chart requested by the Department .
C .. b Gantt Chart Information Each Gantt Chart shall contain the following information Activity ID Activity Description Early Start Late Start Duration Working Days Late Finish Total Float Progress Bar .
Current Schedule Progress Bar .
Baseline Progress Bar The Engineer may require this to be any past accepted schedule Title block .
Data date .
Run date .
Gantt Chart name C. Electronic File Compressed format .xer files .
C. Submission Timeline It is the Contractors responsibility to meet with the Engineer as often as necessary to satisfy the Departments comments with timeframe stated in Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table CPM Submission Timelines Schedule Type Section Data Date Submission Due Date Department Review Length Resubmission Due Date First Preliminary .. B .
Letting Date or as directed by the Department .
Condition of Contract Approval Calendar Days after Submitted Condition of Contract Approval Subsequent Preliminary .. B .
No later than the th of the month following the last accepted Preliminary Schedule .
Business Days after Data Date Calendar Days after Submitted Calendar Days Baseline .. B .
See Note See Note See Note See Note Update .. B. th of Every Month Business Days after Data Date Business Days after submitted Business Days Revised .. B .
As needed or directed by the Department .
Business Days after Data Date Business Days after submitted Calendar Days Impact .. B .
No earlier than last accepted schedules data date Business Days after Data Date Business Days after submitted As directed by Department The Preliminary Schedule becomes the Baseline after Baseline criteria is met .
If the Department does not accept the Update Schedule the Contractor shall correct the comments and resubmit to the Department within timeframe indicated in Table .. D. Weather and Duration Contingency It is the responsibility of the Contractor to estimate a sufficient amount of contingency to account for normal weather .
The duration of each activity shall only include the necessary working days to actually complete the work defined by the activity weather or any other contingency shall not be built into the durations but shall be accounted for within the project calendars .
Each activity shall be assigned an appropriate calendar .
The Project calendars shall indicate planned working and nonworking days .
Each calendar with the exception of the calendar used for tracking calendar days shall include contingent nonworking days .
The Contractor shall indicate contingent nonworking days on Monday through Friday only .
The Engineer reserves the right to accept or reject the estimated amount of contingency in accordance with Acceptance of Schedule section contained herein .
The Schedule shall use a minimum of the following calendars Calendar to indicate calendar days cure time etc .
Calendar for work that can progress year round and Calendar for each major item of Work affected by weather or seasonal limitations .
The Contractor shall include a minimum of percent weather contingency .
Contingency will be the numbers of indicated nonworking days compared to a description of the duration in hours of the normal working day as indicated in the narrative of the work week e.g .
MF hrs and Sat hrs for every calendar . .
TEMPORARY SUSPENSIONS A Suspension of Work Ordered by the Engineer The Engineer will issue all suspensionofwork orders in writing specifying the effective start date and end date of the suspension the operations to be suspended and the reasons for the suspension .
The Contractor may not resume work until so authorized in writing by the Engineer and shall resume work within a reasonable time upon the Engineers direction .
The Engineer will order the resumption of Work upon determining that the conditions that caused the suspension no longer exist .
If the Engineer issues a temporary suspensionofwork order because of any action or inaction by the Department or because of incomplete Work under other contracts and if the Contractor has not been advised in the Contract that such a suspension may be necessary the Contractor shall refer to .
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer regarding compensation and extension of Contract Time .
If the Engineer issues a temporary suspensionofwork order due to the Contractors fault or negligence such suspension is a nonexcusable delay as specified in .. C NonExcusable Delays and is noncompensable .
B Suspension of Work Requested by the Contractor The Contractor shall send a written request for the temporary suspension of work to the Engineer .
The Contractors request shall include the proposed effective start and end dates the operations to be suspended and the reasons for requesting Minnesota Standard Specifications the suspension .
The Contractor shall not suspend all or any part of the Work without the Engineers written authorization .
Suspension of the Work for any cause whatsoever shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for maintenance of traffic except as otherwise provided in Maintenance of Traffic or by written agreement between the Contractor and the Department .
The Engineer will not authorize the Contractor to temporarily suspend operations until the following conditions are met The roads that are being used by traffic and any temporary approaches or crossings and intersections with trails roads streets businesses parking lots residences garages and farms are in such condition that only routine maintenance will be required to adequately accommodate through and local traffic during the anticipated period of suspension .
The Contractor has performed such work as is necessary to protect all completed or partially completed work during the anticipated suspension period .
The Contractor has placed all traffic control devices as specified in Traffic Control Devices .
Should the Contractor fail to perform any of this Work before suspension the Department reserves the right to have the Work performed by others and to deduct the associated costs from any moneys due or becoming due the Contractor .
PROSECUTION OF WORK .
PROSECUTION CONTROL The Contractor shall commence and prosecute the work with forces and equipment adequate to complete the Controlling Activitys of the Progress Schedule within the planned duration .
The Contractor shall prosecute the work continuously and diligently from as many different points and in such parts and sequences as will ensure progress in accordance with the Progress Schedule .
The Contractor shall prosecute the Work substantially in the same sequence as the Progress Schedule .
The Department will provide written notice to the Contractor when the Department deems Work is being performed substantially out of sequence any Work the Contractor continues to perform out of sequence will be considered unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Contractor shall mitigate the effects of any delay to the extent practicable and demonstrate recovery through submission of a Revised Schedule in accordance with .. B .
Revised Schedule or .. B .
Revised Schedule as appropriate . .
LIMITATION OF OPERATIONS The Contractor shall conduct the Work in a manner and sequence that will ensure the least interference with traffic with due regard given to the location of detours and to the provisions for handling traffic .
The Contractor shall not open up Work to the prejudice or detriment of Work already started .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to finish a section on which Work is in progress before starting Work on any additional sections if the opening of that section to traffic is essential for public convenience .
The Contractor shall not perform Work during the hours of darkness without the prior approval of the Engineer .
When the Engineer authorizes night work the Contractor shall furnish sufficient artificial lighting to permit proper and safe inspection as well as to ensure quality workmanship equal to that achievable during daylight hours .
The Contractor shall not perform Work on Sundays or legal holidays unless specifically allowed for in the Contract .
The Contractor shall suspend construction operations for a period of hours from approximately a.m. on each Sunday or legal holiday until a.m. on the following day .
The Engineer may allow slight changes in these hours but the Contractor shall comply with the intent of this policy .
The Contractor does not have to obtain the Engineers permission to perform minor operations on Sundays and legal holidays that may be necessary to protect the work or to maintain and protect traffic .
METHODS AND EQUIPMENT The Contractor shall use methods and Equipment capable of performing the Work specified in the Contract .
The Contractor shall ensure the Equipment does not damage the Roadway adjacent property or other Highways .
When methods and Equipment are specified in the Contract the Contractor shall request permission from the Engineer in writing to use alternate methods and Equipment .
The Contractor shall describe the proposed methods and Equipment and the reasons for the change .
The Contractor shall perform the Work in accordance with the original basis of payment and Contract Time .
When methods and Equipment are not specified in the Contract the Contractor may use any methods and Equipment that complete the Work in accordance with the Contract requirements .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractor shall discontinue performing the Work using alternate methods or Equipment if the Work does not meet the Contract requirements .
The Contractor shall remove and replace or repair unacceptable work at no additional cost to the Department .
DETERMINATION AND EXTENSION OF CONTRACT TIME .
GENERAL The Proposal Package will specify the Contract Time .
The Contractor shall prosecute the Work continuously and effectively with the least possible delay to the end that all Work is completed within the Contract Time .
If the Department issues a Notice to Proceed the Contract Start Date established in the Notice to Proceed takes precedence over the Contract Start Date specified in the Proposal Package .
The Department will not consider a plea by the Contractor that the Contract Time was not sufficient as a valid reason for an extension of the Contract Time .
If the Department grants an extension of the Contract Time the extended time for completion will be in full force and effect as though it was originally specified .
The Department will only extend the Contract Time if an excusable delay as specified in .. A Excusable Non Compensable Delays or .. B Excusable Compensable Delays delays Work on the Critical Path as described in items and below .
Mitigation of delay whether caused by the Department Contractor a thirdparty or an event is a shared contract and legal requirement .
Mitigation efforts include but are not limited to resequencing work activities acceleration and continuation of work through an otherwise planned shutdown period .
The Contractor and Engineer will explore and discuss potential mitigation efforts promptly and agree upon costs or costsharing responsibilities prior to the implementation of mitigation efforts .
The Department will not evaluate a request for extension of the Contract Time unless the Contractor notifies the Engineer as specified in Notification for Contract Revisions and provides the required analysis as follows .
The Contractor shall evaluate delays and calculate the appropriate time extension due based on the following The Contractor shall base all evaluations of delay and all calculations of the appropriate time extensions due on the schedules submitted to and accepted by the Department .
The Contractor shall not use schedules that did not exist on the project or create schedules after the delay has occurred to demonstrate entitlement to a time extension .
The Contractor shall base evaluations and calculations related to the determination of extensions of time on the Critical Path as established by the schedules submitted to and accepted by the Department .
The Contractor is not entitled to a time extension for delays that do not delay the Critical Path .
The evaluations and calculations required to establish entitlement to a time extension will vary depending on the nature and timing of the delay and whether the Contract Time is measured in working days calendar days or based on a fixed completion date .
It will also vary depending on whether the Contract requires a bar chart or CPM schedule .
The schedules relevant to the evaluation and calculation of time extensions are the most current schedules submitted to and accepted by the Department .
For example if the Department determines that Extra Work is required and the Supplemental Agreement adding this work will be dated June then the determination of the time extension due the Contractor will be based on the last schedule submitted and accepted by the Department prior to June of the same year .
The Contractors evaluations and calculations shall comply with the following Recommended Practices published by the Association for the Advancement of Cost Engineering International .
Recommended Practice No .
R Time Impact Analysis As Applied in Construction .
The Contractor shall use this Recommended Practice for delays that are in the future prospective .
The Contractor shall not use this recommended practice to evaluate delays that have already occurred retrospective . .
Recommended Practice No .
R Forensic Schedule Analysis MIP .
Observational DynamicContemporaneous Split approach .
The Contractor shall use MIP .
when evaluating delays that have already occurred .
The Engineer will review the Contractors evaluations and calculations and determine the time extension due if any .
The Engineer will measure extensions to the Contract Time in working days for Working Day Contracts and in calendar days for Completion Date and Calendar Day Contracts .
The Department will relieve the Contractor from associated liquidated damages as specified in Failure to Complete the Work on Time if the Department extends the Contract Time under this section . . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
TYPES OF DELAYS A Excusable NonCompensable Delays Excusable noncompensable delays are delays that are not the Contractors or the Departments fault or responsibility and that could not have been foreseen by the Contractor .
The Department will not compensate the Contractor for excusable non compensable delays .
Excusable noncompensable delays include but are not limited to Delays due to fires floods tornadoes lightning strikes earthquakes epidemics or other cataclysmic phenomena of nature .
Delays due to weather if the Contractor is entitled to a time extension for weather as specified in .
Determination of Charges on Working Day Contracts and .
Extension of Contract Time Due to Weather on Calendar Day and Completion Date Contracts .
Extraordinary delays in material deliveries the Contractor or its suppliers can not foresee or avoid resulting from freight embargoes government acts or regional material shortages .
Delays due to civil disturbances .
Delays due to acts of the public enemy .
Delays due to labor strikes that are beyond the Contractors subcontractors or suppliers power to settle and are not caused by improper acts or omissions of the Contractor subcontractor or supplier .
Delays due to acts of the government or a political subdivision other than the Department .
All other delays not the Contractors or Departments fault or responsibility and which could not have been foreseen by the Contractor .
B Excusable Compensable Delays Excusable compensable delays are delays that are not the Contractors fault or responsibility and are the Departments fault or responsibility or are determined by judicial proceeding to be the Departments sole responsibility .
Excusable compensable delays include but are not limited to Delays due to revised Work as specified in .
Differing Site Conditions .
Significant Changes to the Character of Work and .
Extra Work .
Delays due to utility or railroad interference on the Project Site that are not anticipated as a concurrent move or activity by the Contract .
Delays due to an Engineerordered suspension as specified in .
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer .
Delays due to the neglect of the Department or its failure to act in a timely manner .
C NonExcusable Delays Nonexcusable delays are delays that are the Contractors fault or responsibility .
All nonexcusable delays are non compensable .
Nonexcusable delays include but are not limited to Delays due to the Contractors subcontractors or suppliers insolvency or mismanagement .
Delays due to slow delivery of materials from the supplier or fabricator when the material was available in warehouse stock or when delivery was delayed for reasons of priority late ordering financial considerations or other causes .
Delays due to the Contractors failure to provide sufficient forces and equipment to maintain satisfactory progress in completing the Controlling Activities .
Delays caused by plant and equipment failure or delays due to the Contractors failure to provide and maintain the equipment in good mechanical condition or to provide for immediate emergency repairs .
Delays caused by conditions on the project including traffic conditions that could be foreseen or anticipated before the date of bid opening .
Weather delays are addressed in .
Determination of Charges on Working Day Contracts and .
Extension of Contract Time Due to Weather on Calendar Day and Completion Date Contracts .
D Concurrent Delays Concurrent delays are independent sources of delay that occur at the same time ..
When a nonexcusable delay is concurrent with an excusable delay the Contractor is not entitled to an extension of Contract Time for the period the nonexcusable delay is concurrent with the excusable delay .
When a noncompensable delay is concurrent with a compensable delay the Contractor is entitled to an extension of Contract Time but not entitled to compensation for the period the noncompensable delay is concurrent with the compensable delay . .
DETERMINATION OF CHARGES ON WORKING DAY CONTRACTS The Department will determine working day charges as follows .
Minnesota Standard Specifications One whole day for each day of work that the Contractor makes progress or could have made progress during a working day on one or more Critical Activities for at least continuous hours .
One whole day when the Engineer orders a work suspension for reasons of Contractors fault or negligence .
One whole day for NonExcusable Delays as specified in .. C NonExcusable Delays .
One half day for each day of work that the Contractor makes progress or could have made progress during a working day on one or more Critical Activities for at least continuous hours .
The Department will not charge a working day When the Contractor could not effectively prosecute Critical Activities for at least continuous hours during a working day due to .
Excusable NonCompensable Delays as specified in .. A Excusable NonCompensable Delays. . Excusable Compensable Delays as specified in .. B Excusable Compensable Delays. . Concurrent Delays as specified in .. D Concurrent Delays .
On Saturdays Sundays and legal holidays .
During the inclusive period from November through April except as specified in .
Determination and Extension of Contract Time General .
During Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer as specified in .
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer except for work suspensions ordered by the Engineer for reasons of Contractors fault or negligence .
The Department will add or subtract working days via Supplemental Agreement to the Contract .
The number of working days to be added or subtracted will be determined as specified in .
Determination and Extension of Contract Time General For Differing Site Conditions as specified in .
Differing Site Conditions .
For Significant Changes in the Character of the Work as specified in .
Significant Changes to the Character of Work .
For Extra Work as specified in .
Extra Work .
The Engineer will furnish the Contractor a weekly statement showing the working days charged to the project except during periods when the Engineer determines that working day charges will not be made .
The statement will include an accounting of all delays affecting the Critical Path .
The Engineer will classify each of these delays as excusable noncompensable or excusable compensable or nonexcusable in accordance with .
Types of Delays or weatherrelated in accordance with .
Determination of Charges on Working Day Contracts and .
Extension of Contract Time Due to Weather on Calendar Day and Completion Date Contracts .
The Engineer will commence assessing working day charges on the Contract Starting Date and cease when the Contractor has completed all Work including maintenance and final cleanup operations .
However assessments will be made for work conducted before the Contract Starting Date when the operations in progress result in traffic restriction .
In that case the work causing the traffic restriction will be considered Critical Path Work and working days will be assessed .
Objections by the Contractor as to an improper or excessive assessment of working day charges shall be in the form of a written protest to the Engineer within calendar days of receipt of statement setting forth the specific dates and justifications for reduced charges .
If the Engineer finds the Contractors protest to be valid or if the Department detects an error the Engineer will issue corrected weekly statements .
Once accepted by the Contractor whether explicitly or as a result of the Contractors failure to file a timely protest the weekly statement is final and the Contractor waives entitlement to an extension of Contract Time or compensation for any delays not explicitly identified by the weekly statement .
In case of disagreement the Contractor may request an administrative review of contested charges by the Departments Construction Engineer. . EXTENSION OF CONTRACT TIME DUE TO WEATHER ON CALENDAR DAY AND COMPLETION DATE CONTRACTS The Department will not consider weekends holidays or any days between November and April inclusive as eligible for extensions of Contract Time due to weather unless the Engineer directs the Contractor to work those days or the Contractors accepted progress schedule in place at the time the delay occurred indicated that the Contractor intended to perform Critical Path Work on those days .
FAILURE TO COMPLETE THE WORK ON TIME The Department is entitled to damages for failure of the Contractor to complete the Work within the Contract Time .
In view of the difficulty in making a precise determination of actual damages incurred the Department will assess a daily charge not as a penalty but as liquidated damages to compensate the Department for the additional costs incurred .
In suits involving assessment or recovery of liquidated damages the reasonableness of daily charges will be presumed and the amount assessed will be in addition to every other remedy enforceable at law in equity by statute or under the Contract .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
ASSESSMENT OF LIQUIDATED DAMAGES The Department will deduct liquidated damages from money due the Contractor for each calendar day that the Work remains incomplete after the Contract Time expires .
The Engineer will deduct liquidated damages based on the original Contract Amount and Table .
Table Schedule of Liquidated Damages Original Contract Amount Liquidated damage charge per calendar day From more than To and including .
WAIVER OF LIQUIDATED DAMAGES The Department may waive all or any portion of liquidated damages after the date the Work is substantially completed if the Engineer determines that the Work is in a condition that no longer requires ongoing inspection by the Department .
The Department will not deduct liquidated damages during periods of authorized suspension .
The Department does not waive any of its rights under the Contract by allowing the Contractor to continue and finish the Work or any part of the Work after the Contract Time expires .
The Department does not waive its rights to recover liquidated damages from the Contractor or its Surety by either Taking over the Work or Terminating the Contract .
DEFAULT OF CONTRACTOR The Commissioner after giving due notice to the Contractor and its Sureties will have full power and authority to take the prosecution of the Work out of the hands of the Contractor without violating the terms of the Contract if the Contractor commits any of the following events of default Fails to start the Work by the Contract starting date and any intermediate starting date as required in Determination and Extension of Contact Time Fails to perform the Work with sufficient workers and equipment or with sufficient Materials to ensure prompt completion of the Work as required in Failure to Maintain Satisfactory Progress Fails to perform the Work satisfactorily as required by Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work Suspends the prosecution of Work without permission of the Engineer as required in .
Temporary Suspensions Neglects or refuses to remove Materials or reconstruct Work rejected as defective or unacceptable as required in Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work Fails to resume suspended Work within a reasonable time after notice to do so as required by .
Temporary Suspensions Becomes insolvent is declared bankrupt or is the subject of a voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy petition Makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors Fails to comply with the Labor Provisions required by the Contract or Fails to carry on the Work in an acceptable manner for any other cause whatsoever .
Repeatedly fails to make payment in accordance with the Contract to subcontractors or suppliers for labor or materials .
The Engineer will give the Contractor and Sureties written notice of any default and will identify the facts of the events of default together with a demand that the Contractor correct such events of default to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
If within a period of business days after such notice the Contractor and Sureties fail to correct the identified events of default the Commissioner will exercise any lawful authority and take any lawful action with respect to such default and with respect to securing performance of the Work .
The Contractor and Department acknowledge the following A notice of default is duly served when it is delivered in person or by registered mail to the Contractor and Sureties or to their authorized representatives including persons in charge of their offices and Minnesota Standard Specifications The service of the notice is complete and sufficient when a properly addressed and stamped envelope containing the notice is registered and deposited in any post office or U.S. letter box in the State .
The Commissioners authority to take the prosecution of the Work out of the hands of the Contractor shall include the right to appropriate or use any or all Materials and equipment on the ground as may be suitable and acceptable and to enter into an agreement with others for completion of the Work according to the terms and provisions of the Contract or to use such other methods as may be required to complete the Work in an acceptable manner .
The Department will deduct all costs and charges incurred by the Department together with the cost of completing the Work under Contract from any moneys due the Contractor or that would have become due the Contractor under the Contract if the Contractor had completed the Work .
If the cost and charges incurred by the Department exceed the amount that would have been payable under the Contract the Contractor and the Sureties shall be liable for the excess .
If a default of the Contractor is later determined to be without cause the default of the Contractor will revert to a termination of the Contract in the best public interest as allowed in Termination of Contract .
TERMINATION OF CONTRACT The Department may issue a written termination of the Contract or any portion thereof for any of the following reasons beyond the Contractors control If the Department determines that the Contractor is prevented from proceeding with or completing the Work within a reasonable period of time because of but not limited to the following .
Labor or material shortage .
Limitations imposed by law rule regulation or order of the local State or Federal government or .
Actions of the public enemy including those related to priorities and thirdparty actions .
If the Department determines it is in the best public State Department or national interest because of but not limited to the following .
Lack of funding or a funding reallocation that prevents the completion of the Work as planned .
Discovery of significant hazardous material problems .
Right Of Way acquisition problems or .
Utility conflicts that would cause substantial delays or expense to the Contract .
If the Department issues a termination of the Contract or portion thereof the Department relieves the Contractor of its obligation to perform such portions of the Contract .
The Department does not relieve the Contractor of its responsibilities for the Work completed before the termination or the Contractors Surety of its responsibilities for any just claims arising out of the performance of the Work before the termination .
The Department may direct the Contractor to complete certain elements of the Work before termination of the Contract .
The Department will compensate the Contractor for completed and partially completed quantities of eliminated Contract Items in accordance with Compensation for Contract Revisions and Compensation for Eliminated Items .
Measurement and Payment MEASUREMENT OF QUANTITIES Unless otherwise specified the Engineer will measure in accordance with this section .
The Engineer will determine quantities of acceptable Work using one of the following methods Plan dimensions for Contract Items or portions of Contract Items designated as P in the Statement of Estimated Quantities on the Plans the Department will use the Plan quantities for payment Field measurement for Contract Items with no P designation shown on the Plans the Engineer will field measure quantities of Work performed or A combination of Plan dimensions and field measurements .
The Engineer may adjust quantities for portions of the Work or the entire Project .
The Engineer will not adjust quantities if a difference results from use of commonly accepted dimensional approximations .
The Engineer will determine quantities using the US customary system of weights and measures .
The units and the methods of measurement in the Contract for each class of work will supplement or modify the provisions in this section by the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Imposing measurement limitations Describing measurements or computation procedures Establishing conversion factors or adjustment conditions and Providing for the determination of accurate and representative pay quantities .
Item names for pay quantities may include designated terms to indicate the basis for unit measurements such as where or when the Engineer will take the unit measurements or make computations .
Unless otherwise required by the Contract the Engineer will make measurements and computations as specified in this section .
The Contractor may dispute the Engineers determination of pay quantities by submitting a written request to the Engineer .
The Contractor shall state the Contract Item and sections of the Project disputed and provide details to justify the Engineers review of the pay quantity .
The request must be consistent with conditions governing the Contract Item .
The Engineer will not review quantities unless the Contractor provides evidence substantiating that the quantity is incorrect. . P QUANTITIES If the Department places a P designation on individual Contract Items or specific portions of Contract Items in the Statement of Estimated Quantities on the Plans the Department will use the Plan dimensions to calculate the pay quantity for that Contract Item .
The Department will limit use of the P designated quantities to Contract Items with specified dimensions and controlled by field checks during or after construction .
The purpose of the Departments use of P designated quantities is to avoid the expense of measuring dimensions if original Plan dimensions remain valid .
The Engineer will determine the quantities of Contract Items that do not have a P designation using the methods of measurement required by the Contract unless otherwise agreed in writing .
The Engineer will use Plan dimensions as applicable for completed Work .
The Engineer will only use field dimensions if required by the Contract or as necessary to accurately dimension completed Work .
The Engineer will adjust a P designated quantity if the Engineer revises the dimensions of the Work or decides the P designated quantity is incorrect .
The Engineer will only adjust quantities for the revised or corrected portions of the P designated Contract Item. . AREAS For longitudinal measurements the Engineer will measure horizontally for computing an area and will not make deductions for Structures with an area less than sq yd .
For transverse measurements the Engineer will use the neat line dimensions shown in the Plans or ordered by the Engineer . .
STRUCTURES The Engineer will measure Structures using the neat line dimensions shown on the Plans or the dimensions as altered to fit field conditions . .
LENGTH The Engineer will measure Contract Items requiring a linear unit of measure such as pipe culverts guardrail and underdrains parallel to the base or foundation on which the Structure is placed. . VOLUME A Excavated Volume EV Cubic Yard The Engineer will determine the cubic yards of Excavated Volume EV using the crosssection method or digital surface model method to measure the material in its original position .
B Compacted Volume CV Cubic Yard The Engineer will determine the cubic yards of Compacted Volume CV using the crosssection method or digital surface model method to measure the compacted material in its final position in accordance with the placement dimensions required by the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
C Loose Volume in Vehicular Measure Cubic Yard The Engineer will determine the cubic yards of Loose Volume LV using the vehicular measure method .
The Engineer will measure the material at the point of delivery to the nearest .
cu yd .
The Contractor may use vehicles for hauling material to the Project of any size or type if the Engineer can easily determine the vehicle body capacity and view the contents .
The Engineer will determine the struck capacity for each vehicle .
The Contractor shall mark the struck or level perimeter line on the inside of the box of each vehicle .
The Contractor shall load the vehicle and level the load as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall provide overallowance for settlement of the load during transit .
The Engineer may direct the Contractor to level any load upon its arrival at the point of delivery .
The Engineer will not measure material heaped above the struck capacity of the vehicle .
The Engineer will make deductions in .
cu yd increments on loads that contain less than the struck capacity .
The Contractor shall provide hauling vehicles with a conspicuous legible identification mark that is acceptable to the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Stockpiled Volume SV Cubic Yard The Engineer will determine the cubic yards of Stockpiled Volume SV using the cross section method or the digital surface model method to measure material in the stockpiled position .
The Contractor shall shape the stockpile to a condition directed by the Engineer before measurement. . BLANK .
BLANK .
MASS For measuring or proportioning Material by mass the Contractor shall provide certified weights or weigh Material on calibrated approved scales .
The Department will not allow the use of frontend loader scales .
The Contractor shall give the Engineer a copy of the inspection certificate .
The Contractor shall provide an automated weighing device for Materials hauled in trucks and paid for by mass .
A Certified Weights The Contractor is not required to weigh materials in the presence of the Engineer if the Contractor delivers the Material in original containers marked with the certified weight ..
If the Engineer suspects a loss of Material the Engineer will require the Contractor to reweigh the Material .
B Blank C Scale Testing and Calibration The Contractor shall ensure an authorized person tests and calibrates scales before use on the Project .
The Contractor shall provide test weights accessories and assistance required for testing and calibrating the scales .
The Contractor shall test and calibrate the scales in accordance with the frequency criteria tolerances and sensitivity requirements in this section .
C. Authorized Person An authorized person as defined by one of the following descriptions shall test and calibrate the scales A scale service person with a valid placinginservice registration issued by the Minnesota Department of Commerce or The Contractor with written approval of the Engineer and under the supervision of the Engineer .
C. Frequency The Contractor shall test and calibrate the scales in accordance with the following Inspect test and calibrate the scales each year before use on the Project Spot check scales for accuracy and sensitivity at the discretion of the Engineer as Work progresses Check the vehicle tare and gross mass at a frequency directed by the Engineer for Materials weighed in the hauling vehicle Test and calibrate scales at threemonth intervals for the duration of the Project and Test and calibrate scales as specified by these Standard Specifications .
C. Testing and Calibration Criteria The authorized person shall test and calibrate the scales with calibrated test weights .
The Contractor shall provide calibrated test weights certified by the Minnesota Department of Commerce within the preceding months unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer .
The authorized person may weigh the supplemental mass of Material or Equipment on the scales after initial calibration and use to supplement the calibrated test weights .
The Contractor shall verify commercial scales have current certification from the Minnesota Department of Commerce before the Engineer will allow use on the Project .
C .. a Testing and Calibration by Registered Scale Service Person If a registered scale service person performs testing and calibrating the service person shall test scales up to the maximum expected load weighed on the Project .
The Contractor shall provide evidence to the Engineer that scales meet the Contract requirements .
C .. a Truck Scales The registered scale service person shall use at least lb of calibrated test weights along with the supplemental mass .
C .. a Batch Scales The registered scale service person shall use at least lb of calibrated test weights along with the supplemental mass. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C .. b .
Testing and Calibration by the Contractor If the Contractor tests and calibrates the scales the Contractor shall perform a comparison test .
The Contractor shall perform the comparison test at the minimum and maximum expected loads weighed during the Project .
C .. b Truck Scales The Contractor shall weigh an empty truck and a loaded truck of the size and capacity the Contractor will use on the Project on a certified commercial scale then weigh the same empty truck and loaded truck on the scale the Contractor will use on the Project .
C .. b Batch Scales The Contractor shall make calibrated test weights available at each scale installation at all times to provide a total test mass of percent of the net load the Contractor will weigh not exceeding lb of test weights .
The Engineer may allow the Contractor to weigh a load or series of loads in a hopper then drop the load into a truck that has been weighed on a certified commercial scale .
The Contractor shall weigh the loaded truck on the same certified scale .
C. Scale Tolerance C .. a Calibration with Calibrated Test Weights The Contractor shall use scales with scale indications within percent of the value of the calibrated and supplemental test weights applied to the scale .
C .. b Calibration with a Certified Commercial Scale Indicated loads on the calibrated scale shall agree within percent with the indicated loads on the certified commercial scale .
C. Scale Sensitivity C .. a Weighbeam Indicators The scale indicator at the normal minimum and maximum loads shall sense a change in load equal to .
percent of the load on the scale .
C .. b Dial or Digital Indicators A sensitivity test is not applicable but the dial or digital indicator shall respond uniformly and smoothly to changes in loads on the scale .
D Automated Weighing Device If the Department pays for Materials hauled in trucks by mass the Contractor shall provide scales integrated with a ticket printer .
Tickets shall include the date Project number Contract Item number truck or tractor and trailer identification truck tare and net mass .
The truck driver shall give the ticket to the Inspector on the Project. . BITUMINOUS MATERIALS The Engineer will measure bituminous Materials by the gallon or ton and make corrections for loss waste foaming and quantities not incorporated in the Work .
The Engineer will make volumetric measurements of bituminous Materials at F or will correct the amount based on a volume at F using the Bituminous Manual .
The Engineer will determine the volumetric content of transport and storage tanks using the tank manufacturers calibrated measuring devices and outage tables based on the computed or certified tank capacity or the Engineer will compute the content from the density factors derived from tests. . BLANK .
OTHER BASIS OF MEASUREMENT If the Contractor and Engineer mutually agree in writing the Engineer may measure Materials in units other than the units of measure specified as the basis of payment .
The Engineer will convert the measured quantities to the unit of measure specified in the method of measurement section .
The Engineer will establish the factors for conversion from one unit of measurement to another as mutually agreed. . BLANK .
TIMBER AND LUMBER The Engineer will measure timber and lumber by at least one of the following Each Lump sum Area in square feet or Volume in cubic yards in the structure based on the nominal width thickness and the extreme length of each piece in the finished Structure. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
LUMP SUM If used as a unit of measure the term lump sum shall mean complete payment for the Contract Item as described in the Contract . .
INDIVIDUAL UNIT OR EACH If a complete Structure Contract Item or lump sum unit is specified as the unit of measure the Engineer will measure the unit based on physical count and will include fittings and accessories . .
RENTAL EQUIPMENT The Engineer will measure rental Equipment based on time in hours of actual working time and traveling time of the Equipment within the Project. . STANDARDS AND TOLERANCES If the Contract specifies standard manufactured items such as fencing wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduit unit mass and section dimensions the Engineer will consider the identification of these items as nominal .
SCOPE OF PAYMENT The Contractor shall receive compensation provided for in the Contract as full payment for providing Materials and performing Work in accordance with the Contract requirements .
This includes compensation for all risk loss damage and expense incurred by the Contractor for performing the Work required by the Contract subject to No Waiver of Legal Rights .
COMPENSATION FOR ALTERED QUANTITIES If the Department pays for the Work of a Contract Item on an actual quantity basis and the accepted quantities of Work vary from the quantities in the Contract but do not meet the requirements established for significant changes in .
Significant Changes to the Character of Work the Department will pay for the work of the Contract Item as follows The Departments payment based on the Contract Unit Prices is payment in full for the quantities of work performed by the Contractor and accepted by the Engineer .
The Department will not pay for increased expenses loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits or overhead suffered or claimed by the Contractor due to differences between the actual quantities of Work and the quantities in the Contract .
The Department will not pay for loss of expected reimbursements from unbalanced allocation of costs among the Contract Items due to differences between the actual quantities of Work and the quantities in the Contract .
COMPENSATION FOR CONTRACT REVISIONS .
GENERAL If the Department revises the Contract as provided in Contract Revisions the Department will compensate the Contractor for the Contract revision following the sequence specified in .
through ..
Such compensation for the Contract revision constitutes final and full compensation for performing the revised Work delay costs and all other costs not expressly precluded by .
NonAllowable Charges .
The Engineer will determine the pricing method following the sequence specified in .
through .
before directing the Contractor to perform the Work in the Contract revision .
If the Contract revision includes a time extension for compensable delays as provided by Determination and Extension of Contract Time the Department will compensate the Contractor for the costs associated with the time extension in accordance with .
Compensation for Delay. . CONTRACT UNIT PRICES Before proceeding to another pricing method the Engineer will attempt to price and pay for the Contract revision using Contract Unit Prices . .
NEGOTIATED PRICES If the Engineer and Contractor are unable to agree on compensation in accordance with .
Contract Unit Prices they will attempt to negotiate unit or lump sum prices using one or more of the following methods Original Contract Unit Prices for similar Contract Items adjusted for increased or decreased Material costs Representative historical unit prices of similar work and quantity Unit prices computed by the Department or Cost analysis of labor material equipment and mark ups as allowed in .
Force Account .
Negotiated markup for subcontractor work may not exceed that provided for in .. H Contractor Markup .. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Within business days of the Departments request the Contractor shall submit a written proposal that includes pricing cost justification and a schedule for the Contract revision .
The Department will respond within business days after receipt of the Contractors submittal .
The Department and the Contractor can mutually agree to extend these businessday time limits. . FORCE ACCOUNT If the Engineer and Contractor are unable to negotiate a price for the Contract revision in accordance with .
Negotiated Prices the Engineer may direct the Contractor to perform all or part of the revised Work on a force account basis .
When the Engineer directs the Contractor to perform revised Work on a force account basis the Department will pay the Contractor as specified in .. A through .. J .
A Labor The Department will compensate the Contractor for labor at the actual rate of wage paid and shown on the payroll for every hour that the labor and foreman are actually engaged in the revised Work .
The foreman must be in direct charge of the specific operations and must be at the Project Site in order to be included in this compensation .
Unless already included in the wage rates paid the Contractor will also receive the actual laborrelated costs incurred by reason of subsistence and travel allowances health and welfare benefits pension fund or other fringe benefits provided those payments are required by collective bargaining agreement or other employment contract generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the Work .
The Department will prorate the wages of any foreman who is employed partly on the revised Work and partly on other Work .
The Department will determine the prorated wage based on the number of workers employed on each class of Work as shown by the payrolls .
The Department will prorate any subsistence or travel allowances paid to the foreman on the same basis as the prorated direct wages .
The Department will pay the Contractor an amount equal to percent of the actual taxable rate of wage as full compensation for overhead profit additional bond property damage and liability insurance premiums workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions employer Social Security taxes and other indirect labor force costs .
This compensation is based on a Workers Compensation insurance premium of .
per .
of payroll .
If the revised Work involves labor in a classification with a higher premium rate the Contractor may submit a written request in accordance with Notification for Contract Revisions for the additional premium amount .
The request shall include A certified copy of the Contractors latest Workers Compensation Final Insurance Audit and A certification from the insurance carrier listing the Workers Compensation classification code numbers and the premium rates that are being paid in the current year .
B Materials The Department will pay the Contractor the actual cost of acceptable Materials delivered and used in the revised Work including transportation charges paid by the Contractor exclusive of equipment rentals plus an additional percent for field and home office overhead costs and profit .
C Equipment The Department will pay the Contractor for Equipment at the rental rates established by the Commissioners Equipment Rental Schedule available on the Departments website and effective on the date the two parties execute the force account agreement Supplemental Agreement or Work Order .
This compensation is for Equipment fuel and lubricants that the Engineer authorizes and the Contractor uses on the Project .
The Department will not pay for small tools .
The Department will pay for the actual time the Equipment is in operation on the revised Work plus travel time or transportation allowances .
The Department will not pay for any additional Equipment costs except as provided under .. D Miscellaneous Compensation .
If the Equipment is moved to and from the location of the revised Work under its own power the Department will pay for the travel time at the above rental rates .
If the Equipment is moved to and from the location of the revised Work by means other than its own power the Department will pay for the actual operating time during periods of loading and unloading at the above rental rates and will pay for the actual transportation costs .
D Miscellaneous Compensation If the Engineer directs the Contractor to perform the revised Work on the right of way of a railroad in addition to the compensation for labor Materials and Equipment the Department will pay the Contractor for actual costs related to satisfying the requirements of RailroadHighway Provisions .
The Department will only pay for these costs to the extent that there is no duplication or overlapping of charges provided under .. A Labor .. B Materials and .. C Equipment or by any existing contract items .
The Department will pay the Contractor for the actual cost of miscellaneous fees incurred in performing the revised Work including but not limited to dump fees permits and licenses .
Any negotiated markup for miscellaneous fees may not exceed of the miscellaneous fees .
The Department will not pay the Contractor for other miscellaneous costs that the Contract does not provide for specifically .
E Daily Records The Engineer and Contractor will document the labor Materials and Equipment used in performing the revised Work on a Daily Force Account Record Form .
At the end of each workday the Engineer and Contractor will compare and sign the Daily .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Equipment Labor Rental Record .
Daily Equipment Labor Rental Records signed by both the Department and Contractor will govern over other Department and Contractor records .
In the event the Contractor declines to sign the Daily Equipment Labor Rental Record the Departments records shall govern .
F Payments The Department will not pay for the revised Work until the Engineer has accepted the revised Work and the Contractor has submitted to the Engineer itemized statements of the cost including the following Name classification date daily hours total hours rate and extension for each laborer and foreman .
Designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and extension for each unit of Equipment .
Quantities of acceptable Materials prices and extensions .
Transportation costs of Materials and Equipment .
Invoices for Materials used and for transportation charges .
If the Contractor uses Materials on the revised Work that the Contractor did not specifically purchase for the Work but were taken from the Contractors stock the Contractor shall submit an affidavit certifying that such Materials were taken from the Contractors stock that the quantity was actually used and that the price and transportation costs represent the actual costs to the Contractor .
G Specialty Contract Work If the Contractor uses specialty contracting firms to perform the revised Work the Department will pay the Contractor by reasonable invoice at the discretion of the Engineer .
Specialty work is unique work that can not be performed by the Contractor its subcontractors or other contracting firms that generally perform work on highway construction projects .
The provisions of .. A through .. F shall not apply to payments made by reasonable invoice .
All firms or contractors paid under these provisions and working on the Project are subject to all Labor Provisions required by the Contract .
The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with a cost estimate of the specialty Work or service and obtain the Engineers approval before performing the specialty Work or service .
As a minimum the cost estimate shall include a complete description of types of Equipment to be used the number and job classifications of employees who will perform the specialty Work and all Material costs .
H Contractor MarkUp For any force account work performed by a subcontractor including work performed by a specialty contractor the Department will pay the Contractor one additional markup on revised Work performed by a subcontractor to cover administration general superintendence overhead profit and expenses not otherwise recoverable .
The additional markup will be a percentage of the total force account invoice for the subcontractors portion of the revised Work equal to percent of the first .
plus percent of the balance in excess of ..
I Acceleration The Engineer may order the Contractor to accelerate the Work to avoid delay costs or to complete the Project early .
The Department will pay for accelerations in accordance with this section .
J Inefficiency The Department will compensate the Contractor for inefficiency or loss of productivity resulting from Contract Revisions .
Use the Measured Mile analysis or other reliable methods comparing the productivity of work impacted by a change to the productivity of similar work performed under unimpacted unchanged conditions to quantify the inefficiency .
The Department will pay for inefficiencies in accordance with this section . . NONALLOWABLE CHARGES The Department will not pay the Contractor for the following regardless of the method of payment for the revised Work Loss of anticipated profits Consequential damages including loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency Indirect costs Attorneys fees claims preparation expenses or costs of litigation .
Per .
Suspensions of Work Ordered by the Engineer the Department will not pay the Contractor for profit on suspensions or delays ordered by the Engineer .
The Department will remove profit from the markups in .. A Labor .. B Materials and .. H Contractor MarkUp by reducing the markup percentages as follows Labor from percent to percent Materials from percent to percent and Contractor markup from percent for the first .
to percent for the first .. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
COMPENSATION FOR DELAY A General For compensable delays as identified in Determination and Extension of Contract Time the Department will pay for the costs specified in .. B Allowable Delay Costs .
The Department will not pay for nonallowable charges specified in .
NonAllowable Charges or duplicate payment made under .
through ..
The Department will not pay for delay costs before the Contractor submits an itemized statement of those costs .
The Contractor shall include the following content for the applicable items in the statement .
B Allowable Delay Costs Extended Field Overhead The Department will pay the Contractor for extended field overhead costs that include costs for general field supervision field office facilities and supplies and for maintenance of field operations .
General field supervision labor costs include but are not limited to field supervisors assistants watchman clerical and other field support staff .
The Contractor shall calculate these labor costs as specified in .. A Labor .
For salaried personnel the Contractor shall calculate the daily wage rate actually paid by dividing the weekly salary by days per week .
Field office facility and supply costs include but are not limited to field office trailers tool trailers office equipment rental temporary toilets and other incidental facilities and supplies .
The Contractor shall calculate these costs to provide these services on a calendarday basis using actual costs incurred due to the delay .
Maintenance of field operations costs include but are not limited to telephone electric water and other similar expenses .
The Contractor shall calculate these costs to maintain these services on a calendarday basis using actual costs incurred due to the delay .
Idle Labor The Contractor shall calculate labor costs during delays as specified in .. A Labor for all nonsalaried personnel remaining on the Project as required under collective bargaining agreements or for other Engineerapproved reasons .
Escalated Labor To receive payment for escalated labor the Contractor shall demonstrate that the Departmentcaused delay forced the work to be performed during a period when labor costs were higher than planned at the time of bid .
The Contractor shall provide adequate support documentation for labor costs allowances and benefits .
Idle Equipment or Equipment Mobilization and Demobilization The Department will pay the Contractor for equipment other than small tools that must remain on the Project during Departmentcaused delays at the idle Equipment rate calculated in .. C Equipment .
The Department will pay the Contractors transportation costs to remove and return Equipment not required on the Project during Departmentcaused delays .
Materials Escalation or Material Storage The Department will pay the Contractor for increased Material costs or Material storage costs due to the Department caused delay .
The Contractor shall obtain the Engineers approval before storing Material due to a delay .
Extended or Unabsorbed Home Office Overhead The Department will pay the Contractor for unabsorbed or extended home office overhead costs in accordance with the Federal Acquisition Regulations specifically C.F.R . .
The Department will audit all extended or unabsorbed home office overhead claims in accordance with Audits .
The Department will compensate the Contractor using the standard Eichleay formula .
To recover home office overhead the Contractors claim shall prove the delay was caused by the Owner suspending the entire project in accordance with .
Suspensions of the Work Ordered by the Engineer .
the Owner required the Contractor to standby during the suspension period it was impractical for the Contractor to obtain replacement work during the suspension period the suspension caused the contractor to be unable to complete the contract within the original contract performance period as extended by any modifications and the Contractor suffered actual damages as a result of the delay caused by the suspension .
The Department will consider Subcontractors eligible for separate extended or unabsorbed home office overhead using the standard Eichleay formula if the Subcontract does not contain language disallowing such claim compensation .
To recover home office overhead the Subcontractors claim shall prove .
Minnesota Standard Specifications the delay was caused by the Owner suspending the entire project in accordance with .
Suspensions of the Work Ordered by the Engineer and the Subcontractor was on the project site directly before and directly after the suspension and the Owner required the Subcontractor to standby during the suspension and it was impractical for the Subcontractor to obtain replacement work during the suspension period and the Subcontractor suffered actual damages as a result of the delay or caused by the suspension and either the delay caused the Subcontractor to be unable to complete the subcontract within the original subcontract performance period as extended by any modifications .
The Department will not allow compensation for home office overhead for the Contractor or Subcontractor if it was not impractical to obtain replacement work during the suspension period the inability to obtain other work was not caused by the suspension or the Contractor or Subcontractor was able to reduce fixed overhead expenses during the period of delay or suspension .
COMPENSATION FOR ELIMINATED ITEMS The Department will compensate the Contractor for eliminated items in accordance with the following For completed quantities of eliminated Contract Items the Department will compensate the Contractor for the accepted quantities at the Contract Unit Price .
For materials that the Contractor has ordered but not incorporated in the Work the Department will compensate the Contractor in accordance with Payment for Surplus Material .
For partially completed quantities of eliminated Contract Items the Department will compensate the Contractor for that portion of the quantity of the work the Contractor has performed on the eliminated Contract Item on the basis of a percentage of the Contract Unit Price equal to the percentage of work performed toward completion of that quantity of the Contract Item .
To calculate this percentage the Engineer will consider the value of materials incorporated in the partially completed quantity of the eliminated Contract Items to be the invoice cost of the materials plus transportation costs .
The Engineer will add a percent markup to the sum of the invoice and transportation costs .
For the cost of equipment mobilization and overhead that the Engineer considers directly attributable to the eliminated Contract Items and that the Department has not compensated the Contractor for through provisions and of this list the Department will compensate the Contractor in accordance with Compensation for Contract Revisions .
The Department will not compensate the Contractor for loss of anticipated profits on completely or partially eliminated Work .
The Departments compensation to the Contractor for completed or partially completed quantities of Work on eliminated Contract Items in accordance with constitutes final and full compensation for the Work the Contractor has performed on eliminated or partially eliminated Contract Items .
The Contractor shall allow the Department access in accordance with Audits to the Contractors cost records and other data relating to the Contract as needed by the Department to determine compensation for eliminated Work .
PARTIAL PAYMENTS .
GENERAL At least once a month at regular intervals the Engineer will prepare an estimate of the value of the Work completed to date .
Each estimate will show the documented quantity of Work completed or substantially completed under each Contract Item .
The Department will make partial payments once per month based on the amount of Work performed unless the Engineer authorizes semimonthly partial payments .
The Department reserves the right to withhold partial payments under this Contract if the Contractor fails to provide documents as required by any other contract with the Department that prevent the Department from making the Final Estimate or executing the Certificate of Final Acceptance for the other contract .
The Department reserves the right to deduct from any payment due to the Contractor such amount to protect the Departments interests in consideration of charges or assessments against the Contractor whether arising from this Contract or any other contract with the Department .
The Department may withhold payment of such amount until the Contractor pays or satisfies the charges or assessments .
The Departments payment of partial estimates does not relieve the Contractor from the sole responsibility for all Materials and Work for which payments have been made or for the restoration of any damaged Work .
The payments are not a waiver by the Department of any provision of the Contract or of the Departments rights to require the Contractor to fulfill all terms of the Contract .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractors acceptance of partial payment constitutes a certification by the Contractor that the Work covered by the partial payment meets the Contract requirements. . MATERIAL ON HAND The Contractor may request partial payments for the value of materials on hand defined as acceptable Materials produced for or provided to the Project but not yet incorporated into the Work .
The Department will pay for Materials on hand when the Contractor meets the following requirements Requests payment for at least Provides Materials specifically manufactured produced or supplied for permanent incorporation into the Project When the Contractor provided storage is accepted by the Engineer for Materials delivered to or adjacent to the Project Site When the Contractor irrevocably assigns the Materials to the Project stores the Materials separately from other similar Materials ensures the Materials are not available for use on other projects and makes the Materials available for inspection by the Department at the material storage location for Materials not yet delivered to or adjacent to the Project Site and Provides Materials as shown on the Plans and in accordance with the Specifications .
The Department will not make partial payments for living plant or perishable materials as Materials on hand .
The Contractor shall provide the following actual authentic customary and auditable documents produced in the normal course of business to receive payment for Materials on hand Invoices and proof of payment for the Materials An itemized list detailing the cost of Contractorproduced Material and Documents containing complete Material description and identification .
The Department will pay for Materials on hand in an amount not greater than the delivered cost of the Material as verified by Contractorprovided invoices or not greater than the Contract Unit Price for the Material complete in place .
The Department reserves the right to recover payments made by the Department for Materials on hand if the Department believes the Contractor has not paid its Subcontractors or suppliers for the Materials on hand .
The Department may recover the applicable payment by deducting such amount from the next partial payment .
PAYMENT FOR SURPLUS MATERIAL The Department will pay for Materials ordered for the Work but not used if the Engineer cancels a portion of the Work or the Contract orders the termination of the Work before completion of the entire unit or orders a quantity greater than the quantity needed for the Work in accordance with the following If the Contract Item only includes providing and delivering the Material the Department will pay for purchased surplus Materials shipped or delivered to the Project at the Contract Unit Price If the Contract Unit Price includes the cost of providing and placing of the Material the Department will perform the following .
Take possession of the purchased surplus Material shipped or delivered to the Project and pay the actual purchase price and transportation cost plus percent or .
Order the Material returned to the supplier for credit and pay the Contractor the actual purchase price and transportation costs plus percent of the total less credits the Contractor received for the returned Materials .
The Department will pay the actual purchase price and transportation cost plus percent upon delivery for Materials that required special manufacture fabrication or processing making the Materials unsuitable for general use only if the supplier refuses to cancel or modify the order for Materials .
The foregoing items to will not apply and the Department will not pay for Materials ordered for the Work but not used if the Contractor or supplier takes possession of the surplus Material at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will pay an amount for surplus Materials not greater than the Contract Unit Price for the same quantity of Materials complete in place .
The Contractor shall provide receipted invoices or an affidavit showing the purchase price and transportation charges for surplus Materials that will become the property of the Department .
The Contractor shall deliver surplus Materials that the Department purchases to the storage sites designated by the Engineer .
The Department will only pay for Materials incorporated in the Work except as otherwise specified in this section .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will only pay for surplus materials inspected tested or accepted for use and for material properly preserved stored and maintained in accordance with Storage of Materials and Handling Materials until delivered to the Department .
FINAL ESTIMATE AND PAYMENT CONDITIONS AND PROCESS .
GENERAL The Department will initiate the final estimate and payment process in accordance with this section after the Contractor achieves Project acceptance as specified in .
Project Acceptance .
The Department may make corrections to estimates for partial payments in the final estimate .
If the final estimate shows that the total of all partial payments exceeds the total amount due the Contractor the Contractor shall promptly refund the overpayment .
If the Contractor fails to refund the overpayment the Department may deduct the amount of overpayment from any moneys due or becoming due to the Contractor under any other contract .
This right survives the completion and closeout of the Contract. . SEMIFINAL ESTIMATE FOLLOWING PROJECT ACCEPTANCE After issuing Project acceptance in accordance with .
Project Acceptance the Engineer will prepare a semifinal estimate showing the accepted quantity and value of each Contract Item performed by the Contractor and the amounts the Department will retain or deduct as required by the Contract .
The Contractor shall review and comment on the semifinal estimate . .
FINAL ESTIMATE FOLLOWING COMPLETION OF WORK The Department will review records and other factors indicating compliance with the requirements of .
Completion of the Work .
The Department will prepare and provide the final estimate and Certificate of Final Acceptance to the Contractor after the Contractor completes the Work in accordance with .
Completion of the Work .
The Contractor shall execute and return the Certificate of Final Acceptance to the Department within calendar days of receipt .
If the Contractor does not return the executed Certificate of Final Acceptance within the time specified in this section the Department will deem the Certificate accepted by the Contractor .
The Contractors acceptance of the final payment constitutes a certification by the Contractor that the Contractor performed the Work in accordance with all Contract requirements .
The Department will make final payment to the Contractor after the Contractor executes and returns the Certificate of Final Acceptance or the Department deems the certificate accepted .
Creating the final estimate and making final payment shall not relieve the Contractor of financial liabilities imposed by statute or waive Department claims under Minnesota Statutes Chapter C or otherwise with respect to any overcharges or any claims made by the Contractor under or related to the Contract .
Final payment and Contract closeout by the Department does not affect the rights of any claimants under Minnesota Statutes ..
ASSIGNMENT OF PAYMENTS The Department will not recognize assignments or orders executed by the Contractor that direct payments of money due to the Contractor under the Contract unless the Suretys consent is attached to the assignment or order by endorsement or other means or the assignment or order is of an account defined in the Uniform Commercial Code as enacted in Minnesota .
The Department may accept or reject orders or assignments except in cases where acceptance is required by law .
COST ESCALATION The Department will not make adjustments for cost escalation unless the Contract requires otherwise. . Minnesota Standard Specifications DIVISION II CONSTRUCTION DETAILS General MOBILIZATION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of preparatory work and operations including the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project to establish contractors offices and buildings or other facilities .
This work may also include obtaining bonds permits and demobilizing. . MATERIALS BLANK .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS BLANK .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT BLANK .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will provide partial payments for mobilization in accordance with the following table Table Mobilization Partial Payments When Contract Unit Price for Mobilization is less than percent of the total contract amount pay Contract Unit Price for Mobilization exceeds percent of the total contract amount pay Percent of Original Contract Amount Completed Percent of Mobilization Percent of Original Contract Amount The percent of Original Contract Amount the amount earned by the Contractor excluding money earned for mobilization and material on hand divided by the total value of the original contract all contract items .
If the contract unit price for mobilization exceeds percent of the total original contract amount the Department may withhold on any partial estimate the portion in excess of percent until the Contractor earns at least percent of the original contract amount .
The Department will not pay more than the original contract unit price for the mobilization item even if the Contractor shuts down work on the project or moves equipment away from the project and then back again .
If the contract does not contain a lump sum item for mobilization all costs incurred by the Contractor for mobilization shall be incidental to other work .
The Department will pay for mobilization on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Mobilization lump sum FIELD OFFICE AND LABORATORY .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing maintaining and removing field office and laboratory facilities for the exclusive use of Department personnel to perform field tests and write reports for storage of records and equipment and as field headquarters for the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS Obtain the Engineers acceptance of facilities location of facilities and services before installing on the project site .
The facilities shall remain the property of the Contractor .
Provide maintain and service the facilities with fuel electrical power sanitary services access roads and other items required by the contract .
Provide telephone service including a modular jack to all field office and laboratory facilities .
Provide for the telephone installation provide basic monthly phone service and remove the telephone at project completion at no additional cost to the Department .
Submit invoices for long distance telephone charges to the Engineer for payment .
Do not place field offices laboratories equipment or supplies within ft outside of the dripline of specimen trees or other vegetation designated for preservation .
Restrict traffic movement from this protected area .
Provide temporary fence and other protection measures as specified in Protection and Restoration of Vegetation and as directed by the Engineer .
Locate the field office and laboratory sites within the rightofway if possible .
If a site within the rightofway is not possible arrange for a site adjacent to the rightofway .
If site rental is necessary the Department will compensate the Contractor for rental costs as Extra Work .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor when to deliver a unit to the project ready it for occupancy and relocate or remove it .
Do not relocate or remove any unit from the project unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer may use field office units for the full life of the contract including periods of work suspension and until the execution of the Certificate of final acceptance .
The Engineer will not use the laboratory units during periods of authorized winter suspension without the Contractors permission or unless otherwise required by the contract .
The Engineer will release field laboratory units upon completion of field inspection work and acceptance in accordance with Acceptance unless otherwise required by the contract. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Basic Requirements Provide each field office and laboratory as a separate mobile unit or building .
The Engineer may accept separate quarters in stationary structures if they satisfy the Departments location and mobility needs .
Construct and equip each field office or laboratory meeting the following characteristics and requirements Weatherproof thermal resistant construction with finished interior walls ceiling and floor capable of being easily maintained and cleaned Exterior width of at least ft and a floor to ceiling height of at least ft At least two entrance doors with inside latches and at least one of those doors functioning as an exterior door equipped with an outside lock and having an opening of at least in in Commercial type windows of normal number and size with a total window area of at least percent of the unit floor area and with inside latches on all vent windows Ceiling ventilator or exhaust fan insectproof screening on each exterior door and all vent windows and Venetian blinds or effective awnings over all windows Artificial lighting system with fixtures providing adequate illumination over each desk and all work areas Portable or wall mounted plans rack At least one multipurpose fire extinguisher meeting the requirements of applicable Federal and State safety and health regulations Electric heating system capable of maintaining a uniform temperature of at least F throughout the interior in all zones and Floor area based on exterior dimensions of at least sq .
ft for the field office and at least sq .
ft for the field laboratory .
Ensure the exterior doors provide convenient and safe egress from the ends of the unit .
Provide a main door with dimensions of at least in in .
The Contractor may install a smaller auxiliary door on laboratory units if it fulfills the basic needs for an emergency exit .
Ensure the doors and passageways provide easy access to all areas of the unit .
B Specific Requirements Design or arrange the interior layout of each unit to make the furnishings easy to use accommodate the use and storage of ordinary office machines or testing apparatus and provide a reasonably modern and universally acceptable facility .
Provide builtin furnishings and fixtures .
Provide desks tables and work top surfaces surfaced or finished with mar resistant materials .
Provide appliance installations sanitary facilities electrical circuitry waste and water supply systems venting and safety features meeting the requirements of Federal State and local regulations .
Equip the field office or laboratory with the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Field Office Furnishings B .. a Desks Provide at least two pedestal type desks meeting the following characteristics and requirements Contains supply drawers Top width of at least in Either the portable or builtin type and Top length of at least in .
The Contractor may mount at least one end of the desk flush with a wall provided the top length is at least in .
B .. b File Drawers Provide at least three letter or legal size file drawers either of the builtin or portable cabinet type .
B .. c Drafting Desk Provide a drafting desk meeting the following requirements and characteristics Contains a plan sheet and pencil drawer Top dimensions of at least in in Commercially built Tilt or slant top desk and Wall mounted pedestal or cabinet style .
Do not mount either end flush with a wall .
B .. d Storage Cabinet Provide an enclosed storage cabinet or closet with space for the usual outdoor garments office supplies and other materials not separately stored on open shelves or in desk drawers .
B .. e Shelving Provide at least ft of open shelving at least in wide .
Install shelving above desks or at other convenient locations .
B .. f Drafting Stools and Desk Chairs Provide one drafting stool for each drafting desk and one swiveltype desk chair for each desk .
Provide at least two additional desk chairs for each facility .
B .
Field Laboratory Furnishings B .. a Workbench Provide a sturdilybuilt workbench with a work top at least ft in and with open space below for placement of a curing tank or other equipment .
Install the workbench along a side wall .
B .. b Service Sink Provide a service sink meeting the following requirements and characteristics At least in deep Capacity of at least gal Contains water supply faucet and an outside drain .
Install the sink near one end of the workbench .
Recess the sink into the workbench .
B .. c Storage Cabinet or Closet Provide an enclosed storage cabinet or closet with space for the usual outdoor garments standard supplies and other miscellaneous equipment or apparatus that would ordinarily be stored for convenience or protection .
B .. d Desk or Table Provide a desk or table with a work top at least in in .
B .. e File drawers Provide at least two letter or legal size file drawers either of the builtin or portable cabinet type .
B .. f Stools or Chairs Provide at least two stools or chairs of a height that will provide seating at the workbench and clerical desk. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .. g Shelving Provide at least ft of open shelving at least in wide above the workbench or at other convenient locations .
B .. h Stove Provide an electric kitchen stove with four heating plates and electric oven .
The Contractor may substitute separate heating plates .
B .. i Exhaust Fan Provide an electric exhaust fan .
C Special Requirements Level and support units at the project site .
Rigidly support the field laboratory to eliminate floor and workbench vibrations for accurate weighing on a benchsupported scale .
Provide a curing tank with adequate capacity and in dimensions that allow installation below a laboratory workbench for concrete test cylinder curing when the work involves casting of standard concrete test cylinders .
The Contractor may place the tank outside when used at the site of a field office as approved by the Engineer .
Equip the field office or laboratory with the following special services in accordance with the type required by the contract .
C. Type A Service Provide a pressurized water supply of sufficient capacity to meet materials testing and cylinder curing needs for the project .
If a pressurized water supply is not available provide and install a storage tank with a gal water capacity at each field laboratory site .
Install the tank to produce sufficient gravity pressure to maintain constant flow through the sink faucet .
C. Type B Service For Type B Service provide Type A service and add toilet and lavatory facilities drinking water facilities and trash disposal service .
Install detached portable toilets in locations as directed by the Engineer .
Provide a closed faucetequipped drinkingwater container or cooler with an adequate supply of potable water if a potable pressure water system is not available .
Provide trash containers and regularly remove trash from the project site .
C. Type C Service For Type C Service provide Type B service and add electrical power supply and fixtures including duplex outlet receptacles capable of providing adequate amperage for electric lighting and other appliance needs .
Provide an electrically powered mechanical sieving apparatus meeting the following characteristics and requirements to determine particle size distribution of fine aggregate No .
sieve .
mm Capable of accommodating six Departmentprovided full height in round sieves with pan and cover Equipped with an automatic timing device of at least min duration and Meeting the requirements of the AASHTO T sieving sufficiency .
C. Type D Service For Type D Service provide Type C service and add a thermostatically controlled heating and cooling system capable of maintaining a uniform temperature from F to F in all zones .
The Contractor may provide separate systems .
C. Type X Service Provide Type X Service only for field laboratory units in combination with the requirements of one of the service types specified in this section .
If the contract requires Type AX Type BX Type CX or Type DX the Engineer may use the specified laboratory unit as a combination officelaboratory facility during the contract time including periods of work suspension until the Department executes the Certificate of Final Contract Acceptance in accordance with Acceptance .
Provide the service requirements based on the first letter of the service type specified i.e .
for Type AX provide Type A Service . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will separately measure accepted field office and field laboratory units by the number and type provided and used as required by the contract regardless of the duration of its use at any one or different locations on the project site . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for field office or field laboratory units of each type includes the cost of providing placing relocating maintaining and servicing the complete facility as required including removal and relocation .
The Department will separately pay for public utility connections for facility relocations directed by the Engineer after the initial public utility connections made at the original site .
The Department will not pay for ordinary relocation expenses not involving public utility changes .
The Department will pay for field office and laboratory on the basis of the following schedule .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Item No .
Item Unit .
Field Office Type ___ Each .
Field Laboratory Type ___ Each MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION OF HAUL ROADS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of the maintenance repair and restoration of designated haul roads for materials hauled for the work covered by the contract. . DEFINITIONS The Department defines designated haul road as any public road or street officially designated as a haul road except for a Minnesota trunk highway or road officially designated by the Commissioner as a detour around a construction project over which the following materials are hauled Soil or other material for embankment construction Sand gravel or other material for backfill Sand gravel or crushed rock for base or surfacing courses Aggregates for bituminous surfacing including hauling bituminous mixtures from the mixing plant Aggregates for concrete base or pavement including hauling concrete batches from batch plants and Bituminous materials and portland cement for paving mixtures .
The Contractor may haul materials to the project or to other locations outside the project if required to complete the work specified in the contract . .
DESIGNATION AND USE OF HAUL ROADS If the contract specifies Maintenance and Restoration of Haul Roads as a contract item do not haul material from any source until the Commissioner designates the haul road from that source as a haul road .
Once the Commissioner designates the haul road from a source haul all materials from that source over that road .
Make all vehicle trips both loaded or unloaded between material sources and the project on designated haul roads .
If the contract is with MnDOT for State Trunk Highway Projects select haul roads and notify the Engineer of the selections .
Within calendar days after receipt of notification of the haul road selections the Commissioner will determine the acceptability of the selected haul roads .
If the haul roads are acceptable the Commissioner will designate the roads as temporary trunk highway haul roads .
If the contract is with or for a governmental agency other than MnDOT select a haul road and notify the Engineer representing that governmental agency of the selection .
Within calendar days after receipt of notification of the haul road selection the Engineer will determine if the selected road is an acceptable road .
If the road is acceptable the Engineer will approve that road as a designated haul road .
After a haul road is officially designated the Contractor may select a different road for official designation using the same procedure specified in this section .
If the haul road designation changes and any of the above described materials were hauled over the previously designated haul road the Contractor shall restore the previously designated haul road to the original condition .
A Bituminous Roadways Reimburse local government agencies for haul road use on bituminous roadways in accordance with the following Verify spring load capacities of proposed haul roads with the local government agencies For a designated haul road with a bituminous surface and a spring load capacity less than tons reimburse the local government agency for haul road use at a rate of .
per ton per mile of material hauled Make full payment to the local government agency upon receiving notice of payment due and computations from the Engineer and Provide the Engineer with confirmation of payment to the local agency .
The Department will not require payment if the amount due to an individual local government agency is less than ..
The Department will not require the Contractor to reimburse local government agencies for concrete surfaced roadways . .
MAINTENANCE AND RESTORATION While hauling operations are in progress maintain the haul road as approved by the Engineer .
This work includes application of water bituminous material or calcium chloride to the road surface as necessary to alleviate dust nuisance and eliminate traffic hazards. . Minnesota Standard Specifications After the completion of hauling operations over a haul road perform one of the following Restore that haul road to a condition at least equal to the condition existing at the start of the hauling operations or Compensate the local government agency in the amount approved by the local government agency and the Engineer for the restoration of that haul road by the local government agency .
The fact that other traffic used the haul road concurrently with the Contractors material hauling operation does not relieve the Contractor of the obligation to maintain and restore the haul road as required in this section .
If other contractors performing highway construction under a contract with the same governmental agency haul materials over the same road concurrently with the Contractors material hauling operation the Engineer will determine the amount of maintenance and restoration obligation to be shared by each .
The Engineer will determine the kind and amount of maintenance and restoration work required to restore the haul road to a condition equal to the condition existing at the time the hauling operations started .
The Engineers decision is final binding and conclusive .
When hauling over any designated haul road is completed and the Contractor has restored the road or has compensated the governmental agency for the restoration as required the Engineer will accept such restoration or concur in such financial settlement for the restoration of the haul road in writing and such acceptance shall relieve the Contractor of additional obligation in connection with the restoration of the designated haul road . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract lump sum amount for Maintenance and Restoration of Haul Roads includes the cost of maintenance restoration and the reimbursement to any local government agencies as specified in this section for use of haul roads officially designated and used in conjunction with the contract work .
The Department will not make payment for Maintenance and Restoration of Haul Roads unless one or more haul roads were officially designated and used for hauling materials .
The Department will make payment at the contract lump sum amount if these two conditions were met and regardless of the amount of maintenance and restoration work required provided work was completed or the local government agency certified receipt of payment for such restoration .
If the Contractor fails or refuses to perform haul road restoration or to make satisfactory financial settlement for such restoration as required within the period specified by the Engineer in writing the Department will complete the restoration work and deduct the costs from any moneys that are or may become due the Contractor or require reimbursement from the Contractors Surety .
The Department will pay for maintenance and restoration of haul roads on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Maintenance and Restoration of Haul Roads lump sum .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Grading CLEARING AND GRUBBING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing and disposing of the trees brush stumps roots and other plant life including dead and decayed matter within the construction area unless otherwise designated to remain by the contract or as directed by the Engineer. . BLANK .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS The Engineer will establish the rightofway lines and construction limits confining the clearing and grubbing operations .
The Engineer will designate those trees brush and other vegetation for preservation and those for removal .
Remove and dispose of the trees brush stumps and roots from the limits designated for clearing and grubbing .
Follow all requirements of Minnesota Statute Chapter Section .
with regards to treatment and movement of woody noxious weeds located with the construction limits .
The state noxious weed list is determined by the MN Department of Agriculture .
The Contractor may visit httpwww.mda.state.mn.usplantspestmanagementweedcontrolnoxiouslist.aspx to find information about control requirements and transportation restrictions .
Adhere to all plant pest quarantine orders imposed by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture and United States Department of Agriculture .
Contractor may contact MDA at or visit httpwww.mda.state.mn.uspestregs to find information about all existing plant pest quarantines active in Minnesota .
Common requirements include but are not limited to Untreated wood from areas known to have plant pest is prohibited from entering noninfested areas Movement of materials or equipment out of quarantine areas is prohibited without inspection andor compliance agreements Wood may not be offered as firewood or otherwise to an industry or individual without compliance agreements The Contractor will Use wood chips within the construction limits for erosion control construction exit pads or other project related needs prior to removing the chips from the site .
Dispose of quarantined wood in accordance with existing quarantine requirements The Department will not pay for compliance with these requirements .
Salvage topsoil in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
Cleared and grubbed areas are subject to partial payment withholdings of Erodible Surface Areas in accordance with Soil Preparation Protect the items designated to remain in accordance with Protection and Restoration of Property and Protection and Restoration of Vegetation place temporary fence and perform clearing and grubbing operations in a manner that will not damage or jeopardize the surrounding plant life and property .
Prune branches for the following reasons For pedestrian vehicle and infrastructure clearance To reduce risk of branch failure To improve a site line and sign visibility and To protect trees and maintain tree health in accordance with .A Protection and Restoration of Vegetation Construction Requirements Protecting and Preserving .
A Clearing and Grubbing Operations Cut off remove and dispose of the trees brush stumps and roots from designated areas within the construction limits as a clearing and grubbing operation .
Perform clearing and grubbing on the project to construct the proposed improvements including the clearing and grubbing of designated areas outside those construction limits as shown on the plans or as designated by the Engineer and in accordance with the following Within the rightofway remove trees brush stumps and other items that can be viewed from the traveled way as directed by the Engineer and Within ft of the construction limits outside of structures remove trees stumps roots brush and branches to protect and maintain the completed improvements as directed by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Clearing Operations Cut off remove and dispose of trees and brush in the areas identified as a clearing operation on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
If the contract does not require grubbing or if the Engineer directs the Contractor not to perform grubbing cut off at a point within in of the ground .
C Grubbing Operations Remove and dispose of the brush stumps roots and other remains in the areas designated as a grubbing operation on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Completely remove stumps in accordance with .. C Removal Operations unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
If the Engineer approves of a stump to remain cut the stump no greater than in above the ground and flush with or below the ground surface if directed by the Engineer .
Fill depressions resulting from the grubbing operations with suitable material in accordance with .. B Borrow Material and compact the material as approved by the Engineer except in those areas to be excavated as part of the work .
D Disposal Limitations Dispose of trees brush stumps roots and other debris or byproducts by chipping tub grinding or marketing .
The Contractor may chip the wood through a chipping machine or tub grinder to create Type mulch for use within the construction limits .
If the construction project is within a Plant Pest Quarantine provide to the Engineer a compliance agreement from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture .
Dispose of any quarantine regulated wood products as directed by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture regulations or nonquarantine regulated items as forestry standards dictate to prevent the spread of insects and disease .
D. Marketable Trees The Contractor may market trees designated for removal to woodutilizing industries .
Do not market any wood from a quarantined area to woodusing industries or individuals without a compliance agreement from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture .
The Department defines marketable trees as all trees except for the following Elm trees Oak wilt infected oak trees and Ash trees that have a diameter of in or more when measured at a point in above the ground surface .
D. Elm Oak Wilt Infected Oak Pine and Quarantined Wood D .. a Elm Trees Dispose of elm trees brush stumps roots and debris by chipping or tub grinding and using the mulch within the construction limits for erosion control construction of exit pads or landscaping purposes .
D .. b Oak Wilt Infected Oak Trees Dispose of stumps roots and debris from oak wilt infected oak trees by chipping or tub grinding and using the mulch within the construction limits for erosion control construction of exit pads or landscaping purposes .
Dc Elm and Oak Wilt Infected Oak Tree Disposal Deadlines and Locations Dispose of elm and oak wilt infected oak trees in accordance with the following Within calendar days of notification or of clearing and grubbing whichever comes first when performing the cutting operations between April and September By April when performing cutting operations between September and March Within the right of way by tub grinding or chipping and using the mulch within the construction limits for erosion control construction exit pads or landscaping purposes and Off the right of way provided the tree logs are processed by debarking or made into wood chip mulch to prevent the spread of Dutch elm disease and oak wilt .
D. Pine Dispose of all nonmarketable pine trees brush stumps roots and slash debris by chipping tub grinding or debarking within calendar days of being cleared during the growing season to prevent the infestation and spread of pine bark beetles .
D. Quarantined Wood The Contractor must follow all species specific quarantine regulation posted by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture .
Do not market quarantined trees to the woodusing industries or individuals without having a compliance agreement from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture .
Do not make wood with bark attached available to the public for use as firewood from the quarantined area .
Do not any part of the quarantined tree including roots outside of a quarantined county without fulfilling the requirements of a compliance agreement from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture .
Contact the Minnesota Department of Agriculture to speak with a regulatory official and visit the Minnesota Department of Agriculture Plant Pest Quarantine website to determine the quarantine areas .
The Contractor may chip quarantined wood through a chipping machine or tub grinder to create Type or Type mulch for use within the construction limits. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Burning .
D. Burying . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure clearing and grubbing by area lump sum or individual unit as required by the contract .
The Engineer will measure tree diameter by measuring the circumference of the tree at .
ft above the ground and dividing the circumference by .
or by measuring the diameter or the tree stump after removal .
A Qualifying Trees and Stumps The Engineer will only measure trees for payment having a diameter greater than in at a point measured in above the ground surface .
The Engineer will only measure stumps for payment having a diameter greater than in when measured at one of the following points ft above the ground surface for a tree cleared under the contract or The point of cutoff for an existing stump not cleared under the contract .
The Engineer will not measure for the removal and disposal of stumps and brush with a diameter equal to or less than in at the point of cutoff .
B Area Basis If the contract specifies the unit as a hectare the Engineer will determine quantities by measuring to the nearest .
acre all areas cleared and all areas grubbed within the limits as shown on the plans or staked by the Engineer .
The Engineer will make all measurements horizontally to points ft outside the trunks of qualifying trees or stumps on the perimeter of the area being measured .
The Engineer will measure separate areas less than .
acre as .
acre .
If isolated trees or stumps require removal outside the areas designated for clearing or grubbing by the hectare and no unit price is provided in the contract for clearing and grubbing individual trees or stumps the Department will pay based on the following The Engineer will consider each isolated qualifying tree less than in .
in diameter when measured at a point ft above the ground surface and each isolated qualifying stump measuring less than in at the point of cutoff as .
acre .
The Engineer will consider each isolated tree or stump at least in .
in diameter when measured at the points described in above as .
acre .
C Individual Unit Basis When the contract specifies tree as the unit the Engineer will count the number of qualifying trees cleared and the number of qualifying stumps grubbed to determine the quantity .
D Lump Sum Basis The Engineer will not measure an individual area tree or stump if the contract specifies clearing and grubbing as a lump sum item . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit prices for the accepted quantities of clearing and grubbing includes the cost for removal and disposal securing outside disposal sites in accordance with .. D Disposal of Materials and Debris bringing in a chippergrinder if necessary securing a compliance agreement from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture and performing the required treatment for disposing of elm oak wilt infected oaks pine quarantined wood and marketable trees .
The contract lump sum price for Clearing and Grubbing regardless of the sizes of the trees and stumps includes the cost of all clearing and grubbing required by the contract .
The Department will include the costs for removing and disposing of brush and stumps with a diameter equal to or less than in at the point of cutoff in the contract unit prices of other relevant pay items .
The Department will not pay for pruning except as specified in .
Protection and Restoration of Vegetation Basis of Payment .
If the contract does not specify a pay item for clearing and grubbing the Department will pay for clearing and grubbing of qualifying trees and stumps as specified in .
Clearing and Grubbing Method of Measurement as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will pay for clearing and grubbing items on the basis of the following schedule .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Item No .
Item Unit .
Clearing and Grubbing LUMP SUM .
Clearing Acre .
Grubbing Acre .
Grubbing Tree .
Clearing Tree PAVEMENT MARKING REMOVAL .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing temporary and permanent pavement markings except for removable preformed plastic pavement markings that conflict with revised traffic patterns. . MATERIALS BLANK .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Before making a change in traffic pattern fully remove conflicting pavement markings as required by the contract and as directed by the Engineer minimizing damage to the pavement structure or surface texture .
Repair damaged areas as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
Remove irregular shaped pavement messages with a rectangular shape per the Plan or of least dimensions as determined by the Engineer .
Control or restrict operations to avoid exposing traffic to hazardous conditions in accordance with Laws to be Observed Public Convenience and Safety and Air Land and Water Pollution .
Remove expended materials or agents used in the pavement marking removal process from the pavement surface as the work progresses .
Dispose of removed marking material in accordance with Laws to be Observed and Air Land and Water Pollution .
Removed pavement marking material shall become the property of the Contractor . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure Pavement Marking Removal by area or length of the original markings as removed .
The Engineer will measure removal areas on the basis of nominal widths and actual lengths as originally applied and still visible at the time of pavement marking removal .
The Engineer will enclose irregularly shaped markings within rectangular boundaries of least dimensions as determined by the Engineer .
The Engineer will measure removal length by the actual length of each in wide pavement marking removed .
The Engineer will measure longitudinal pavement marking removal quantities greater than in wide based on a ratio of actual pavement marking width relative to in .
The Engineer will not include the gap between line segments in the removal length measurement .
The Department will include the cost of removing removable preformed pavement marking tape with the relevant contract unit prices in accordance with Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for Pavement Marking Removal includes the cost of obliterating the markings as required by the contract and for restoring the pavement texture as directed by the Engineer .
Unless the contract requires otherwise the Department will pay for the removal of markings of all types under a single contract item .
The Department will pay for pavement marking removal on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Pavement Marking Removal linear foot .
Pavement Marking Removal square foot BUILDING REMOVAL .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing unsalvageable and vacated buildings from the rightofway making sewer and water service disconnections and removing sidewalks driveways or miscellaneous structures unless otherwise required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
BLANK .
REMOVAL REQUIREMENTS A General Perform building removals as required by the contract .
The contract will provide a general description and the street addresses or references to a survey station for the buildings and miscellaneous items requiring removal .
Remove buildings including all fixtures except those owned by public or private utilities by demolition before removal from the rightofway .
The Contractor is responsible for any damage caused to adjacent property during the building removal process .
The Department assumes no responsibility for the condition of any buildings at any time and no guarantee is made or implied that any building will remain in the condition the bidder finds it at the time of examination before preparing the Proposal .
B Removal Remove buildings and structures including steps basement floors and walls floor slabs and footings from the rightofway .
If the building rests on a concrete surface slab remove the entire slab and related footings .
C Utilities C. Disconnection of Sewer and Water Services Locate expose cut off and plug all sewer and water service connections at the sewer and water mains .
Plug all sewers leading from the building using watertight plugs at no additional cost to the Department .
Abandon wells in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures .
C. Other Utilities The utility owners will disconnect telephone electric power other wire services and gas service pipes outside the buildings .
The utility owners will also remove utilityowned fixtures in accordance with Utility Property and Service .
D Disposal of Materials and Debris Dispose of the demolished building in accordance with .. D Disposal of Materials and Debris at a demolition landfill permitted by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency except the Contractor may recycle parts of the building as approved by the Engineer .
Do not dispose of buildings at permitbyrule landfills transfer stations or waste storage facilities .
E Filling Basement Excavations If the building was removed by another contract ensure that basement floors and walls have been removed and fill all basement excavations and other excavations previously made as required by the contract .
Fill the excavation to the level of the existing ground surface using backfill that matches the existing soil conditions .
Provide the fill material from sources outside the rightofway in accordance with Use of Materials Found on the Project .
Compact the fill in accordance with the quality compaction requirements in Excavation and Embankment .
If the building removal is included with the grading in this contract remove the foundations in accordance with .. B Removal and fill basement excavations in accordance with .. H Finishing Operations . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Building Removal The Engineer will measure all buildings listed for removal as a single lump sum .
B Basement Excavation Fill The Engineer will measure the volume of fill provided by the Contractor by the volume of the basements below the ground surface as required by the contract .
C Disconnection of Sewer and Water Services The Engineer will measure each sewer and water service connection cut off and plugged at the main . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for the Disconnect Sewer Service and Disconnect Water Service includes the cost of the restoration of street and property surfaces. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will pay for building removal based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Building Removal lump sum .
Disconnect Sewer Service each .
Disconnect Water Service each .
Basement Excavation Fill cubic yard REMOVING PAVEMENT AND MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing and disposing of pavement sewers culverts guardrails abandoned structures and other obstructions on the rightofway except as specified in Removal of Existing Bridges and Building Removal .
This work also consists of salvaging material and backfilling trenches holes and depressions. . MATERIALS BLANK .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Remove and dispose of structures and obstructions as required by the contract .
B Salvage Operations Remove dismantle and store salvaged materials to allow reuse .
When salvaging guardrail and fences coil the wire and cable pull posts from the ground and remove nails and staples from posts and boards .
Stockpile materials designated for salvage by the Department on the rightofway at locations approved by the Engineer .
Remove dismantle and clean materials as required by the contract before stockpiling .
C Removal Operations C. Removing Portion of Structure Do not damage existing structures to be retained for use during the removal operations .
Ensure a length of at least bar diameters from the face of the cut for existing reinforcement bars for concrete structures left in place .
C. Pavements and Sidewalks Saw the existing concrete pavement or sidewalks or bituminous pavement at the locations as shown on the plans and as staked by the Engineer to establish a neat line for extending the new work .
C. Concrete and Masonry Structures Remove concrete and masonry structures to the excavation limits as shown on the plans .
Remove septic tanks cisterns and cesspools .
Rebuild and reconnect live sewers after removing related manholes catch basins and drop inlets .
Provide a bypass and maintain the service during the removal operations .
Use concrete or masonry plugs to plug pipes draining into abandoned basements manholes or similar structures .
C. Timber Structures and Underground Tanks Remove timber structures and underground tanks meeting the requirements of applicable laws and regulations .
C. Wells and Holes Refer to Minnesota Rules Chapter Wells and Borings for the definition of wells and borings .
Construct and seal most wells and borings meeting the requirements of Minnesota Rules Chapter Wells and Borings .
Seal wells and borings taken out of service meeting the requirements of Minnesota Rule Chapter Wells and Borings .
Protect wells and borings until permanently meeting the requirements of Minnesota Rule Chapter Wells and Borings during the work to prevent surface drainage from entering the opening .
Cut and remove casing in the well or boring to the elevation as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer after sealing .
Submit one copy of the sealing record to the Minnesota Department of Health and one copy to the Engineer within calendar days after sealing a well or boring. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Miscellaneous Items When removing railroad tracks remove rails ties paving crossings track encasements and other appurtenances .
D Disposal of Materials and Debris D. Disposal Plan Provide the Engineer with information and documentation substantiating proper disposal arrangements and operations .
The Department will not pay for removal before acceptance of the initial disposal plan or if required a modified disposal plan .
D. Disposal within RightofWay Do not dispose material or debris within the rightofway .
Do not burn or bury treated or untreated wood including but not limited to dimensional lumber brush trees and roots within the rightofway .
D. Disposal outside RightofWay Dispose of materials and debris resulting from removal or demolition operations having no specific disposal provisions outside the rightofway .
Assume full responsibility for acceptable disposition of the material and for damages resulting from the disposal operations .
The Engineer may not give final acceptance of the work Unless disposal is made at a publicly controlled dumping site or Until the disposal areas are in acceptable condition with respect to the Contractors obligations .
E Backfilling Depressions Backfill depressions with material in accordance with Excavation and Embankment . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Area The Engineer will measure pavements sidewalks surfacing and other uniform thickness items by area without specifying the thickness .
The Engineer will classify pavement removal by kind of paving material when the material is comprised entirely of portland cement concrete remove concrete pavement or entirely of bituminousaggregate mixtures remove bituminous pavement .
If the pavement is comprised of a combination of different paving materials such as a concrete base or pavement overlaid with bituminous surfacing the Engineer will measure the removal of the entire structure as the unclassified item of remove pavement .
Regardless of classification the Engineer will include the removal of integrant curb removed as a part of pavement removal .
The Engineer will separately measure the removal of pavement as part of the excavation of trenches for installation of drainage structures or utility items as the pay item for remove trench pavement .
Remove trench pavement will include the removal of paving courses including unclassified materials .
B Length The Engineer will measure the length along the longitudinal centerline of the structure parallel to the base or foundation supporting the structure and from end to end of the removed structure .
The Engineer will measure pipe from center to center of junction fittings catch basins or manholes .
The Engineer will include the length of aprons removed as shown on the plans with the pipe measurements .
The Engineer will measure sawing of concrete and bituminous pavements by length along the saw cut lines as staked by the Engineer if included as contract items .
C Volume The Engineer will determine the volume of concrete or masonry structures by taking measurements on the inplace structure as it is being uncovered and removed except if otherwise established .
D Number Complete Unit The Engineer will measure contract items with a contract each price by counting the number of individual units removed salvaged or abandoned including all appurtenances .
E Lump Sum The Engineer will measure portions of completed work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit prices for Remove Salvage or Abandon includes the cost of the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Removing the material or portions of the material as specified by the contract Disposing of the materials removed Salvaging of parts as specified by the contract Backfilling depressions and other restoration work as specified by the contract Performing well abandonment procedures and Other work of a special nature as specified in the contract or imposed by laws ordinances and regulations .
The contract unit prices for sawing only includes sawing of concrete and bituminous pavements using a saw .
Use of any other method approved by the Engineer at the option of the Contractor will be at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will include the cost of sawing with other relevant contract pay items if the contract does not include a contract pay item for sawing .
The contract unit price for fence removal includes the cost of removing abandoned fences .
The Department will include the cost of removal of abandoned fences with other relevant contract pay items if the contract does not include a contract item for fence removal .
For salvage items the Department will only pay for units removed in a condition acceptable for reuse .
The Department will include the cost of the necessary removal of damaged or deteriorated units with other relevant removal contract items or as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
If the Contractors negligence damages materials designated for salvage the Department will deduct from any moneys due or becoming due the Contractor an amount equal to percent of the current delivered price of new material of the same type and size as that damaged and equal to the quantity of material so damaged .
The damaged material shall then become the property of the Contractor .
The Department will pay for the removal of the ends of old box culverts preparatory to extending the structure by the cubic yard cubic meter or by each unit .
The Department will pay for backfilling depressions resulting from the removal of structures as embankment construction .
The Department will pay for removing pavement and miscellaneous structures on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Remove lump sum . .
Remove Remove each linear foot .
Remove square yard .
Remove cubic yard .
Remove square foot .
Sawing Concrete Pavement linear foot .
Sawing Bituminous Pavement linear foot .
Salvage linear foot .
Salvage each .
Abandon each Specify item name such as culvert pipe sewer pipe drain pipe curb and gutter curb sidewalk fence concrete or masonry structures railway track manholes or catch basins integrant curb concrete pavement bituminous pavement pavement trench pavement guardrail water well etc .
EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of excavating and placing embankment .
A Definitions A .
Road Core The road core is the area below the grading grade to the bottom of the excavation and between the following For embankment heights ft. from the grading grade point of intersections P.I.s with a VH slope and For embankment heights ft. from the grading grade point of intersections P.I.s with a ½ VH slope .
A. Grading Grade Grading grade is the bottom of the aggregate base. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Top of Subgrade The top of the subgrade is the surface of material immediately beneath the granular material .
If there is no granular layer then the top of subgrade is the Grading Grade .
A. Optimum Moisture Content The optimum moisture content is determined by the Moisture Density Test Method Proctor or OnePoint Proctor Method or Estimated Optimum Moisture Content Form GB .
A .
Maximum Density Maximum density is the maximum density determined by the Moisture Density Test Method Proctor test in the Grading and Base Manual .
A .
Select Grading Material Select grading materials are all mineral soils found in the Triaxial Chart in the Grading and Base Manual excluding silt .
Silt is defined as soils containing or more siltsized particles .
Marl and organic soils are also excluded .
A. Granular Materials Granular materials meet the requirements of .. B .. A. NonStructural Grading Materials NonStructural grading materials are all mineral soils excess topsoil and organic soils capable of supporting construction equipment .
A .
Uniform Soils Uniform soils have the same soil class per the Triaxial Chart in the Grading and Base Manual and have similar color moisture content and performance characteristics .
A. Organic Soils Organic soils contain percent organic content .
A. Geotextiles for Separation A geotextile used for separation at the locations shown in the plan or as directed by the Engineer .
Geotextiles provide separation between the fill and underlying softer soils prevent mixing provide stability during compaction provide reinforcement and minimize differential movement. . MATERIALS A Excavation Material The Engineer will classify the excavation using the following categories A .
Common Excavation Material not classified in any other category .
A. Subgrade Excavation All excavation in the road core below a paved surface concrete bituminous and all other stabilized bituminous surfaces as defined in Removing Pavement And Miscellaneous Structures excluding rock muck channel or rock channel excavation .
A .
Rock Excavation Material that requires drilling blasting or ripping before excavation .
This includes boulders and other detached rock larger than cu .
yd .
A. Muck Excavation The removal of organic soils as defined in .. A. Organic Soils and other unstable soils as designated by the plan and below the natural ground level of marshes swamps or bogs regardless of the moisture content .
Muck excavation is limited to areas over which the roadway embankment or a structure is to be constructed .
A .
Channel and Pond Excavation Material from channel changes waterways and ponds outside of the roadway embankment not classified as rock channel excavation .
A .
Rock Channel Excavation Material classified as rock excavation from channel changes and waterways outside of the roadway embankment .
A. Topsoil Excavation .
Minnesota Standard Specifications All excavation material taken from the top of an exposed layer of soil that supports vegetation and is salvaged stockpiled and used in accordance with Soil Preparation .
B Borrow Material Provide borrow meeting the specifications in Table .
Table Borrow Specifications Material Specification Common Borrow .. A .
Select Grading Material Granular Borrow .. B. Granular Material Select Granular Borrow .. B .
Select Granular Material Topsoil Borrow Topsoil Material Materials obtained by the Contractor from sources outside the roadway must comply with Source of Supply and Quality and with Natural Material Sources .
C Geotextiles Geotextiles conforming to Geotextiles .
D Stabilizing Aggregate Aggregate meeting the requirements of .. C. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General For road core embankment meet the requirements of select grading material per .. A .. Nonstructural grading materials per .. A. may be used as embankment outside the road core .
All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Perform excavation and embankment operations within the plan excavation limits as required by the contract .
Before beginning excavation and embankment operations comply with the requirements of Clearing and Grubbing .
Comply with the erodible surface requirements of Soil Preparation .
Maintain drainage in excavations and embankment operations at all times .
Provide and maintain temporary drainage facilities until the permanent facilities are complete and operational .
Provide and maintain temporary preparation and erosion control on embankment and stockpiles until finishing operations per .. H are complete .
Repair or replace settlement plates damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
Protect structures during construction operations .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations .
Excess materials from within the excavation limits shown on the plans that meet the specified requirements can be used by the Contractor for borrow items shown on the plans .
These excess materials must comply with Use of Materials Found on the Project .
If the plans show a contract pay item for stabilizing aggregate place it in accordance with Aggregate Base .
B Contractor Quality Control QC Testing Perform Contractor QC testing and submit all required forms if required in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Submit results to the Engineer within one business day after sampling .
Test corrected areas that fail either QC or Quality Assurance QA .
Submit to the Engineer the following items a preliminary Grading and Base Report GB required before work commences a final Grading and Base Report GB required within two weeks of completion of project and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications a weekly summary report of tests completed and retests of failing materials GB required the first working day of the following week .
B .
Aggregate Certification and Aggregate Testing Certify granular materials on Form GB .
Attach any required aggregate test results to Form GB .
Material placed without certifications is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Gradation quality and crushing testing are only required for .
Material On Hand .
B. Moisture Control If required by the Schedule of Materials Control determine the optimum moisture content .
Test for the moisture content in areas that appear least likely to meet specifications .
Determine the moisture content during compaction using test methods listed in the Grading and Base Manual or by alternate methods approved by the Engineer .
Meet the moisture content requirements listed in Table .
Table Moisture Content Requirements For Compaction Requirements Relative Moisture Content Requirements Minimum of of maximum density Minimum of of maximum density Quality Compaction Penetration Index Method As determined on form GB Correct for moisture content in areas represented by failing moisture tests before testing the compaction .
Compaction tests taken in areas represented by failing moisture tests are not valid .
Note that optimum moisture content determination tests and moisture tests during compaction are required for all compaction requirements including quality compaction LWD penetration index and specified density .
B. Proctor Tests The Contractor uses the Departments proctor test results for optimum moisture determination .
B .
Test Rolling Test roll per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract the top surface of nongranular subgrade and the top of any granular surface not meeting the requirements of .. B. per using the test roller as specified in the Contract .
If no test roller is specified use test roller TR .
C Preparation of Embankment Foundation When slopes are steeper than VH construct steps before placing embankment material .
Construct the steps with a minimum width of in and a maximum height of inches .
Ensure the foundation area drains freely. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Compact the bottom of the excavation according to Table .
Table Required Compaction for Bottom of Excavation Excavation Depth Below Grading Grade Material Type Required Compaction All depths Structure Backfill NonGranular of maximum density LWD and Quality Compaction All depths Structure Backfill Granular of maximum density LWD Penetration Index and Quality Compaction in NonGranular of maximum density LWD and Quality Compaction in Granular of maximum density LWD Penetration Index and Quality Compaction in NonGranular of maximum density or passes of a roller in Granular of maximum density LWD Penetration Index and Quality Compaction Excavation below the planned subgrade may be subject to Contract Revisions Use a pad foot roller weighing at least lb .
The Engineer may waive the four pass requirement if the subgrade will not support the roller or direct the Contractor to repair the subgrade .
Repairs are subject to .
Extra Work .
Remove surfacing and excavate an existing road core in accordance with the Contract .
Then perform subgrade preparation on the excavated portion and the new roadcore in accordance with Subgrade Preparation before placing new embankment material .
D Excavating Operations Obtain the Engineers written approval before excavating beyond the limits and elevations established by the contract .
Remove rock outcroppings from within the slope lines and to the elevations shown on the plans .
Remove loosened rock from the backslopes .
Provide drainage for the shoulder slopes .
Do not leave undrainable depressions .
Presplit rock back slopes steeper than VH .
Control blasting operations to eliminate flying rock or debris .
Excavation below the planned subgrade to correct unstable conditions may be subject to Contract Revisions E Placing Embankment Materials Place embankments in uniform lifts parallel to the plan profile grade over the full width of the roadway .
Construct each lift of material using uniform soil .
Protect structures during placement of embankments .
Place granular materials in the uppermost portion of the subgrade .
Excavate stockpile and place topsoil as required by the contract .
Obtain written permission from the Engineer before removing topsoil or granular material from the project .
Embankment materials placed on the road core may not increase the moisture content of the underlying material beyond the specified limit Maximum lift thicknesses are controlled by the capability of the equipment to uniformly compact the entire lift in accordance with the following For all areas except for structural backfill the Engineer will restrict lift thickness to no greater than in loose thickness when uniform results are not achieved .
For structural backfill the maximum lift thickness is in compacted in loose thickness .
The Engineer may allow thicker lifts over saturated foundation soils .
The top of the thicker lift must be at least ft. below the grading grade .
Uniformly blend the entire thickness of each lift before testing moisture content and compaction .
Disc soils with greater than percent passing the No .
sieve. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Stagger construction traffic uniformly over the full width of the roadway embankment .
Remove snow ice and frozen soils from road core before placing embankment .
Use embankment material in the road core with particle sizes no larger than specified in Table Table Maximum Particle Size in Road Core Depth from Grading Grade Maximum Particle Size Inches in ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. from a nonplastic structure ft. from a plastic structure Areas where piling is to be placed Remove surcharges as directed by the contract .
Install settlement plates if required by the contract .
Do not disturb settlement plates .
F Compacting Embankments Maintain moisture content during compaction per Table .
Correct the moisture in areas represented by failing tests before testing the compaction .
Compaction tests taken in areas represented by failing moisture tests are not valid .
Meeting the requirements of density for the specified density method is equivalent to meeting the requirements for the penetration index method .
Uniformly compact each lift of the road core For materials not meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials to the specified density requirements per .. F. the quality compaction requirements per .. F. and the LWD requirements of .. F. For materials meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials to the specified density requirements per .. F. the quality compaction requirements per .. F. the penetration index PI requirements per .. F. and the LWD requirements of .. F. Compact all roadway embankment outside of the road core to the quality compaction requirements per .. F ..
Compact the entire length and width of each lift with a roller .
Construction traffic does not replace the rolling requirement .
Compaction requirements on swamp backfills start when the road core embankment is ft. above the water elevation at the time of construction operations .
The Engineer may waive mechanical compaction requirements on embankment containing predominately rock .
Compact soils around structures with appropriate equipment or hand methods to prevent damage to adjacent structures .
Correct or replace materials in areas represented by a failing test .
Maintain the required compaction until the next layer is placed .
F. Specified Density Compact to meet the requirements of Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Specified Density Requirements Embankment Location Required Compaction Relative Density ft Below Grading Grade of Road Core trails or sidewalks for nongranular materials and for all depths of subgrade preparation and granular materials Minimum ft Below Grading Grade of Road Core trails or sidewalks for nongranular materials Minimum Within an excavation trench and backfill of structures Structural Excavations and Backfills for all depths both within and out of road core .
Minimum See plan sheets for modifications note especially compaction requirements directly beneath pipes where no compaction may be required .
F. Quality Compaction Compact each lift until there is no evidence of consolidation during compaction or under traffic with no Pumping vertical displacement of the top surface of the compacted layer not directly under the vehicle tire Reaction a movement back to a former or less advanced condition .
Yielding giving under pressure flexible Cracking cracking of material on visible surface Lateral movement sideways movement of the top surface F. Penetration Index PI Compact the entire lift to achieve a dynamic cone penetration index DPI value per Table .
Table Maximum Allowable Penetration for DCP Grading Number Moisture Content Maximum Allowable DPI mmblow Maximum Allowable Seat .
. . No Requirement .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . As determined by Form GB Percent of dry weight .
Note that a moisture test is not required if the material meets the toughest requirements for the Grading Number .
F. Light Weight Deflectometer LWD Method Compact the entire lift to achieve the LWD target value as required per the LWD procedure for in the Grading and Base Manual .
G Agency Quality Assurance QA Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
Note Test for moisture control per .. B. if required by the Schedule of Materials Control .
G. Material Testing .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Perform the following QA tests Gradation Crushing Aggregate Quality and Bitumen content using procedure in the Laboratory Manual .
Sample the granular materials from the road core after spreading but before compaction .
Select crushing aggregate quality and bitumen samples using the random sampling method in the Grading and Base manual additional samples and tests may be taken to delineate visually indicated material failures .
Select gradation samples from locations that are at risk of not meeting the specification requirements .
G. Compaction Testing Test for compaction using Quality compaction and specified density or the LWD for materials not meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials or Quality compaction and specified density or granular penetration index or the LWD for materials meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials .
Test for compaction in areas with the greatest rutting or deflection and near structures and in an area at least foot from an unconfined edge .
Correct any area represented by a failing test .
Perform additional tests in areas with the greatest rutting or deflection .
For clean granular materials with less than passing the sieve the Engineer may elect to only use the Quality Compaction method .. F .. Use the specified density method for virgin materials only .
The following method may be used in lieu of point testing penetration index specified density or LWD for material meeting .. B .
Select Grading Material when the material thickness is or less and when not adjacent to Structures per Definitions .
The Engineer may elect with the concurrence of the Contractor to have the Contractor test roll per Test Rolling material meeting the requirements of .. B .
Select Granular Material in lieu of point compaction testing .
If this method is adapted the Contractor would be required to first place of base on top of the material meeting .. B. prior to test rolling .
For areas failing test rolling the Contractor would be required to remove the base and recompact the material meeting .. B. then place the base back and retest roll .
There is no additional compensation to the Contractor if this method is adapted .
Additionally the material meeting .. B. is not accepted until acceptable test rolling has occurred .
G. Test Rolling Observe and document all test rolling per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract .
H Finishing Operations Shape and maintain the roadway core to the required grade and cross section and within the tolerance in accordance with .. E Tolerances until the next layer is placed .
Perform earthwork finishing and topsoil placement operations concurrently to allow timely completion of erosion control items .
Shape and maintain disturbed areas outside the road core to final grade prior to placing erosion control .
Scarify the surface to a minimum depth of in before placing topsoil .
Complete soil preparation erosion control and turf establishment as required by Soil Preparation and Establishing Turf and Controlling Erosion .
I Disposition of Excavated Material All surplus materials become the property of the Contractor .
Dispose of these materials in accordance with a disposal plan approved by the Engineer .
The disposal plan must comply with all applicable environmental regulations permit requirements and Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures .
Disposal of materials before acceptance of the disposal plan is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
J Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. . Minnesota Standard Specifications K Geotextile Requirements Submit the proposed construction sequence for geotextile and fill placement to the Engineer for review at least days prior to beginning of this element of construction .
Place geotextiles if required in the plan or if directed by the Engineer .
Prepare a smooth surface free of stones sticks or other debris or irregularities that may puncture or tear the geotextile .
Unless otherwise directed or approved by the Engineer place the geotextile with the highest strength direction usually the machine or roll direction oriented in the direction of the greatest expected field stress this will usually be at right angles to the centerline of the construction .
If multiple pieces of geotextile are required field or factory sew adjacent strips with the seams meeting the strength as specified in .B .
Use a double spool machine capable of sewing a Federal Type locking stitch .
Sow a flat J or butterfly seam type using thread with a minimum strength of strength of pounds with rows of stitching and stitches per inch and consistent with achieving the required seam strength and as recommended by the geotextile manufacturer .
Approved adhesive listed on the MnDOT approvedqualified products list may be used in lieu of sewing for Types and geotextiles .
The approved list for adhesives is found under the geosynthetic heading .
Install per the Adhesive Seams Guidelines found on the geosyntheticadhesive seams links on the MnDOT approvedqualified products list .
Secure the geotextile so that it is not displaced during subsequent construction .
Permit no traffic or construction equipment to operate directly on the geotextile .
Repair any damaged geotextile to the satisfaction of the Engineer by patching and sewing .
Place fill onto the fabric in uniform lifts as required by the applicable specification but in no case exceed inches .
Use fill material as shown in the plan or as directed by the Engineer .
Use granular materials for placement from feet above water level and below . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Excavation Material The Engineer will measure and calculate excavated material quantities according to Measurement of Quantities .
Quantities are limited to measurements within specified construction limits and variances authorized by the Engineer .
The Engineer will measure excavated quantities by excavated volume EV .
The Engineer will take measurements to determine the limits of material classifications during excavation .
A .
Rock Excavation The Engineer will include the following in the measurement for rock excavation Overbreakage if the plane of the bottom of the excavation falls within a layer or stratum of rock in overbreak allowance outside the grading section or as indicated in the plans and in measured horizontally overbreak allowance outside the backslopes for hard rock types .
The Engineer will not provide an allowance for overbreak of presplit backslopes .
B Borrow Material The Engineer will measure borrow material quantities by volume in accordance with Measurement of Quantities .
The Engineer will deduct borrow quantities caused by excavation beyond the Contract limits .
The Engineer will deduct borrow quantities caused by placing embankment beyond the Contract limits .
The Engineer will measure all borrow quantities by compacted volume CV .
C Geotextiles Measurement will be made by the number of square yards of installed geotextile .
No allowance will be made for seams or overlaps .
D Stabilizing Aggregate The Engineer will measure Stabilizing Aggregate quantities by compacted volume CV . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for accepted quantities of Excavation and Embankment items includes the costs of production testing placement drying watering and compaction. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A Stabilizing Aggregate The contract cubic yard price for Stabilizing Aggregate includes the cost of production testing compaction and placement .
B Geotextiles The Contract unit price for geotextiles includes the cost of providing placing seaming or gluing testing anchoring and any needed repairs .
In the absence of contract unit price and a quantity less the square yards the Department will pay .
per square yard for Type Geotextile .
For a quantity greater than square yards or for any other geotextile other than Type the Department will pay for Geotextile as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
C Borrow Materials The contract unit price for borrow materials includes the cost of source preparation excavation testing delivery placement compaction and final finishing .
Payment for necessary site preparation and restoration from stipulated sources will be compensated separately or as per .
Extra Work in the absence of a payment provision .
The Department will pay the contract unit prices of both the excavation and borrow contract item for excess material used as a borrow item .
D Excavated Materials The contract unit price for excavated materials includes the cost of excavation testing final placement construction of steps in existing slopes and disposal .
D. Channel and Pond Excavation The Department will pay an additional .
per cubic yard when the Engineer reclassifies Common Excavation to Channel and Pond Excavation .
D. Rock Excavation The Department will pay an additional .
per cubic yard when the Engineer reclassifies Common Excavation Subgrade or Channel and Pond Excavation to Rock Excavation .
The Department can only apply this price adjustment if the contract does not contain Rock Excavation and can not exceed cu .
yd .
D. Rock Channel Excavation The Department will pay an additional .
per cubic yard when the Engineer reclassifies Channel and Pond Excavation to Rock Channel Excavation .
The Department can only apply this price adjustment if the contract does not contain Rock Channel Excavation and can not exceed cu .
yd .
D. Muck Excavation The Department will pay for muck excavation deeper than the depth shown on the plans in accordance with Table .
Table Price Adjustments for Additional Muck Excavation Depth below natural surface Compensation ft. ft. Muck Excavation Contract Unit Price ft. ft. Muck Excavation Contract Unit Price plus .
per cubic yard ft. ft. Muck Excavation Contract Unit Price plus .
per cubic yard ft .
Negotiated Price NOTE These price adjustments are payment in full for all additional costs incurred .
Exception Compensation for additional Muck Excavation may be subject to the provisions of Contract Revisions .
E Subgrade Preparation The cost for subgrade preparation under .. C is incidental unless there is a pay item for Subgrade Preparation .
F Blank G Partial Payment Withholdings The Department will withhold payment in accordance with Soil Preparation for erodible surfaces .
H Topsoil Borrow The Department will pay for topsoil borrow in accordance with Soil Preparation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications I Water The cost of water used for compaction is incidental to embankment contract items .
J Monetary Price Adjustments Granular Materials The Engineer may allow the Contractor to accept a monetary price adjustment instead of correcting failing granular material using granular monetary price adjustment tables found on the Grading and Base website .
The Department will assess a monetary price adjustment for each failing aggregate quality crushing gradation and bitumen content test result .
The maximum monetary price adjustment is .
The Department will apply the monetary price adjustment against the entire quantity represented by the failing test .
K Contract Item Schedule The Department will pay for excavation and embankment on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Geotextile Fabric Type square yard .
Common Excavation cubic yard .
Rock Excavation cubic yard .
Muck Excavation cubic yard .
Subgrade Excavation cubic yard .
Channel and Pond Excavation cubic yard .
Rock Channel Excavation cubic yard .
Granular Borrow cubic yard .
Select Granular Borrow cubic yard .
Common Borrow cubic yard .
Stabilizing Aggregate cubic yard .
Stabilizing Aggregate ton Notes Specify Type or .
Specify basis of measure EV LV SV or CV .
See .
and .
Specify basis of percent modification e.g .
etc .
EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENT COMPACTED VOLUME METHOD .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of excavating and placing embankment .
A Definitions A .
Road Core The road core is the area below the grading grade to the bottom of the excavation and between the following For embankment heights ft. from the grading grade point of intersections P.I.s with a VH slope and For embankment heights ft. from the grading grade point of intersections P.I.s with a ½ VH slope .
A. Grading Grade Grading grade is the bottom of the aggregate base .
A .
Top of Subgrade The top of the subgrade is the surface of material immediately beneath the granular material .
If there is no granular layer then the top of subgrade is the Grading Grade .
A. Optimum Moisture Content The optimum moisture content is determined by the Moisture Density Test Method Proctor or OnePoint Proctor Method or Estimated Optimum Moisture Content Form GB .
A .
Maximum Density Maximum density is the maximum density determined by the Moisture Density Test Method Proctor test in the Grading and Base Manual. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Select Grading Material Select grading materials are all mineral soils found in the Triaxial Chart in the Grading and Base Manual excluding silt .
Silt is defined as soils containing or more siltsized particles .
Marl and organic soils are also excluded .
A. Granular Materials Granular materials meet the requirements of .. B .. A. NonStructural Grading Materials NonStructural grading materials are all mineral soils excess topsoil and organic soils capable of supporting construction equipment .
A .
Uniform Soils Uniform soils have the same soil class per the Triaxial Chart in the Grading and Base Manual and have similar color moisture content and performance characteristics .
A. Organic Soils Organic soils contain percent organic content .
A. Geotextiles for Separation A geotextile used for separation at the locations shown in the plan or as directed by the Engineer .
Geotextiles provide separation between the fill and underlying softer soils prevent mixing provide stability during compaction provide reinforcement and minimize differential movement. . MATERIALS A Excavation Material The Engineer will classify the excavation using the following categories A .
Common Excavation Material not classified in any other category .
A. Subgrade Excavation All excavation in the road core below a paved surface concrete bituminous and all other stabilized bituminous surfaces as defined in Removing Pavement And Miscellaneous Structures excluding rock muck channel or rock channel excavation .
A .
Rock Excavation Material that requires drilling blasting or ripping before excavation .
This includes boulders and other detached rock larger than cu .
yd .
A. Muck Excavation The removal of organic soils as defined in .. A. Organic Soils and other unstable soils as designated by the plan and below the natural ground level of marshes swamps or bogs regardless of the moisture content .
Muck excavation is limited to areas over which the roadway embankment or a structure is to be constructed .
A .
Channel and Pond Excavation Material from channel changes waterways and ponds outside of the roadway embankment not classified as rock channel excavation .
A .
Rock Channel Excavation Material classified as rock excavation from channel changes and waterways outside of the roadway embankment .
A. Topsoil Excavation All excavation material taken from the top of an exposed layer of soil that supports vegetation and is salvaged stockpiled and used in accordance with Soil Preparation .
B Embankment Material Provide embankment material meeting the specifications in Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Embankment Material Specifications Material Specification Common Embankment .. A .
Select Grading Material Granular Embankment .. B. Granular Material Select Granular Embankment .. B .
Select Granular Material Slope Dressing Topsoil Material Materials obtained by the Contractor from sources outside the roadway must comply with Source of Supply and Quality and with Natural Material Sources .
C Geotextiles Geotextiles conforming to Geotextiles .
D Stabilizing Aggregate Aggregate meeting the requirements of .. C. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General For road core embankment meet the requirements of select grading material per .. A .. Nonstructural grading materials per .. A. may be used as embankment outside the road core .
All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Perform excavation and embankment operations within the plan excavation limits as required by the contract .
Before beginning excavation and embankment operations comply with the requirements of Clearing and Grubbing .
Comply with the erodible surface requirements of Soil Preparation .
Maintain drainage in excavations and embankment operations at all times .
Provide and maintain temporary drainage facilities until the permanent facilities are complete and operational .
Provide and maintain temporary preparation and erosion control on embankment and stockpiles until finishing operations per .. H are complete .
Repair or replace settlement plates damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
Protect structures during construction operations .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations .
Excess materials from within the excavation limits shown on the plans that meet the specified requirements can be used by the Contractor for embankment items shown on the plans .
These excess materials must comply with Use of Materials Found on the Project .
If the plans show a contract pay item for stabilizing aggregate place it in accordance with Aggregate Base .
Material generated from the specified excavations on the Project may be utilized in the embankment sections where applicable if the material meets the specifications of the Contract .
B Contractor Quality Control QC Testing Perform Contractor QC testing and submit all required forms if required in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Submit results to the Engineer within one business day after sampling .
Test corrected areas that fail either QC or Quality Assurance QA Testing .
Submit to the Engineer the following items a preliminary Grading and Base Report GB required before work commences a final Grading and Base Report GB required within two weeks of completion of project and a weekly summary report of tests completed and retests of failing materials GB required the first working day of the following week. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Aggregate Certification and Aggregate Testing Certify granular materials on Form GB .
Attach any required aggregate test results to Form GB .
Material placed without certifications is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Gradation quality and crushing testing are only required for .
Material On Hand .
B. Moisture Control Determine the optimum moisture content .
Test for the moisture content in areas that appear least likely to meet specifications .
Determine the moisture content during compaction using test methods listed in the Grading and Base Manual or by alternate methods approved by the Engineer .
Meet the moisture content requirements listed in Table .
Table Moisture Content Requirements For Compaction Requirements Relative Moisture Content Requirements Minimum of of maximum density Minimum of of maximum density Quality Compaction Penetration Index Method As determined on form GB Correct for moisture content in areas represented by failing moisture tests before testing the compaction .
Compaction tests taken in areas represented by failing moisture tests are not valid .
Note that optimum moisture content determination tests and moisture tests during compaction are required for all compaction requirements including quality compaction LWD penetration index and specified density .
B. Proctor Tests The Contractor uses the Departments proctor test results for optimum moisture determination .
B .
Test Rolling Test roll per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract the top surface of nongranular subgrade and the top of any granular surface not meeting the requirements of .. B. per using the test roller as specified in the Contract .
If no test roller is specified use test roller TR .
C Preparation of Embankment Foundation When slopes are steeper than VH construct steps before placing embankment material .
Construct the steps with a minimum width of in and a maximum height of inches .
Ensure the foundation area drains freely .
Compact the bottom of the excavation according to Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Required Compaction for Bottom of Excavation Excavation Depth Below Grading Grade Material Type Required Compaction All depths Structure Backfill NonGranular of maximum density LWD and Quality Compaction All depths Structure Backfill Granular of maximum density LWD Penetration Index and Quality Compaction in Non Granular of maximum density LWD and Quality Compaction in Granular of maximum density LWD Penetration Index and Quality Compaction in Non Granular of maximum density or passes of a roller .
in Granular of maximum density LWD Penetration Index and Quality Compaction Excavation below the planned subgrade may be subject to Contract Revisions Use a pad foot roller weighing at least lb .
The Engineer may waive the four pass requirement if the subgrade will not support the roller or direct the Contractor to repair the subgrade .
Repairs are subject to .
Extra Work .
Remove surfacing and excavate an existing road core in accordance with the Contract .
Then perform subgrade preparation on the excavated portion and the new roadcore in accordance with Subgrade Preparation before placing new embankment material .
D Excavating Operations Obtain the Engineers written approval before excavating beyond the limits and elevations established by the contract .
Remove rock outcroppings from within the slope lines and to the elevations shown on the plans .
Remove loosened rock from the backslopes .
Provide drainage for the shoulder slopes .
Do not leave undrainable depressions .
Presplit rock back slopes steeper than VH .
Control blasting operations to eliminate flying rock or debris .
Excavation below the planned subgrade to correct unstable conditions may be subject to Contract Revisions E Placing Embankment Materials Place embankments in uniform lifts parallel to the plan profile grade over the full width of the roadway .
Construct each lift of material using uniform soil .
Protect structures during placement of embankments .
Place granular materials in the uppermost portion of the subgrade .
Excavate stockpile and place topsoil as required by the contract .
Obtain written permission from the Engineer before removing topsoil or granular material from the project .
Embankment materials placed on the road core may not increase the moisture content of the underlying material beyond the specified limit .
Maximum lift thicknesses are controlled by the capability of the equipment to uniformly compact the entire lift in accordance with the following For areas except structural backfill the Engineer will restrict lift thickness to no greater than in loose thickness when uniform results are not achieved .
For structural backfill the maximum lift thickness is in compacted in loose thickness .
The Engineer may allow thicker lifts over saturated foundation soils .
The top of the thicker lift must be at least ft. below the grading grade .
Uniformly blend the entire thickness of each lift before testing moisture content and compaction .
Disc soils with greater than percent passing the No .
sieve .
Stagger construction traffic uniformly over the full width of the roadway embankment. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Remove snow ice and frozen soils from road core before placing embankment .
Use embankment material in the road core with particle sizes no larger than specified in Table Table Maximum Particle Size in Road Core Depth from Grading Grade Max .
Particle Size Inches in ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. ft. from a nonplastic structure ft. from a plastic structure Areas where piling is to be placed Remove surcharges as directed by the contract .
Install settlement plates if required by the contract .
Do not disturb settlement plates .
F Compacting Embankments Maintain moisture content during compaction per Table .
Correct the moisture in areas represented by failing tests before testing the compaction .
Compaction tests taken in areas represented by failing moisture tests are not valid .
Meeting the requirements of density for the specified density method is equivalent to meet the requirements for the penetration index method .
Uniformly compact each lift of the road core For materials not meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials to the specified density requirements per .. F. the quality compaction requirements per .. F. and the LWD requirements of .. F. For materials meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials to the specified density requirements per .. F. the quality compaction requirements per .. F. the penetration index PI requirements per .. F. and the LWD requirements of .. F. Compact all roadway embankment outside of the road core to the quality compaction requirements per .. F ..
Compact the entire length and width of each lift with a roller .
Construction traffic does not replace the rolling requirement .
Compaction requirements on swamp backfills start when the road core embankment is ft. above the water elevation at the time of construction operations .
The Engineer may waive mechanical compaction requirements on embankment containing predominately rock .
Compact soils around structures with appropriate equipment or hand methods to prevent damage to adjacent structures .
Correct or replace materials in areas represented by a failing test .
Maintain the required compaction until the next layer is placed .
F. Specified Density Compact to meet the requirements of Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Specified Density Requirements Embankment Location Required Compaction Relative Density ft Below Grading Grade of Road Core trails or sidewalks for non granular materials and for all depths of subgrade preparation and granular materials Minimum ft Below Grading Grade of Road Core trails or sidewalks for all non granular materials Minimum Within an excavation trench and backfill of structures Structural Excavations and Backfills for all depths both within and out of road core .
Minimum See plan sheets for modifications note especially compaction requirements directly beneath pipes where no compaction may be required .
F. Quality Compaction Compact each lift until there is no evidence of consolidation during compaction or under traffic with no Pumping vertical displacement of the top surface of the compacted layer not directly under the vehicle tire .
Reaction a movement back to a former or less advanced condition .
Yielding giving under pressure flexible Cracking cracking of material on visible surface Lateral movement sideways movement of the top surface F. Penetration Index PI Compact the entire lift to achieve a dynamic cone penetration index DPI value per Table .
Table Maximum Allowable Penetration for DCP Grading Number Moisture Content Maximum Allowable DPI mmblow Maximum Allowable Seat .
. . No Requirement .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . As determined by Form GB Percent of dry weight .
Note that a moisture test is not required if the material meets the toughest requirements for the Grading Number .
F. Light Weight Deflectometer LWD Method Compact the entire lift to achieve an LWD target value as required per the LWD procedure for in the Grading and Base Manual .
G Agency Quality Assurance Testing QA Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
G. Material Testing Perform the following QA tests .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Gradation Crushing Aggregate Quality and Bitumen content using procedure in the Laboratory Manual .
Sample the granular materials from the road core after spreading but before compaction .
Select crushing aggregate quality and bitumen samples using the random sampling method in the Grading and Base manual additional samples and tests may be taken to delineate visually indicated material failures .
Select gradation samples from locations that are at risk of not meeting the specification requirements .
G. Compaction Testing Test for compaction using Quality compaction and specified density or the LWD for materials not meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials or Quality compaction and specified density or granular penetration index or LWD for materials meeting the requirements of .. B. Granular Materials .
Test for compaction in areas with the greatest rutting or deflection and near structures and in an area at least foot from an unconfined edge .
Correct any area represented by a failing test .
Perform additional tests in areas with the greatest rutting or deflection .
For clean granular materials with less than passing the sieve the Engineer may elect to only use the Quality Compaction method .. F .. Use the specified density method for virgin materials only .
The following method may be used in lieu of point testing penetration index specified density or LWD for material meeting .. B .
Select Grading Material when the material thickness is or less and when not adjacent to Structures per Definitions .
The Engineer may elect with the concurrence of the Contractor to have the Contractor test roll per Test Rolling material meeting the requirements of .. B .
Select Granular Material in lieu of point compaction Testing .
If this method is adapted the Contractor would be required to first place of base on top of the material meeting .. B. prior to test rolling .
For areas failing test rolling the Contractor would be required to remove the base and recompact the material meeting .. B. then place the base back and retest roll .
There is no additional compensation to the Contractor if this method is adapted .
Additionally the material meeting .. B. is not accepted until acceptable test rolling has occurred .
G. Test Rolling Observe and document all test rolling per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract .
H Finishing Operations Shape and maintain the roadway core to the required grade and cross section and within the tolerance in accordance with .. E Tolerances until the next layer is placed .
Perform earthwork finishing and topsoil placement operations concurrently to allow timely completion of erosion control items .
Shape and maintain disturbed areas outside the road core to final grade prior to placing erosion control .
Scarify the surface to a minimum depth of in before placing topsoil .
Complete soil preparation erosion control and turf establishment as required by Soil Preparation and Establishing Turf and Controlling Erosion .
I Disposition of Excavated Material All surplus materials become the property of the Contractor .
Dispose of these materials in accordance with a disposal plan approved by the Engineer .
The disposal plan must comply with all applicable environmental regulations permit requirements and Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures .
Disposal of materials before acceptance of the disposal plan is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
J Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. K Geotextile Requirements Submit the proposed construction sequence for geotextile and fill placement to the Engineer for review at least days prior to beginning of this element of construction .
Place geotextiles if required in the plan or if directed by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Prepare a smooth surface free of stones sticks or other debris or irregularities that may puncture or tear the geotextile .
Unless otherwise directed or approved by the Engineer place the geotextile with the highest strength direction usually the machine or roll direction oriented in the direction of the greatest expected field stress .
This will usually be at right angles to the centerline of the construction .
If multiple pieces of geotextile are required field or factory sew adjacent strips with the seams meeting the strength as specified in .B .
Use a double spool machine capable of sewing a Federal Type locking stitch .
Sow a flat J or butterfly seam type using thread with a minimum strength of strength of pounds with rows of stitching and stitches per inch and consistent with achieving the required seam strength and as recommended by the geotextile manufacturer .
Approved adhesive per the MnDOT approvedqualified products list may be used in lieu of sewing for Types and geotextiles .
The approved list for adhesives is found under the geosynthetic heading .
Install per the Adhesive Seams Guidelines found on the geosyntheticadhesive seams links on the MnDOT approved products list .
Secure the geotextile so that it is not displaced during subsequent construction .
Permit no traffic or construction equipment to operate directly on the geotextile .
Repair any damaged geotextile to the satisfaction of the Engineer by patching and sewing .
Place fill onto the fabric in uniform lifts as required by the applicable specification but in no case exceed inches .
Use fill material as shown in the plan or as directed by the Engineer .
Use granular materials for placement from feet above water level and below . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT No shrinkage factors have been applied or will be applied to any Excavation or Embankment items .
The Contractor is responsible to fully construct the embankment sections as specified in the plan and Special Provisions .
A Excavation Material The Engineer will measure and calculate excavated material quantities according to Measurement of Quantities .
Quantities are limited to measurements within specified construction limits and variances authorized by the Engineer .
The Engineer will measure excavated quantities by excavated volume EV .
The Engineer will take measurements to determine the limits of material classifications during excavation .
A .
Rock Excavation The Engineer will include the following in the measurement for rock excavation Overbreakage if the plane of the bottom of the excavation falls within a layer or stratum of rock in overbreak allowance outside the grading section or as indicated in the plans and in measured horizontally overbreak allowance outside the backslopes for hard rock types .
The Engineer will not provide an allowance for overbreak of presplit backslopes .
B Embankment Material The Engineer will measure embankment material quantities by volume in accordance with Measurement of Quantities .
The Engineer will measure all embankment quantities by compacted volume CV .
C Geotextiles Measurement will be made of the number of square yards of installed geotextile .
No allowance will be made for seams or overlaps .
D Stabilizing Aggregate The Engineer will measure Stabilizing Aggregate quantities by compacted volume CV . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT No separate payment will be made for obtaining grading materials from off the Project nor will any payment be made for disposing of unsuitable or excess material .
The contract unit price for accepted quantities of Excavation and Embankment Compacted Volume Method items includes the costs of production testing placement drying watering and compaction .
A Stabilizing Aggregate The contract cubic yard price for Stabilizing Aggregate includes the cost of production testing compaction and placement. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Geotextiles The Contract unit price for geotextiles includes the cost of providing placing seaming or gluing testing anchoring and any needed repairs .
In the absence of contract unit price and a quantity less the square yards the Department will pay .
per square yard for Type Geotextile .
For a quantity greater than square yards or for any other geotextile other than Type the Department will pay for Geotextile as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
C Embankment Materials The contract unit price for embankment materials includes the cost of testing delivery placement compaction and final finishing .
Payment for necessary site preparation and restoration from stipulated sources will be compensated separately or as per .
Extra Work in the absence of a payment provision .
D Excavated Materials The contract unit price for excavated materials includes the cost of excavation testing construction of steps in existing slopes and disposal .
D. Channel and Pond Excavation The Department will pay an additional .
per cubic yard when the Engineer reclassifies Common Excavation to Channel and Pond Excavation .
D. Rock Excavation The Department will pay an additional .
per cubic yard when the Engineer reclassifies Common Excavation Subgrade or Channel and Pond Excavation to Rock Excavation .
The Department can only apply this price adjustment if the contract does not contain Rock Excavation and can not exceed cu .
yd .
D. Rock Channel Excavation The Department will pay an additional .
per cubic yard when the Engineer reclassifies Channel and Pond Excavation to Rock Channel Excavation .
The Department can only apply this price adjustment if the contract does not contain Rock Channel Excavation and can not exceed cu .
yd .
D. Muck Excavation The Department will pay for muck excavation deeper than the depth shown on the plans in accordance with Table .
Table Price Adjustments for Additional Muck Excavation Depth below natural surface Compensation ft. ft. Muck Excavation Contract Unit Price ft. ft. Muck Excavation Contract Unit Price plus .
per cubic yard ft. ft. Muck Excavation Contract Unit Price plus .
per cubic yard ft .
Negotiated Price NOTE These price adjustments are payment in full for all additional costs incurred .
Exception Compensation for additional Muck Excavation may be subject to the provisions of Contract Revisions .
E Subgrade Preparation The cost for subgrade preparation under .. C is incidental unless there is a pay item for Subgrade Preparation .
F Blank G Partial Payment Withholdings The Department will withhold payment in accordance with Soil Preparation for erodible surfaces .
H Blank I Water The cost of water used for compaction is incidental to embankment contract items .
J Monetary Price Adjustments Granular Materials The Engineer may allow the Contractor to accept a monetary price adjustment instead of correcting failing granular material using granular monetary price adjustment tables found on the Grading and Base website. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will assess a monetary price adjustment for each failing aggregate quality crushing gradation and bitumen content test result .
The maximum monetary price adjustment is .
The Department will apply the monetary price adjustment against the entire quantity represented by the failing test .
K Contract Item Schedule The Department will pay for excavation and embankment on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Geotextile Fabric Type square yard .
. . . . . . . . . . Excavation Common Excavation Rock Excavation Muck Excavation Subgrade Excavation Channel and Pond Excavation Rock Channel Granular Embankment CV Select Granular Embankment CV Common Embankment CV Stabilizing Aggregate CV Stabilizing Aggregate cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard cubic yard Ton Notes Specify Type or .
Specify basis of percent modification e.g .
etc .
TEST ROLLING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and operating equipment to test roll roadway embankments .
A Definitions A .
Strip Strip is the area covered by the rolling tire. . EQUIPMENT Provide one or both test rollers as specified in the Contract meeting the following applicable requirements A. Pneumatic Tires for Test Roller TR Two pneumatic tires spaced at least ft. apart center to center Tire sizes of or and Inflate tires to psi .
A. Pneumatic Tires for Test Roller TR Tire width maximum of inches for the front axle tires and a maximum of inches for the rear axle tires and Inflate tires to within psi of tire or vehicle manufacturers maximum psi rating .
The minimum psi rating must be psi .
B .
Load for TR Provide a mass load on each tire from .
ton to .
ton .
B .
Load for TR Provide a tandem truck with a minimum legal capacity of pounds and a minimum front axle capacity of pounds .
Load the truck such that the front axle is loaded to a minimum of pounds and the total weight of the truck and load is a minimum of pounds .
C Deflection Measurement Measure deflection from the top of the unrolled embankment to bottom of the rut at the time of rolling .
Mark failing areas with an approved deflection measurement device approved by the Engineer set to measure a depth per .B and mounted over the center of the front axle and offset inches from the outside edge of each tire .
The Engineer may allow alternate deflection recording devices. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Do not cross over a bridge using test roller TR loaded to greater than pounds gross weight additionally provide a blister of fill of at least in depth when test rolling with a loaded TR test roller over a structure other than a bridge .
Protect all structures from damage that may be caused by the test roller .
All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Test roll on the layer as specified in the Contract .
Use TR on Aggregate Base and nonstabilized FullDepth Reclamation .
If a test roller is not designated in the Contract for Excavation and Embankment or use TR .
Construct the embankment surface to the design cross section and profile as per Subgrade Preparation .
For TR position the roller tongue parallel to the grade at the time of testing .
After test rolling repair and maintain the surface per Subgrade Preparation until placement of the next layer .
Test roll the entire length and width at the top of layers designated in the Contract from shoulder point of intersection to shoulder point of intersection or width of the subcut .
Roll the first strip at the PI roll subsequent passes with one wheel centered between the wheel paths of the previous pass until the entire surface is covered at approximately a four foot interval between the center of each pass .
Weigh the test roller at an independent certified scale facility and provide documentation to the Engineer .
Repair Structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
A Testing Requirements A .
General Make two passes over each strip covered by the tire width for nongranular materials and one pass over each strip covered by the tire for granular materials at an operating speed from .
mph to mph .
Granular materials are defined as meeting the requirements of .. B ..
Engineer is to observe testing from behind the roller and mark and record failing areas immediately .
The Engineer may require a layer be tested again if the next layer is not placed within the same construction season .
Keep roller parallel to grade when testing .
Correct areas that fail test rolling .
A .
Testing Requirements Specific Surface Preparation a Embankment surface Prepare the embankment surface within in of the design crosssection and profile .
b Base or nonstabilized full depth reclamation surface Perform test rolling prior to tolerancing .
c Compact surface with a smoothdrum compactor immediately prior to test rolling .
d Ensure the surface is free of marks tracks rutting or ridged material to prevent collection of false readings .
B Acceptance Requirements B .
Acceptance Requirements TR Meet the applicable requirement for or materials listed in Table for TR. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table TR Acceptance Criteria Maximum Deflection Granular NonGranular Materials Material Type Maximum Deflection Granular materials not covered by stabilizing materials in All other materials including granular materials covered by stabilizing materials .
in B .
Acceptance Requirements TR Meet the criteria listed in Table for TR and the criteria for quality compaction in .. F .. Table TR Acceptance Criteria Maximum Deflection Material Type Maximum Deflection Granular NonGranular Materials .
inches NonStabilized FullDepth Reclamation Aggregate Base .
inches C Testing Corrected Areas Repeat testing after all failing areas have been repaired .
The Engineer may waive repeat testing on corrected areas that are less than road stations in length .
D Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure test rolling by length for the entire width when it is listed as a contract item in the contract .
The Engineer will separately measure test rolling on each roadbed for divided highways .
All Test Rolling shall be combined into one quantity . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Test rolling on embankment constructed under this contract is incidental to the embankment base or full depth reclamation contract item unless it is listed as a separate contract item .
The Department will pay for all repairs to failing sections constructed under a previous contract in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will pay for test rolling embankment constructed under a previous contract based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Test Rolling road station SUBGRADE PREPARATION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of shaping mixing and compacting the subgrade as defined in . . MATERIALS BLANK .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
Scarify mix and compact the top in of the subgrade .
Correct areas represented by failing tests. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Excavation below the planned subgrade to correct unstable conditions may be subject to Contract Revisions .
B Contractor QC Testing Perform Contractor QC testing and submit all required forms if required in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Submit results to the Engineer within one business day after completion of test .
Test corrected areas that fail either QC or Quality Assurance QA Testing .
Submit to the Engineer the following items a preliminary Grading and Base Report GB required before work commences a final Grading and Base Report GB required within two weeks of completion of project and a weekly summary report of tests completed and retests of failing materials GB required the first working day of the following week .
B. Proctor Testing The Contractor uses the Departments proctor test results for optimum moisture determination .
B. Moisture Control During Placement If required by the Schedule of Materials Control determine the moisture content during compaction using test methods approved by the Engineer and provide daily QC testing results for the moisture content to the Engineer .
Maintain the moisture content during compaction between percent and percent of optimum moisture content .
C Density Test for compaction compliance per .
Achieve and maintain the compaction requirements until placement of the next Lift .
D Agency Quality Assurance Testing QA Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
The Engineer will test for compaction in areas with the greatest rutting or deflection .
Retest failing areas after correction .
Note Test for moisture control per .. B. if required by the Schedule of Materials Control .
E Tolerances Finish the surface of each layer within .
ft. above to .
ft. below the cross section shown on the plans before placing the next layer .
F Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure subgrade preparation by length along the centerline of the embankment .
The Engineer will separately measure work on each embankment on divided highways . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract road station price for Subgrade Preparation includes all costs of testing and subgrade preparation on embankment constructed as required by this contract .
Areas not represented by passing QC tests are unacceptable work per Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Department will pay for subgrade preparation on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Subgrade Preparation road station AGGREGATE SURFACING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of placing an aggregate wearing course on the roadway and shoulders. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS A Aggregate Provide the class of aggregate as required by the contract with the following exceptions Class with a minimum bitumen content of .
may be substituted for class .
Bituminous millings meeting a gradation of passing the .
sieve and passing the sieve may be used for the filletrollover outside of a paved shoulder. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
Construct aggregate surfacing in accordance with Aggregate Base .
Use the Quality Compaction Method specified in .. F ..
Maintain the moisture content at or above percent by dry weight during compaction .
A Contractor Quality Control QC Testing Comply with the QC requirements of .B Contractor Quality Control Testing except that no test rolling is required .
Comply with the Schedule of Materials Control .
B Agency Quality Assurance Testing QA Comply with the requirements of .. D Agency Quality Assurance Testing .
Use .. D.b Quality Compaction Method to verify compaction .
Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
C Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure the aggregate surfacing in accordance with Measurement of Quantities .
The Engineer will not make deductions for the mass or volume of water and admixtures .
Mass and Volume conversion tables are in the Grading and Base Manual . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for the accepted quantities of Aggregate Surfacing includes the costs of production testing placement watering or drying and compaction .
All aggregate surfacing placed before the Engineer accepts the Contractors certification is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer may allow the Contractor to accept a monetary price adjustment instead of correcting failing material in accordance with Table Table and The monetary price adjustment table for aggregate quality on the Grading and Base website .
The Department will assess a monetary price adjustment for each failing aggregate quality crushing gradation and bitumen content results .
For surfacing gradations used for shouldering that fail because they are too fine the Engineer may elect to accept the material without a monetary price adjustment if the material meets the engineering intent of the specification .
The maximum monetary price adjustment is .
The Department will apply the monetary price adjustment against the entire quantity represented by the failing tests .
The Department will pay for aggregate surfacing on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Aggregate Surfacing LV Class ___ cubic yard .
Aggregate Surfacing CV Class ___ cubic yard .
Aggregate Surface Class ____ ton .
Minnesota Standard Specifications EQUIPMENT RENTAL .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing laborers and operating equipment for work required by the contract directed by the Engineer and paid by the Department. . GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Provide equipment as approved by the Engineer .
Provide equipment with rubber tires or smooth street plates when operating on bituminous or concrete surfaces .
Provide towing equipment with sufficient power to tow equipment required by the contract and not damage the work .
SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS Provide rental equipment in accordance with the following specific requirements regarding type size capacity power or dimensions .
A Motor Grader Provide a selfpropelled motor grader with the following characteristics Pneumatictired wheels Powerassisted controls A mass of at least lb Moldboard at least ft long with a suitable cutting edge and A suitable scarifier .
B Dozer Provide a crawlertype tractor with at least hp at the tow bar and power assisted controls equipped with an angle or fixed dozer blade at least in wide .
When providing an angle blade ensure that the blade will adjust to an angle of degrees with the direction of travel of the tractor .
The Department will consider the dozer blade and tractor as a single unit .
C Scraper Provide scrapers meeting the following characteristics Carryall type scrapers mounted on pneumatictired wheels or Rotary type scrapers towed by a tractor of suitable size and Having a volumetric capacity as required by the contract that shall correspond with the manufacturers rated heaped capacity .
D Dragline Provide a fullrevolving type dragline equipped with a bucket of at least the size required by the contract .
Provide cu .
yd draglines with at least a ft boom and a working radius of at least ft .
Provide ½ cu .
yd draglines with at least an ft boom and a working radius of at least ft .
Provide draglines in other sizes with the boom length and working radius as required by the contract .
For swamp work provide one set of mats for each dragline .
Provide mats each with a length at least equal to twice the distance between the outside edges of the crawler treads .
Ensure the combined width of all the mats equals at least twice the bearing length of the crawler treads .
E Power Shovel Provide a fullrevolving crawlertype power shovel with a bucket in the size recommended by the manufacturer .
Provide the shovel in the size required by the contract in accordance with the bucket capacity .
F Tractor Provide a crawler type tractor with the power at the drawbar as required by the contract .
Measure the power in horsepower .
G PneumaticTired Roller Provide pneumatictired rollers meeting the following characteristics Compacting width of at least ft . Minnesota Standard Specifications Constructed to allow the gross mass to vary as directed by the Engineer from lb per in to lb per in of rolling width Tires arranged to obtain compaction over the full compacting width with each pass of the roller and Selfpropelled or provided with suitable tractive equipment unless otherwise required by the contract .
If a single tractive unit propels more than one roller the Engineer will count the combination as a single roller unit .
H Tamping Roller Provide a tamping roller meeting the following characteristics Consists of two sections each with a drum at least in in diameter and A gross mass and number of pads as approved by the Engineer .
I Blank J SteelWheeled Roller Provide a selfpropelled steelwheeled roller meeting the following characteristics A total mass of at least tons unless otherwise required by the contract Capable of reversing without backlash Equipped with spray attachments for moistening rolls on both the front and back and Either tandem type or threewheeled type unless otherwise required by the contract .
If using vibratory rollers use rollers that produce lb per in of width .
K Truck Provide a truck meeting the following characteristics A manufacturers rated capacity of at least .
ton A volumetric capacity of at least cubic yards A poweroperated hoist A end dump type metal dump box and A rear axle equipped with dual wheels and tires at least in wide in accordance with the manufacturers designated size .
L Rotary Tiller Provide a rotary tiller at least in wide and adjustable to depths up to in .
M Front End Loader Provide a crawler type or rubbertired front end loader meeting the following characteristics Equipped with a poweroperated loader bucket with the minimum struck capacity required by the contract Capable of excavating at least in deep below the bottom of the treads or tires and Capable of loading the excavated material on the trucks used for hauling .
N Disk Harrow Provide a disk harrow of sufficient size and mass to manipulate the soils to in deep as approved by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Equipment Hours The Engineer will measure rental of each unit of equipment by the number of hours of actual working time and necessary traveling time within the project .
B Common Laborer Hire The Engineer will measure common laborer hire by the hours of actual working time and necessary traveling time within the project . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract price per hour for equipment rental includes the cost of the use and operation of equipment the operators and any tractive equipment and required accessories .
The contract price per hour is subject to the requirements of this section for additional compensation if the Contractor is obligated to pay overtime wages for work performed on Sundays holidays or during overtime periods .
The contract price per hour for Common Laborers includes the cost of hand tools used by laborers .
The contract price per hour is subject to the requirements of this section for additional compensation if the Contractor is obligated to pay overtime wages for work on Sundays holidays or during overtime periods. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will only compensate the Contractor in addition to the Contract price per hour for equipment rental or common laborer hire for work performed during overtime periods or on Sundays or holidays if the work is directed by the Engineer .
If the Engineer directs the use of equipment or common laborers during overtime periods or on Sundays or holidays the Department will pay the Contractor only the increased wages that the Contractor is obligated to pay under the terms of wage agreements .
The Department will pay the increased wages to the Contractor by increasing the contract price per hour for the equipment or common laborers used by an amount equal to the difference between the normal hourly wage for straight time work and the overtime hourly wage actually paid the laborers for operating the equipment or performing the labor based on the Contractors payroll .
The contract price per hour for equipment rental includes the cost of supervision by the Contractor necessary to accomplish the work as directed by the Engineer .
The Department will provide payment for equipment rental on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Common Laborers hour .
Motor Grader hour .
___ cubic yard Dragline hour .
___ cubic yard Shovel hour .
___ cubic yard Scraper hour .
Dozer hour .
___ cubic yard Truck hour .
___ horsepower Tractor hour .
Rotary Tiller hour .
Disk Harrow hour .
___ cubic yard Front End Loader hour .
PneumaticTired Roller hour .
PneumaticTired Roller Tractor Drawn hour .
PneumaticTired Roller Self Propelled hour .
Tamping Roller hour .
___ ton SteelWheeled Roller hour APPLICATION OF WATER FOR DUST CONTROL .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and applying water to control dust created by the traveling public within the project as directed by the Engineer. . MATERIALS Provide reasonably clean water. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Use a water supply and equipment capable of applying the quantity of water required to abate dust and avoid unwarranted loss of water through evaporation absorption or drainage .
Apply the water at the time and in the quantity approved by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure water for payment by volume .
The Engineer may deduct payment for water wasted if the Contractor fails to coordinate the water application with other operations as directed by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for Water includes the cost of providing transporting and applying the water as directed by the Engineer .
The Department will only pay for water applied for dust control for the project as approved by the Engineer .
The Department considers the cost of water used for the following as included in the contract unit prices for the relevant contract pay items Water used for sprinkling Water used in the construction of concrete pavements Water used in the production or curing of concrete Water used to maintain plant life Water used in compacting soil and aggregate and Water used for dust control on Contractorselected haul roads detours or work sites outside of the project and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Water applied for dust control or pavement cleaning caused by the Contractors equipment and operations including abatement of nuisance dust for adjacent landowners and dust conditions detrimental to the safety of the traveling public as directed by the Engineer .
The Department will pay for water applied to aggregate surfaces for dust control caused by the traveling public on portions of the project open to traffic as directed or approved by the Engineer at a unit price of per gal in the absence of the Contract Pay Item ..
The Department will pay for application of water for dust control on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Water MGal APPLICATION OF CALCIUM CHLORIDE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of applying calcium chloride as a surface treatment or as an admixture while grading or placing aggregate base or surface courses. . MATERIALS A Calcium Chloride B Water Provide water meeting the water quality rules established by the State of Minnesota. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
A Surface Application Apply a uniform layer of dry or liquid calcium chloride following the rates listed in the Grading and Base Manual .
B Admixture Application Use one of the following calcium chloride application methods Mix the calcium chloride with the aggregate during aggregate production .
Use a separate conveyor or metering device to add calcium chloride to the aggregate .
Apply dry calcium chloride as a surface application and mix with the specified layer .
Apply calcium chloride solution as a surface application . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure dry calcium chloride by weight and calcium chloride solutions by volume . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for the application of water used with dry calcium chloride in accordance with Application of Water for Dust Control .
The Department will pay for the application of calcium chloride on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Calcium Chloride Solution gallon .
Calcium Chloride Type ___ Solution ton .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Base Construction AGGREGATE BASE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing placing and compacting aggregate base. . MATERIALS A Aggregate Provide the class of aggregate as required by the contract. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
A General Remove aggregate base placed under the contract that saturates subgrade soils and then dry and recompact the subgrade .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
Compact and shape the aggregate base to the plan dimensions before suspending operations .
B Contractor Quality Control QC Testing Perform Contractor QC testing and submit all required forms if required by the Schedule of Materials Control .
Certify materials on Form GB .
Attach any required aggregate test results to Form GB .
Submit results to the Engineer within one business day after sampling .
Submit to the Engineer the following items a preliminary Grading and Base Report GB required before work commences a final Grading and Base Report GB required within two weeks of completion of project and a weekly summary report of tests completed and retests of failing materials GB required the first working day of the following week .
Retest corrected base which fails either QC or Quality Assurance QA testing .
Correct failing material before placing the next lift and provide copies to the Engineer before QA testing .
If required by the Schedule of Materials Control test for the moisture content in areas that appear least likely to meet specifications .
Note that moisture tests during compaction are required for all compaction requirements including quality compaction LWD penetration index and specified density .
Test roll per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract the top surface per using test roller TR .
Gradation quality and crushing testing are only required for .
Material On Hand .
Provide the Engineer a copy of the test results on a daily basis .
C Placing and Compacting Ensure the underlying layer meets QC and QA requirements before the next layer is placed .
Maintain the moisture content per Table .
Table Moisture Required for Base Compaction Classification Moisture Content by dry weight Class and .
bitumen content Class Q and .
bitumen content Classes Q and .
bitumen content moisture content .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Ensure the aggregate material has a uniform consistency before compaction .
Place and compact lifts per Table .
Table Rollers Required for Compaction Base Lift Thickness Bitumen Content Required Rollers in Any Bitumen Content Use Pneumatic Rollers only in to in Bitumen Content .
Use both Vibratory and Pneumatic Rollers in to in Bitumen Content .
Use both Vibratory Pad Foot roller weighing at least lb .
and ton Pneumatic Roller Place and compact the base to support traffic while allowing no greater than ½ inch of surface displacement when measured using a straightedge .
Construct the aggregate layer to .
ft. of the profile and crosssection as required by the contract in accordance with Subgrade Preparation .
Maintain the compaction quality integrity and properties of the aggregate material in each lift until the next lift or layer is placed .
Uniformly compact each lift to meet the requirements of .. D .. a .. D .. b .. D .. c and .. D .. d. Correct blend and recompact material represented by failing tests .
D Agency Quality Assurance QA Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
Note Test for moisture control per .. B if required by the Schedule of Materials Control .
D. Gradation and Aggregate Quality Sampling and Testing Sample aggregates from the roadway after spreading but before compaction using the random sampling method in the Grading and Base Manual additional samples and tests may be taken to delineate visually indicated material failures .
Test the entire lot or area of corrected material with new random samples .
The Engineer will test materials for the contract item Stockpile Aggregates before delivery and stockpiling .
D. Compaction The Engineer will test for compaction in the areas with the greatest rutting or deflection and in an area at least foot from an unconfined edge .
The Engineer will perform a new test in corrected areas with the greatest rutting or deflection .
Test for compaction using quality compaction per .. D .. b and specified density per .. D .. a or penetration index per .. D .. c or LWD method per .. D .. d. D .. a Specified Density Method Use the specified density method on virgin aggregates only .
Verify by testing that each lift is compacted to at least percent of maximum density .
D .. b Quality Compaction Method Comply with the requirements of .. F .. D .. c Penetration Index Method Verify that each lift meets the penetration index and seating value per Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Penetration Index Method Maximum Seat and DPI Grading Number Moisture Content Maximum Allowable SEAT mm Maximum Allowable DPI mmblow Test Layer in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . As determined by Form GB Percent of dry weight .
If layer to be placed is thinner than the Test Layer use .. D .. b Quality Compaction Method .
Note When bitumen content is .
compact to achieve a penetration index value of mm and a seating value of mm as determined by Form GB .
Note that a moisture test is not required if the material meets the toughest requirements for the Grading Number .
D .. d Light Weight Deflectometer LWD Method Compact the entire lift to achieve an LWD target value as required per the LWD procedure for in the Grading and Base Manual .
D. Test Rolling Observe and document all test rolling per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract .
E Aggregate for the Contract Item Stockpile Aggregate Produce and certify the class of material required by the contract using form GB .
Deliver and stockpile certified material to the designated sites listed in the contract .
F Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure the aggregate base per Measurement of Quantities .
The Engineer will not deduct the mass or volume of water and admixtures .
Mass and volume conversion tables are in the Grading and Base Manual . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for the accepted quantities of Aggregate Base includes the costs of production testing placement watering or drying and compaction .
The contract unit price for the accepted quantities of Stockpile Aggregate includes the costs of production testing delivery and stockpiling at the designated site .
Aggregate base placed before the Engineer accepts the Contractors certification is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer may allow the Contractor to accept a monetary price adjustment instead of correcting failing material in accordance with .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Table and The monetary price adjustment table for aggregate base qualities on the Grading and Base website .
The Department will assess a monetary price adjustment for each failing aggregate quality crushing gradation and bitumen content results .
The maximum monetary price adjustment is .
The Department will apply the monetary price adjustment against the entire quantity represented by the failing tests .
For base or subbase gradations that fail because they are too coarse the Engineer may elect to accept the material without a monetary price adjustment if the material meets the engineering intent of the specification .
Table Aggregate Gradation Monetary Price Adjustment Schedule Based on Average of Two or More Samples Percent Passing Outside Specified Limits for Sieves Monetary Price Adjustment in ½ in in ¾ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Corrective action required Table Bitumen Content Monetary Price Adjustment Schedule Bitumen Content Composite Mixture Monetary Price Adjustment . . . . . . . . . . Corrective action required The Department will pay for aggregate base on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Aggregate Base CV Class ___ cubic yard .
Aggregate Base LV Class ___ cubic yard .
Stockpile Aggregate SV Class ___ cubic yard .
Stockpile Aggregate LV Class ___ cubic yard .
Aggregate Base Class ___ ton .
Stockpile Aggregate Class ___ ton DRAINABLE AGGREGATE BASE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing a drainable aggregate base on a finished base or filter layer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS Provide the drainable base of the type designated in the Contact .
A Drainable Bases .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
A General Before placing the drainable base shape the underlying surface in accordance with the contract and .. E Tolerances .
Maintain a uniform gradation during placement .
B Contractor Quality Control QC Testing Perform Contractor QC testing and submit all required forms if required in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Certify materials on Form GB Certification of Aggregate and Granular Materials .
Attach any required aggregate test results to Form GB .
Gradation quality and crushing testing are required only for .
Material On Hand .
C Placing and Compacting Provide moisture for compaction for drainable stable base DSB .
Provide placement equipment meeting the following requirements Will not rut the inplace surface Will not displace or damage any geotextile and Capable of placing the required thickness without creating segregation .
Vibratory rollers are not allowed .
Do not allow traffic on the drainable base after final placement and compaction .
Meet the quality compaction requirements of .. F. Quality Compaction .
Maintain drainage .
Construct the aggregate layer to .
ft of the profile and crosssection as required by the contract in accordance with Subgrade Preparation .
Maintain the surface quality integrity and properties of the aggregate material in each lift until the next lift or layer is placed .
D Agency Quality Assurance Testing QA Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
Sample and test from the roadway after spreading but before compaction using the random sampling method in the Grading and Base Manual additional samples and tests may be taken to delineate visually indicated material failures .
Test the entire lot or area of corrected material with new random samples .
Verify compaction per .. F. Quality Compaction .
E Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Measure the material in accordance with Measurement of Quantities . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for the accepted quantities of Drainable Aggregate Base includes the costs of production testing placement and compaction .
Drainable aggregate base placed before the Engineer accepts the Contractors certification is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer may allow the Contractor to accept a monetary price adjustment instead of correcting failing material in accordance with drainable aggregate gradation and quality monetary price adjustment tables on the Grading and Base website. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will add price adjustments for failing gradation and quality tests .
The maximum monetary price adjustment is .
For base or subbase gradations that fail because they are too coarse the Engineer may elect to accept the material without a monetary price adjustment if the material meets the engineering intent of the specification .
The Department will apply the monetary price adjustment against the entire quantity represented by the failing tests .
The Department will pay for drainable base on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Drainable Aggregate Base Type CV cubic yard Note Specify Type either OGAB or DSB .
RECLAMATION The subsections below are designated so an A subsection refers to All Reclamation a B subsection refers to Full Depth Reclamation FDR and a C subsection refers to Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SFDR as illustrated here .X TOPIC A Topic All Reclamation B Topic Full Depth Reclamation FDR C Topic Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SFDR .
DESCRIPTION A Description All Reclamation A. Definitions A .. a Pulverized unstabilized Material Pulverized material is produced by grinding the bituminous pavement with a portion of the underlying granular material .
It may also include additional materials such as add rock or compaction aids .
A .. b Bituminous Stabilized Material Bituminous Stabilized Material is pulverized material that has had a bituminous stabilizing agent emulsion or foamed asphalt added to it .
It may also include additional materials such as cement or add rock .
B Description Full Depth Reclamation FDR This work consists of pulverizing and blending the inplace bituminous pavement with a portion of the underlying material to produce a uniformly mixed aggregate base .
The work includes spreading watering compacting shaping and maintaining the blended reclaim material to the specified profile and crosssection .
If a compaction aid is used a second pulverization mixing and compaction occurs after the initial phase .
C Description Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SFDR Construct a stabilized full depth reclamation SFDR layer by Pulverizing and blending the inplace bituminous pavement structure with a portion of the underlying material mixing it with a specified bituminous material and additional materials if required shaping and compacting .
The process is performed in two steps an initial pulverization and compaction and a final pulverization mixing and compaction. . MATERIALS A Materials All Reclamation A .
Additional Aggregates Provide additional aggregates as required by the Contract .
A .
Water Provide mixing water that meets Water for Concrete and Mortar .
B Materials Full Depth Reclamation FDR .
Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Modified Aggregate Bases B. Compaction Aids Provide Compaction aids if required by the Contract .
C Materials Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SFDR C. SFDR Design Parameters The mix design criteria for SFDR is in the Grading and Base Manual section ..
The Agency will provide the mix requirements on Form GB in the Contract documents .
C .. a Design Requirements Meet the mix Design Parameters listed on Form GB .
C. Gradation Meet the gradation requirements of Table .
Table Gradation Requirements UnStabilized Portion Sieve Size Percent Passing Stabilized Portion Sieve Size Percent Passing .
C. Bituminous Material for Mixture Meet the requirements of Bituminous Material .
Use the type and grade of bituminous material for mixture liquid bituminous material designated in the mix design on Form GB .
C. Mineral Stabilizing Agent Cement or Lime Provide mineral stabilizing agents at the rate required by the Contract .
Cement must conform to Portland Cement .
Hydrated Lime must conform to Hydrated Lime. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Construction Requirements All Reclamation All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
Correct and retest all failing areas .
Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. Place geotextiles if required in the plan or if directed by the Engineer comply with the requirements of Excavation and Embankment .
A .
Contractor Quality Control QC Testing Perform Contractor QC testing and submit all required forms if required in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Submit results to the Engineer within one business day after sampling .
Submit to the Engineer the following items a preliminary Grading and Base Report GB required before work commences a final Grading and Base Report GB required within two weeks of completion of project and a weekly summary report of tests completed and retests of failing materials GB required the first working day of the following week. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Sample and test for gradation within the first ft of production and within ft after a failing gradation .
Correct and retest all failing areas which fail either Quality Control or Quality Assurance Testing .
A .
Agency Quality Assurance QA General Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
B Construction Requirements Full Depth Reclamation FDR B .
Contractor Quality Control QC FDR Perform gradations moisture tests depth checks penetration index tests test roll and any other required tests per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract .
Perform test rolling on the top surface per Test Rolling using test roller TR .
B .
Agency Quality Assurance QA FDR Test compaction using the Penetration Index Method .
Sample for gradation according to the Grading and Base Manual after spreading but before compaction .
Observe and document all test rolling per the Schedule of Materials Control and Contract .
B .
General FDR Requirements Remove all reclaimed pavement pieces that would be retained on a three inch sieve from the rightofway .
B .
Equipment Requirements B .. a Reclaiming Machine Use a road reclaiming machine capable of uniformly pulverizing the pavement and the underlying layer to the specified depth and gradation .
B .. b Rollers B .. b.i PneumaticTired Roller Use a pneumatictired roller weighing at least ton or lb per in of rolling width .
Ensure the tire arrangement allows compaction over the full width of the roller with each pass .
B .. b.ii Pad Foot Vibratory Roller If required in .. B. use a pad foot roller weighing at least lb .
B. Pulverizing Operation Before beginning pulverization remove vegetation and topsoil adjacent to the surface .
Blend add water spread compact and shape pulverized material by the end of the workday .
Protect and avoid damaging Structures during pulverization .
Correct reclaim sections represented by a failing gradation .
B. Incorporation of Additional Aggregates andor Compaction Aids If required of the Contract uniformly spread additional aggregates across the roadway surface to be reclaimed before incorporating it into the reclaim mixture .
If required of the Contract inject and automatically meter compaction aids within the reclaimer using a second reclamation pass .
B .
Placing and Compacting Uniformly mix reclamation material before spreading .
Spread and compact the reclamation material to the profile and cross section shown on the plans before placing the next layer .
Maintain the moisture content from to percent by dry weight during compaction .
Place and compact reclamation materials in maximum inch lifts using a pneumatictired roller in compliance with .. B .. i .
For lifts thicknesses from inches to inches compact using both a pneumatictired and pad foot vibratory rollers in compliance with .. B ..
The Contractor may use excess reclamation material from other locations on the project to attain the profile or crosssection as shown on the plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Compact the full thickness to achieve a penetration index value of mm and a seating value of mm as measured by the MnDOT Standard Dynamic Cone Penetrometer DCP method as determined by Form GB .
Place and compact to support traffic while allowing no greater than ½ inch of surface displacement when measured using a straightedge .
Construct the layer to .
ft of the profile and crosssection as required by the contract in accordance with Subgrade Preparation .
B. Workmanship Quality Repair and Maintenance The Engineer will provide staking to reestablish the centerline when Contractorstaking is not required by the contract .
Maintain the compaction quality integrity and properties of the aggregate material in each lift until the next lift or layer is placed .
Repair ruts potholes washboarding and other distortions by scarifying to a depth of inches below the deepest distortion and recompact .
C Construction Requirements Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SFDR C. General SFDR Requirements Provide water in order to obtain maximum density .
Stabilize when .
The atmospheric temperature is F and rising when using emulsions F and rising when foaming bituminous or F and rising when using cement only and .
It is not foggy or rainy and .
Freezing temperatures are not predicted within hours after placement of SFDR .
Atmospheric temperature and predicted weather requirements are determined by the Engineer .
C. Equipment C .. a Reclaiming Machine Provide a selfpropelled reclaiming machine with the ability to .
Uniformly pulverize the pavement and the underlying layer to the specified depth and gradation requirements of Table . .
Thoroughly mix the reclaimed pavement while injecting the liquid bituminous material and automatically metering it with a variation of not more than .
percent by weight .
It must be capable of adding an additional percent asphalt by total weight . .
Automatically control crossslope and control cutting depth to within ¼ inch of the depth shown on the plans . .
Maintain the designed asphalt content of overlapped mixtures by adjusting the application of bituminous material for the width of pulverized layer .
Automatically maintain the designed asphalt content regardless of machine speed depth of cut and number of operating nozzles .
Provide means for automatically cleaning nozzles and continual observation and measurement by the operator .
For foamed asphalt applications the reclaiming machine must also .
Accurately foam bituminous material and uniformly add specified water . .
Provide samples of the foamed bituminous material through a sampling nozzle .
C .. b Rollers C .. b PneumaticTired Roller Compact with a pneumatic tired roller meeting the requirements of .. B .. e and having a minimum weight of tons .
C .. b Pad Foot Vibratory Roller Compact with a pad foot vibratory roller weighing at least .
ton .
C .. b SteelWheeled Roller Compact with steelwheeled vibratory rollers equipped with a water spray system meeting the requirements of .. B .. e. When using bituminous stabilizers compact with a double drum roller. . Minnesota Standard Specifications When using cement only compact with a single drum roller .
C .. c Bituminous Material for Mixture Supply Tankers When foaming tankers must be equipped with a visible thermometer that measures the temperature of the liquid Bituminous Material for Mixture in the bottom third of the supply tank .
C .. d Vane Feeder When cement is required provide a vane feeder capable of uniformly spreading the cement on the road surface prior to reclaiming .
C .. e Motor Grader Use a selfpropelled motor grader with a minimum foot wide blade C. Pulverization Pulverize grind and uniformly blend the inplace bituminous pavement with the underlying granular base to the gradation requirements of Table .
If required of the Contract uniformly spread additional material across the roadway surface to be reclaimed before incorporating it into the reclaim mixture .
Correct reclaim sections that do not comply with table by repulverizing .
C. Spreading Compaction of the Unstabilized Material Spread shape and compact the pulverized material to the profile and cross section shown on the plans .
Maintain the moisture content from to percent by dry weight during compaction .
Place and compact pulverized unstabilized materials in maximum inch lifts .
Compact the initial pulverized layer to a maximum penetration index value of mm as measured by the MnDOT standard Dynamic Cone Penetrometer DCP device .
Blend add water spread compact and shape pulverized material by the end of each workday and before any significant rainfall event occurs .
C. Spreading Cement Spread cement using a vane feeder in a manner that minimizes dusting i.e .
do not spread when the wind is strong enough to coat traffic andor the environment .
Control the cement content to within .
poundssy of the mix design target from Form GB .
Start mixing operations no longer than ½ hour after spreading stabilizing agent .
C. MixingInjecting Produce the SFDR layer by mixing and injecting the liquid bituminous material into the pulverized pavement .
Incorporate the bituminous material for mixture at the rate designated on the mix design .
However after consultation with the Contractor the Engineer may direct the Contractor to vary the application rate of bituminous material for mixture compared to the mix requirements for areas of pulverized bituminous which the Engineer believes are either too rich or too lean .
Use a minimum inch overlap between passes of the reclaimer .
Demonstrate that the asphalt stabilizing agent is uniformly blended into the inplace recycle pavement .
If the first mixing fails to produce uniformity remix the stabilized layer until it is achieved .
Maintain bituminous material within F of the optimum temperature recommended by the mix design note that bituminous must also meet expansion ratio and halflife foaming tests .
If the supplier does not provide a recommendation maintain the foamed asphalt temperature between F F. C. Compaction of Bituminous Stabilized Material Complete the initial compaction i.e .
a pad foot compactor walks out of the bituminous stabilized material prior to shaping .
C. Shaping and Compacting of Bituminous Stabilized Material Remove any remaining pad foot marks and spread the material. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Place and compact the material to within .
feet of the profile and so that the cross section has no variations greater than ½ inch within feet .
Complete final shaping and compaction within two hours of bituminous material injection .
Within hours of SFDR recompact areas represented by density measurements below of the target density determined from the Control Strip roll until density is achieved .
Note Do not overroll to the point where checking of the surface occurs also note that some areas may not achieve density due to field conditions .
C .. a Control Strip Use a control strip to establish a rolling pattern .
The control strip should represent a homogenous roadway section and have the following characteristics Minimum area of square yards Remain inplace and become a part of the completed work .
Use the following to establish a rolling pattern after initial breakdown is complete .
Randomly select three test points in the control strip and use a nuclear density device ASTM D in backscatter mode to determine a wet density at each point after each finish steel roller pass . .
Ensure that that the nuclear gauge rests on a flat surface .
The density at each point is defined as the average of two readings offset degrees. . Continue compacting until additional roller coverage does not produce appreciable increase in density .
Provide documentation of the growth curve and maximum target density to the Engineer .
Use this for QAQC process . .
Roll the remainder of that course in accordance with the pattern developed in the control strip for that roller . .
Discontinue and reevaluate the rolling operation pattern and timing if surface cracking or checking occurs .
Use this rolling pattern until a new control strip is performed .
Establish a new rolling pattern by performing a new control strip when there are changes in the mixture that cause the original control strip to no longer be representative changes may include Inplace materials variation including sections with varying thickness construction history etc .
If vehicles leave indents in the compacted surface .
Changes in RAP gradation of Target Density is not achieved on two consecutive QC or QA readings .
Changes in the application rate of Bituminous Material for Mixture greater than .
for foaming or .
for emulsion .
C. Workmanship Quality Repair and Maintenance Maintain the compaction quality integrity the profile and cross section to within the criteria of .. C. and properties of the SFDR layer during the curing period until the placement of the next layer .
Immediately prior to placement of the next layer clean the SFDR surface and remove loose aggregate .
The Engineer will provide staking to reestablish the centerline when Contractorstaking is not required by the contract .
Repair ruts potholes washboarding and other distortions .
C. Fog Seal and Bituminous Requirements Apply a CSSh bituminous fog seal per Bituminous Fog Seal at a rate of .
to .
gallons per square yard no more than days after the last section has been stabilized .
Place the asphalt pavement a No sooner than three calendar days and no later than calendar days after SFDR at any location has been injected and compacted note that the day requirement may be extended with concurrence of the Engineer if large rainfall events hinder the curing of the SFDR b When the SFDR surface does not deflect under construction equipment and meets quality compaction per .. F .. c When the SFDR is capable of meeting the required bituminous placement and compaction requirements .
d When the moisture content of the SFDR is low enough to not migrate into and damage the new asphalt. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A BLANK B Method of Measurement Full Depth Reclamation FDR The Engineer will measure the reclamation area by the square yard .
C Method of Measurement Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation SFDR The Engineer will measure the bituminous stabilized full depth reclamation SFDR by the square yard .
The Engineer will measure the bituminous material for mixture by the ton .
The Engineer will measure the bituminous fog seal by the gallon .
Measure cement by the ton .
Measure additional aggregates by the ton . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT A All Reclamation The contract unit prices for reclamation includes the cost of production testing placement occasional variations in the bituminous pavement thickness removing vegetation and topsoil adjacent to the surface repair to Structures damaged by Contractors operations or negligence and necessary maintenance .
The Agency will pay for the correction of unstable areas through no fault of the Contractors operations if directed by the Engineer per .
Extra Work .
The Department will pay for reclamation on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Cement ton .
Aggregate Base Class ___ ton .
Full Depth Reclamation square yard .
Stabilized Full Depth Reclamation square yard .
Haul Full Depth Reclamation LV cubic yard .
Bituminous Material for Mixture ton .
Bituminous Material for Fog Seal Gallon SHOULDER BASE AGGREGATE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of placing shoulder base aggregate adjacent to pavements. . MATERIALS A Aggregate Use the class of aggregate required by the contract. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Unless otherwise designated all test procedures are in the Grading and Base Manual .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations or negligence .
Comply with the requirements of .. A Construction Requirements General .
B Contractor Quality Control QC Testing Comply with the QC requirements of .B Contractor Quality Control Testing except that no test rolling is required .
Additionally comply with the Schedule of Materials Control .
C Shoulder Preparation Comply with the requirements of .. C Placing and Compacting however compact the existing material using the Quality Compaction Method as specified in .. F. Quality Compaction .
Remove vegetation and replace contaminated material as directed by the Engineer .
Shape the bottom of the proposed shoulder aggregate to the grade and cross section as shown on the plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Do not place shoulder aggregate on the existing pavement surface .
Immediately sweep spilled material from the pavement surface .
D Agency Quality Assurance Testing QA Comply with the requirements of .. D Agency Quality Assurance Testing .
Test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
E Tolerances Construct aggregate shouldering in accordance with .. E Tolerances .
F Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure the shoulder aggregate in accordance with Measurement of Quantities .
The Engineer will not deduct the mass or volume of water and admixtures .
Mass and volume conversion tables are in the Grading and Base Manual . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for placing shoulder base aggregate includes the costs of the removing vegetation production testing placement compaction watering or drying and shaping .
All shoulder base aggregate placed before the Engineer accepts the Contractors certification is unauthorized work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer may allow the Contractor to accept a monetary price adjustment instead of correcting failing material in accordance with Table Table and The monetary price adjustment table for shoulder base aggregate quality on the Grading and Base website .
The Department will assess a monetary price adjustment for each failing aggregate quality crushing gradation and bitumen content results .
The Department will apply the monetary price adjustment against the entire quantity represented by the failing tests .
For base or subbase gradations that fail because they are too coarse the Engineer may elect to accept the material without a monetary price adjustment if the material meets the engineering intent of the specification .
The maximum monetary price adjustment is .
The Department will pay for shoulder base aggregate on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Shoulder Base Aggregate CV Class ___ cubic yard .
Shoulder Base Aggregate LV Class ___ cubic yard .
Shoulder Base Aggregate Class ___ ton BITUMINOUS SURFACE RECONDITIONING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of reconditioning the existing pavement surface before constructing a bituminous overlay or surfacing courses. . MATERIALS A Bituminous Patching Mixture Provide bituminous patching material matching the type of material used in the first layer of bituminous surfacing placed on the reconditioned surface. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Mixture for Joints and Cracks Provide a mixture for joints and cracks consisting of a prepared mix of fine aggregate and bituminous material in accordance with the following requirements Table Joint and Cracks Mixture Requirements Material Requirement Aggregate gradation ½ in sieve No .
sieve No .
sieve . .
Aggregate spall Bituminous material . .
Percent passing requirement .
Match PG grade to grade used on first lift of plant mixed asphalt .
Percent by weight .
C Joint and Crack Filler Provide joint and crack filler in accordance with the special provisions. . CONSTRUCTION A Surface Repair Remove loose unstable or deteriorated portions of the existing pavement to provide a stable surface after completion of the patching operation .
Remove waste or surplus material from the project .
Repair and fill the holes and depressions with mix in accordance with the special provisions .
Compact the mix using conventional pneumatic tire roller or mechanical tampers in areas inaccessible to conventional roller equipment .
B Joint Repair B .
Concrete Pavement Clean and refill joints and cracks at least ¼ in wide .
B. Bituminous Pavement Rout and seal cracks ¼ in to ¾ in wide .
For cracks greater than ¾ in wide fill with the mixture for joints and cracks and tamp in place . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will separately measure the accepted quantities of bituminous patching mixture mixture for joints and cracks and joint and crack filler as provided and placed by the weight or by the loose volume of material as shown on the plans . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit prices for Bituminous Patching Mixture for Mixture for Joints and Cracks and for Joints and Crack Filler include the cost of removing and disposing of the existing deteriorated materials .
If the contract does not specify a specific contract pay item for removing concrete base or pavement in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures the Department will pay for the removal of a concrete base or pavement to full depth and width between existing joints or by sawing as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will pay for bituminous surface reconditioning on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Patching Mixture cubic yard .
Mixture for Joints and Cracks pound .
Joint and Crack Filler pound .
Bituminous Patching Mixture ton MILL PAVEMENT SURFACE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing the existing pavement by cold milling. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS BLANK .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Equipment Mill the existing pavement with a power operated selfpropelled cold milling machine capable of removing concrete and bituminous materials to the profile crossslope grade and elevation uniformly across the pavement surface as shown on the plans .
Use automatic controls to control grade elevation crossslope and profile .
Use a machine with ski matching shoe or an independent grade control to reference the existing pavement and automatically establish profile grades along each edge of the machine within ¼ in .
B Operations Mill the pavement surface to the depth width grade and crossslope as shown on the plans .
Perform milling without tearing or gouging the underlying material .
Surface irregularities exceeding ½ inch under a foot straightedge laid transversely and longitudinally after milling is complete are unacceptable .
Reference the milling operation from an independent grade control in areas directed by the Engineer .
Establish and maintain grade control as approved by the Engineer .
Mill the entire pavement width to a flush surface at the end of each work period when the pavement is open to traffic .
If uncompleted operations result in a vertical or near vertical longitudinal face reslope the longitudinal face to provide a taper construct a temporary bituminous taper or provide protective measures as approved by the Engineer .
Taper transverse cutting faces at the end of each working period where pavement is open to traffic .
Construct temporary bituminous tapers at intersecting streets around utility appurtenances and appropriated entrances during the milling operations as directed by the Engineer .
Mill areas inaccessible to the milling machine using other equipment or methods as approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor may recycle the surfacing removed by the milling operations and use on the project in accordance with Aggregate for Base and Surface Courses or Graded Aggregate for Bituminous Mixtures or dispose of the millings outside the rightofway in accordance with .
Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures Construction Requirements .
After milling to the depth shown on the plans sweep or vacuum clean the milled area with equipment approved by the Engineer .
Clean the milled area as approved by the Engineer .
Dispose of debris from milling and cleaning operations outside of the rightofway in accordance with .
Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures Construction Requirements except as otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Mill previously patched areas to the specified depth below the pavement surface that existed before placement of the previous patch and not from the surface of the patch .
Avoid disturbing or damaging existing drainage or utility structures on the project .
Repair damage resulting from the milling operations at no additional cost to the Department .
Keep the milled pavement surface free of all loose materials and dust . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure pavement milling by the area of each type of surface removed .
The Engineer will measure areas milled based on actual finished dimensions of the work . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for pavement milling includes the cost of traffic safety cleanup and disposal operations .
The cost of constructing a temporary milled taper and providing placing and removing temporary bituminous tapers is included in the contract unit price for other relevant contract items .
The Department will pay for mill pavement surface on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Mill Bituminous Surface ___ in square yard .
Mill Concrete Surface ___ in square yard Minnesota Standard Specifications Pavement Construction CONCRETE PAVEMENT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing portland cement concrete pavement on a prepared base .
The Department defines paving concrete to include concrete mainline ramps loops integrant curb shoulders and curb and gutter placed adjacent to the concrete mainline with the same mixture used in the paving .
Integrant curb is a curb constructed monolithically with the pavement .
Use slipform as the standard construction method for concrete paving unless otherwise allowed in the contract or by the Engineer. . MATERIALS A Concrete A. Slipform Placement Mix No .
A A .
Fixed Form Placement Mix No .
A B Cementitious Materials Provide only cementitious materials from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
B. Portland Cement Use Type I or Type III cement complying with the following a Total alkalis NaOe no greater than .
percent in the portland cement and b Total alkalis NaOe no greater than .
lb per cu .
yd of concrete resulting from the portland cement .
B. Slag Cement B. Blended Hydraulic Cement Use Type IL IS or IP cement complying with the following a Total alkalis NaOe no greater than .
percent in the portland cement and b Total alkalis NaOe no greater than .
lb per cu .
yd of concrete resulting from the portland cement .
B .
Fly Ash The Concrete Engineer defines Class F fly ash for the purposes of ASR mitigation as having a maximum CaO content of .. B. Ternary Mixes Ternary mixes are defined as portland cement or Type IL and two other supplementary cementitious materials or blended cement and one other supplementary cementitious material .
C Concrete Aggregate Requirements Test each aggregate fraction proposed for use in accordance with Table .
Table Aggregate Testing Requirements Aggregate Fraction Testing Required Tested by Department in the last years No additional testing unless required by the Concrete Engineer Not tested by the Department in the last years Preliminary aggregate testing in accordance with .. C. Required Preliminary Aggregate Testing .
New source New source concrete aggregate testing in accordance with Fine Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete Intermediate Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete and Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete .
C. Required Preliminary Aggregate Testing After the Department awards the contract and as soon as coarse and fine aggregates are available for testing contact the Engineer to coordinate preliminary sampling of aggregate for concrete paving .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will sample and test the aggregate to verify specific gravity absorption data and aggregate quality .
The Department will perform other tests as determined necessary by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Fine Aggregate Requirements Provide fine aggregates complying with quality requirements of .. B Quality .
C .. a Fine Aggregate Alkali Silica Reactivity ASR Requirements The Department will routinely test fine aggregate sources for alkali silica reactivity ASR in accordance with the following .
Multiple sources of certified portland cement in accordance with ASTM C MnDOT Modified and .
Multiple combinations of certified portland cement and supplementary cementitious materials in accordance with ASTM C MnDOT Modified .
The Concrete Engineer in conjunction with the Engineer will review the day fine aggregate expansion test results to determine the acceptability of the proposed fine aggregate and cement combination in accordance with the following .
For fine aggregate and cement combinations previously tested by the Department the Concrete Engineer will use the average of all day unmitigated test results for an individual fine aggregate source to determine necessary mitigation in accordance with Table . .
If the previously tested proposed fine aggregate and cement combination requires less mitigation than the average day unmitigated test result the Concrete Engineer will allow mitigation at the lesser rate in accordance with Table . . Alkali silica reactivity ASR ASTM C and ASTM C MnDOT Modified test results are available on the MnDOT Concrete Engineering Unit website .
The Concrete Engineer considers the average day expansion result to represent all fine and intermediate aggregates from a single source .
Table Fine and Intermediate Aggregate ASR Mitigation Requirements day Fine and Intermediate Aggregate Unmitigated Expansion Limits Class F Fly Ash Class C Fly Ash Slag Ternary Maximum of SlagClass F Fly Ash SlagClass C Fly Ash ISClass F Fly Ash ISClass C Fly Ash .
No mitigation required . .
Minimum Minimum Slag with a minimum of Class F fly ash Slag and Class C fly ash Type IS with a minimum of Class F Type IS with a minimum of Class C . .
Minimum Minimum .
The Department will reject the fine aggregate The Concrete Engineer may reject the fine aggregate if mortar bar specimens exhibit an indication of external or internal distress not represented by the expansion results .
The Concrete Engineer will make the final acceptance of the aggregate .
C. Intermediate Aggregate Requirements Provide intermediate aggregates complying with the quality requirements of .. D. Intermediate Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete .
For any intermediate aggregate size not previously tested by the Department the Concrete Engineer reserves the right to test for alkali silica reactivity in accordance with ASTM C prior to allowing incorporation into the concrete mix design .
C. Coarse Aggregate Requirements Provide coarse aggregates complying with the requirements of .. D Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete for each individual fraction .
C .. a Coarse Aggregate Alkali Silica Reactivity ASR Requirements When using coarse aggregate identified as quartzite or gneiss the Concrete Engineer will review ASTM C testing to determine the necessary ASR mitigation requirements in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Alkali silica reactivity ASR ASTM C test results are available on the MnDOT Concrete Engineering Unit website .
Table Coarse Aggregate ASR Mitigation Requirements ASTM C Expansion Results Class F Fly Ash Class C Fly Ash Slag SlagClass F Fly Ash SlagClass C Fly Ash ISClass F Fly Ash ISClass C Fly Ash .
No mitigation required .
Minimum Not Allowed Slag with a minimum of Class F fly ash Slag and Class C fly ash Type IS with a minimum of Class F Type IS with a minimum of Class C D Concrete Admixtures Provide admixtures from the ApprovedQualified Products list for all concrete grades shown in Table .
Use of any of the following admixtures are at the Contractors discretion .
Type A Water Reducing Admixture .
Type B Retarding Admixture .
Type D Water Reducing and Retarding Admixture .
Type S Specific Performance Based Admixture Use of the following admixtures require approval of the Concrete Engineer in conjunction with the Engineer unless otherwise allowed in the Contract .
Type C Accelerating Admixture .
Type E Water Reducing and Accelerating Admixture .
Type F High Range Water Reducing Admixture .
Type G High Range Water Reducing and Retarding Admixture The Engineer will permit the use of Type C or Type E accelerating admixtures when all of the following conditions exist .
The ambient temperature is below F . An Engineer approved cold weather protection plan is inplace and .
Cold weather protection materials are onsite and ready for use .
E Reinforcement Bars F Dowel Bars G Concrete Joint Sealers G. Preformed Type G. Hotpoured Elastic Type G. Silicone Type H Preformed Joint Filler I Curing Materials I. Burlap Curing Blankets I. PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound I. Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound I .
Plastic Curing Blankets .
Minnesota Standard Specifications J Form Coating Material K Water L Contractor Concrete Mix Design The Contractor assumes full responsibility for the mix design and performance of the concrete .
The Engineer determines final acceptance of concrete for payment based on satisfactory field placement and performance .
L. Concrete Mix Design Requirements The Department defines the concrete mix design requirements for concrete pavement in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Table Concrete Mix Design Requirements Concrete Grade Estimated Concrete Contract Quantity yd Mix Number Maximum wc ratio Minimum Cement Content lbsyd Cementitious Content lbs yd Air Content Gradation Requirements Minimum Aggregate Size Required Maximum SCM Fly Ash Slag Ternary Slump Range Spec .
Fly Ash Slag Ternary A A . . . Job Mix Formula nominal ½ .D .
A . . and Minor work and fillins not provided by the primary paving plant A . . . and Table Or Job Mix Formula nominal ½ .D .
A . .
Engineer Approved or Plan Allowed HighEarly AHE .
. . and Table Or Job Mix Formula nominal ½ .D .
AHE . .
Determined by multiplying the planned pavement area by the planned pavement thickness .
Provide additional cementitious material to meet requirements in accordance with this section at no additional cost to the Department .
Refer to Table and Table for ASR mitigation requirements .
Adjust slump in accordance with .. E. Consistency .
The Concrete Engineer considers minor work or fillins as gaps in concrete pavement turn lanes intersections or other pavement sections as determined by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
The Contractor may use Portland cement for High Early Concrete provided no mitigation is required for the fine aggregate or intermediate aggregate in accordance with Table or the coarse aggregate in accordance with Table .
If mitigation is required the Contractor is required to use a minimum of of any supplementary cementitious material when designing High Early Concrete. . Minnesota Standard Specifications L. Concrete Mix Design Submittal Requirements Design Grade A concrete mixes based on an absolute volume of cu .
ft . cu .
m and a target air content of ..
Submit the concrete mixes using the appropriate MnDOT Project Specific Mix Design Submittal form available on the MnDOTs website at least calendar days before the initial concrete placement .
When required by Table include a Job Mix Formula in accordance with .. L. Job Mix Formula .
For mix design calculations the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will provide specific gravity and absorption data .
The Concrete Engineer will review the mix design submittal for compliance with the contract .
L. Job Mix Formula A Job Mix Formula JMF contains the following Proportions for each aggregate fraction Individual gradations for each aggregate fraction and Composite gradation of the combined aggregates including working ranges on each sieve in accordance with Table .
Table Job Mix Formula Working Range Sieve Sizes Working Range in ½ in in ¾ in ½ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No . .
Working range limits of the composite gradation based on a moving average of tests N. L .. a JMF Moving Average The Engineer will determine the sampling location by using a random number chart and multiplying the random number by the sampling rate as defined in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Test and record the individual gradation results using the JMF Concrete Aggregate Workbook .
Calculate the moving average of four Contractor aggregate gradation test results during production using the JMF Moving Average Summary Workbook .
L .. b JMF Adjustments If the Contractor expects a future JMF adjustment submit a new mix design including JMF in accordance with .L .
Job Mix Formula .
If during concrete batching the moving average of four Contractor aggregate gradation tests falls outside the allowable JMF working range Make immediate adjustments on the JMF Adjustment Worksheet within the limits specified in Table Review JMF Adjustments with the Engineer .
Provided the adjustments comply with Table both the Contractor and Engineer will sign the JMF Adjustment Worksheet .
Once signed by both resume paving .
If the moving average of four tests falls outside of the adjusted allowable working range stop production and provide a new mix design including JMF to the Concrete Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Allowable JMF Adjustments Sieve Size Allowable Adjustment No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
L .. c Agency Verification of JMF The Engineer will randomly verify Contractor combined aggregate gradation results as defined in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Record the Agency verification test results using the JMF Moving Average Summary Workbook .
If the Engineer and Contractors results on an individual fraction fall outside of the lab field tolerance established in Table the Engineer will test all split samples from that days production .
If the gradation tests on any split samples from that days testing result in a variation between the Producer and the Engineer greater than that set forth in Table the parties shall follow the procedures for test result dispute resolution available from the MnDOT Laboratory Manual .
If the Agencys test results are found to be valid the Engineer will substitute the QA test results into the moving average calculation to determine acceptance and the wellgraded aggregate optional incentive .
Table Allowable Variations on Percent Passing Sieves Sieve Size Allowed Percentage in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
No. . M Concrete Pavement Incentives and Disincentives The Engineer will apply concrete mix incentives or disincentives for contracts using at least cu .
yd of concrete calculated by multiplying the planned pavement area by the planned pavement thickness of paving concrete .
The Engineer will determine payment for the incentives or disincentives for aggregate quality wellgraded aggregate and watercement ratio in accordance with .
Method of Measurement .
The Department defines a primary concrete plant as the following A primary concrete plant providing the majority of the concrete to a paving project .
Only one primary concrete plant per project is allowed unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Use either a paving plant or a certified readymix plant as the primary concrete plant .
Refer to Table to determine if concrete provided by the Primary Concrete Plant is eligible for concrete pavement incentives and disincentives .
The Engineer will only apply incentives or disincentives for materials provided or produced by the Contractors primary concrete plant .
Table Designated Primary Concrete Plant Eligibility for IncentivesDisincentives Type of Concrete Plant Method for Hauling Concrete wc ratio Aggregate Quality Wellgraded Aggregate Paving Plant Dump Trucks Agitator Trucks or Both Yes Yes Yes Certified ReadyMix Plant Dump Trucks Agitator Trucks or Both Yes Yes Yes Paving Plant Truck Mixers No Yes Yes Certified ReadyMix Plant Truck Mixers No Yes Yes A secondary concrete plant providing any minor work or fillins not provided by the primary concrete plant is not eligible for any incentivesdisincentives .
Highearly mixes are not eligible for wc ratio incentive payments .
M. Coarse Aggregate Quality IncentiveDisincentive The Engineer will accept the coarse aggregate for paving concrete by statistical methods and in accordance with all other aggregate quality requirements of Concrete Pavement Structural Concrete and Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete .
The Engineer will determine the Coarse Aggregate Quality IncentiveDisincentive for a maximum of two fractions of coarse aggregate. . Minnesota Standard Specifications M .. a Sampling and Determination of Lots The Engineer will use the Coarse Aggregate Quality IncentiveDisincentive Workbook to determine the following Random sampling locations in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
The incentivedisincentive .
The Engineer will consider the entire project as a single lot for each of the two fractions containing the highest percentage by weight .
If the project is planned for construction over multiple years and before placing any concrete pavement request that the Engineer calculate the incentivedisincentive payment on a yearly basis .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will modify the sampling and testing rates as necessary .
The Engineer will establish a new statistical family for each change in aggregate source fraction or both .
The Engineer will divide a lot representing the plan cubic yards of concrete by the number of samples to form sublots .
The Engineer will multiply the number of cubic yards in a sublot by a random number to obtain the position in the sublot for the sample .
The Engineer will split the samples and leave half of the sample for the Contractor .
The Engineers laboratory will test the samples and report the individual results .
The Engineer will calculate a Quality Index QI for each fraction in accordance with the following ks X QI Where n X i mean X Xi individual test results standard deviation s n x xi k Adjustment Factor based on the number of tests as shown in Table Table Adjustment Factor k K No .
of Tests .
. . . .
If Class A Class B and Class C aggregates meet the requirements as determined by the Engineer the Engineer will provide payment based on a per fraction incentive in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Coarse Aggregate Quality IncentiveDisincentive Aggregate Class QI for Fraction Structural Concrete per cu .
yd Payment Change per Fraction Class A including quartzite and gneiss .
Class B based on absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . As recommended by the Concrete Engineer with coordination of the Engineer Class C based on carbonate . . . . . . . . . . . . As recommended by the Concrete Engineer with coordination of the Engineer The Engineer will not pay incentives or disincentives for Class R aggregates .
If the concrete mixture contains at least three fractions of coarse aggregate the Engineer will consider only the two containing the highest percentage by weight as eligible for incentive .
The Engineer will pay for Coarse Aggregate Quality Incentive Disincentive for all paving concrete provided by the Contractors primary paving plant .
M. WaterCement wc Ratio Provide and place concrete with a watercement ratio not to exceed .
when using cement only or fly ash and .
when using slag or ternary .
Make any adjustments immediately when the watercement ratio exceeds .
when using cement only or fly ash and .
when using slag or ternary .
The Engineer will not make incentive payments for watercement ratio on highearly mixes .
The Engineer will determine the watercement ratio for concrete hauled in dump or agitator trucks concrete hauled in truck mixers are not eligible for wc ratio incentives in accordance with the following M .. a Sampling and Determination of Lots The Engineer will sample test and record the individual results in accordance with .. M .. b Water Content Determination and .. M .. d Cementitious Content Determination at a rate defined in the Schedule of Materials Control .
The Engineer will use the WC Ratio Calculation Workbook for moisture testing and determining the incentivedisincentive .
The Engineer will base the statistical analysis of acceptance for watercement ratio on a per lot basis representing one days paving .
Each individual watercement ratio determination is considered a sublot .
The lot will represent the cumulative average of the sublot values .
The Engineer will start a new lot and test if either of the following occur Mix design change due to a watercement ratio exceeding .
when using cement only or fly ash and .
when using slag or ternary or Supplementary cementitious type change from fly ash to slag or ternary mix design or vice versa .
If the quantities of concrete produced results in no Engineer moisture testing for any given day include the untested quantity of concrete into the next days production and include that quantity of concrete in the sampling rate .
If the untested quantity is on the last day of production add that quantity to the previous days production .
M .. b Water Content Determination For a concrete paving batch plant use an electronic meter approved by the Engineer to record the water including temper water added to the mix that is capable of printing the amount of total water on each batch ticket .
For a readymix plant record the total water added to the mix including temper water on the computerized Certificate of Compliance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will determine the water content for calculating the watercement ratio using the average water calculated from batch tickets or Certificates of Compliances surrounding the randomly selected batch ticket sample four previous tickets ticket representing the random sample and the five following tickets .
M .. c Water Content Verification The Engineer will use plastic concrete taken at the plant site to verify the water content in the mix as determined in accordance with .. M .. b Water Content Determination .
Sample the plastic concrete as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will verify the water content in the plastic concrete mixture using the test procedure specified in AASHTO T Standard Test Method for Water Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete Using Microwave Oven Drying .
The Engineer will begin the test within min after the water has contacted the cement .
Provide the microwave oven and the ancillary equipment as required by the Engineer to perform this test .
M .. d Cementitious Content Determination The Engineer will determine the cementitious content for calculating the watercement ratio using the average total cementitious calculated from batch tickets or Certificates of Compliance surrounding the randomly selected batch ticket sample four previous tickets the ticket representing the random sample and the five following tickets .
M .. e WC Ratio IncentiveDisincentive Do not place concrete mix not meeting the watercement ratio requirements in accordance with Table .
The Engineer may accept inadvertently placed material not meeting the contract requirements in accordance with Table .
Table WC Ratio IncentiveDisincentive When using cement only or fly ash When using slag or ternary WC Ratio Test Result Payment incentivedisincentive per cu .
yd WC Ratio Test Result Payment incentivedisincentive per cu .
yd .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Determined by the Concrete Engineer .
Determined by the Concrete Engineer The Contractor may remove and replace concrete represented by watercement ratios greater than .
when using cement only or fly ash and .
when using slag or ternary .
For concrete left in place with watercement ratios greater than .
when using cement only or fly ash and .
when using slag or ternary and the level of payment is not defined in the Table the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will evaluate the material based on the adequacy of the material for the use intended .
Remove and replace unsatisfactory concrete as determined by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
M. WellGraded Aggregate Optional Incentive The Engineer will use the Contractors combined aggregate gradation test results documented in the JMF Concrete Aggregate Workbook as verified by the Engineer in accordance with .. L .. c Agency Verification of JMF to determine eligibility for the incentive .
Table defines the wellgraded concrete aggregate gradation band on a percent retained per sieve size basis and the Coarse Sand percent retained and Fine Sand percent retained. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Retained Gradation Band Sieve Size Retained in ½ in in ¾ in ½ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
Coarse Sand Retained No .
to No .
Sieve Fine Sand Retained No .
to No .
Sieve The Engineer will use statistical analysis of the Contractors combined averaged aggregate gradation samples for well graded aggregate on a per lot basis representing one days paving .
Each combined aggregate gradation is considered a sublot .
The lot will represent the cumulative average of the sublot values on each sieve for the gradation band .
If the quantities of concrete produced results in no gradation testing for any given day include the untested quantity of concrete into the next days production and include that quantity of concrete in the sampling rate .
If the untested quantity is on the last day of production add that quantity to the previous days production .
An optional incentive is available to the Contractor provided a concrete mixture is designed and produced meeting all requirements of Table on a lot basis in accordance with Table .
Table WellGraded Aggregate Optional Incentive Payment incentivedisincentive per cu .
yard .
per cu .
yd .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Notice of Inspection Notify the Engineer at least h before placing concrete to allow for inspection .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer approves preparations for concrete placement .
If the Contractor fails to notify the Engineer at least h before concrete placement the Engineer may not allow concrete placement in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
B Contractor and Equipment Qualifications B .
Contractor Organizational Chart Provide paving operations supervision in accordance with Supervision by Contractor .
Provide an organizational chart listing names and phone numbers of individuals and alternates responsible for mix design quality control administration and inspection to the Engineer .
Post the organizational chart in the Contractors onsite facility .
B .
Contractor Flatwork Certification The Concrete Contractor or Subcontractor shall have at least two people with a current ACI concrete flatwork technician or flatwork finisher certification and at least one of them must be onsite for all concrete pours. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Concrete Paving Plant Certification Provide notice h in advance of concrete paving production and in conjunction with the Engineer perform a thorough onsite inspection of the concrete plant and complete MnDOT Form Concrete Paving Plant Contact Report .
Sign the report to certify compliance with the paving requirements and to certify review of the continual maintenance of the plant .
If concrete is provided by a Certified ReadyMix Plant complete MnDOT Form Contact Report Addendum ReadyMix Paving .
Calibrate and correlate the testing equipment in accordance with .. D Batching Requirements .
For projects with greater than cu .
yd provide a separate combination plant lab office for use during concrete paving in accordance with .. B .. a Combination Plant LabOffice Requirements .
B .. a Combination Plant Lab Office Requirements The Concrete Paving Contractor QC technicians and the Agency QA technicians will equally share a combination plant lab office during concrete paving .
Provide a separate combination plant lab office in accordance with Plant Inspection Commercial Facility except as modified by the following characteristics and requirements Located at the plant site within yd from the batch plant or other location as approved by the Engineer Plant lab and plant office areas separated and isolated by a wall Total plant laboffice floor area based on exterior dimensions of at least sq .
ft Plant lab floor area based on exterior dimensions of at least sq .
ft Plant office floor area based on exterior dimensions of at least sq .
ft Heating and cooling system capable of maintaining a uniform temperature between o and o F Drinking water container or cooler with adequate supply of potable water Detached portable toilet conveniently located Electrical power supply that provides adequate amperage for all electrical needs Water supply storage tank with a capacity of gal or more or pressurized water supply connected to the sink faucet Provide a sample storage area to prevent contamination of the samples Plant lab furnished in accordance with the following .
One sturdilybuilt workbench or countertop at least in in .
One service sink located near one end of the workbench with a water supply faucet and an outside drain .
Shelf space above workbench or countertop or at other convenient locations totaling at least linear ft in .
Electronic scales of sufficient size to weigh the samples for all required materials testing and .
A four burner standard electric stove top or stove and at least two additional electric burners to perform required aggregate testing per the Schedule of Materials Control. . Microwave oven with turntable or wave deflection fan Watt heat resistant glass pan approx .
xx plain weave fiberglass cloth ozyd and mills thick metal scrapper and grinding pestle .
Metal bowls of sufficient size to perform all required material testing Plant office furnished in accordance with .. B .
Field Office Furnishings except as modified by the following .
Two desks one for the Department and one for the Contractor with total exterior dimensions of at least in in .
At least six desk chairs .
A telephone capable of providing email and .
A printer with scanning and copying capabilities .
Do not begin concrete paving operations until the Engineer approves the combination plant laboffice .
For concrete paving projects supplied by a Certified ReadyMix Plant the separate Combination Plant Lab Office requirements in .. B .. a do not apply with the exception of the following Electrical power supply that provides adequate amperage for all electrical needs Water supply storage tank with a capacity of gal or more or pressurized water supply connected to the sink faucet Electronic scales of sufficient size to weigh the samples for all required materials testing At least six electric burners to perform required aggregate testing per the Schedule of Materials Control .
Metal bowls of sufficient size to perform all required material testing and If wc incentives apply provide a microwave oven with turntable or wave deflection fan Watt heat resistant glass pan approx .
xx plain weave fiberglass cloth ozyd and mills thick metal scrapper and grinding pestle. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .. b Paving Plant Sampling and Testing Provide a MnDOT Certified Concrete Plant Level Technician to oversee testing and plant operations and to remain on site during concrete production or have cellular phone availability .
Provide technicians with certifications at least meeting MnDOT Concrete Plant Level to perform all of the duties in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
The Engineer will provide technicians with certifications at least meeting MnDOT Concrete Plant Level to perform all of the duties in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
Perform testing in accordance with the Concrete Manual and determine testing rates in accordance with the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
The Engineer performs testing in accordance with the Concrete Manual and determines testing rates meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
B .
Contractor Project Documentation Maintain and keep control charts current using the following MnDOT provided charts JMF Moving Average Summary All Contractor plastic air content tests including before and after consolidation in the Air Content Chart Provide all batch tickets and test results to the Engineer on a daily basis .
The Engineer may suspend plant operations if the Contractor fails to provide daily test results .
Provide all reports records and diaries developed during the progress of construction activities to the Engineer .
C Batching and Mixing Batch and mix the concrete in accordance with Structural Concrete and the following C. Batching Requirements Perform the initial spot check of the measuring equipment in accordance with the Concrete Manual for accuracy and sensitivity before starting production operations .
Provide a copy of the inspection certificate to the Engineer .
Provide to the Engineer a computerized batch ticket that includes the following Date State project number SP or SAP Time concrete was batched Quantity of concrete in this load Running total of each type of concrete each day for each project Mix number Labels identifying each material that correlates with the contractor mix design including cementitious and admixture abbreviations or MnDOT digit pit numbers Target weight of materials Actual batched weights of materials Temper water and Total water weight .
If satisfactory finishing and curing of the pavement does not occur as determined by the Engineer suspend batching and mixing operations .
C. Concrete Ingredient Summaries If delivering bulk cementitious materials directly to the concrete batching plant in railroad cars or sealed transport trucks submit copies of the bill of ladings to the Engineer on the same day received from the transporting company .
Advise the Engineer of the method and schedule of cementitious material unloading .
Do not unload cementitious materials until the Engineer approves the operation .
Each day of concrete pavement production provide the Engineer with a production summary in an electronic format that includes the following Daily total concrete produced in cubic yards for each concrete mixture type .
Daily total ingredient quantities aggregate cementitious and water including the percent overrununderrun .
Provide final project total quantities for and to the Engineer at the end of the Project using the Concrete Ingredient Summary Worksheet .
The Engineer will use the Concrete Ingredient Summary Worksheet to verify the following Individual daily cement quantity do not show an underrun in cement usage greater than .
percent of the quantity specified .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The final cement quantity summary does not show an overall underrun greater than .
percent and If either one or both of these limitations are exceeded the Engineer will not pay for the concrete represented at the contract unit price .
The Engineer may reject defective concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work or the Engineer may pay for the defective concrete at an adjusted unit price at the same ratio to the contract unit price as the quantity of cement used to the quantity of cement required less the allowable underrun .
If the cement exceeds the limitations for individual cutoff and final cutoff the Engineer may apply the price adjustment to the cutoff value that produces the greatest monetary deduction .
D Subgrade and Aggregate Base Preparations Prepare the subgrade and aggregate base in accordance with Excavation and Embankment Subgrade Preparation and Aggregate Base and the following Fine grade the aggregate base to the shape and grade shown on the plans allowing construction of the pavement to the thickness and cross section shown on the plans .
Use an approved fine grading machine mounted on crawler tracks .
Complete base construction of a sufficient width outside the edge of the pavement to support the slipform paver treads without distortion of the alignment or grade line .
Shape and maintain the shoulders to allow surface water to drain away from the pavement and off the shoulders .
E Concrete Equipment and Paving Operations Provide selfpropelled spreading and finishing machines capable of consolidating and finishing the concrete and producing a dense and homogenous finished surface meeting the requirements specified in Concrete Pavement .
E. Consistency Maintain the concrete at a uniform consistency .
The Engineer will not allow an edge slump greater than ⅛ in or irregular edge alignment .
For slipform concrete pavement placement place the concrete with a slump value that optimizes placement except ensure the concrete does not slough or slump and is adequately consolidated and meets all other requirements of Concrete Pavement .
For fixed form placement place the concrete with a slump no greater than the maximum allowable slump in accordance with Table .
E. Slipform Construction Place concrete using a slipform paver or combination of pavers designed to spread consolidate screed and floatfinish the freshly placed concrete with minimum hand finishing .
Provide a slipform paver with a nonoscillating extrusion plate with an adjustable angle of entry .
Place the concrete pavement before placing curb and gutter .
If the sequence of operations includes placing the curb and gutter before the concrete pavement submit a jointing plan to the Engineer for approval .
Submit the jointing plan to the Engineer a minimum of seven calendar days before placing the curb and gutter .
Equip the paver with automatic grade control capable of maintaining both the elevation and longitudinal line shown on the plans on both sides of the paver .
Use an erected string line to achieve the line and grade reference .
Tightly stretch a string line set parallel to the established grade for the pavement surface to achieve the grade reference .
Set the control reference and support the line at intervals to maintain the established grade and alignment .
When constructing concrete overlays set and use string lines for grade control on both sides of the roadway during paving operations .
Operate the slipform paver with a continuous forward movement coordinating all operations of mixing providing adequate concrete hauling units and spreading concrete to provide uniform progress with minimal stopping and starting of the paver .
Consolidate the full width and depth of concrete pavement placed by a single pass of a series of internal vibrators .
Operate fullwidth vibrators from VPM to VPM in concrete and from VPM to VPM when checked in air .
Deliver the vibrator impulses directly to the concrete and operate at an intensity to consolidate the concrete uniformly throughout .
Minnesota Standard Specifications the entire depth and width of the concrete .
The Contractor may increase the vibrator frequency as approved by the Engineer .
Perform additional testing as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
If the vibrator fails suspend operations and remove unconsolidated concrete .
Regulate the rate of progress of the vibratory equipment and the duration of the application to fully but not excessively vibrate the concrete .
If the forward progress of the paver stops suspend the operation of vibrators .
Attach vibrators to spreading or finishing equipment .
Do not allow vibrators to come in contact with preset dowel basket assemblies the grade pavement reinforcement or side forms .
Do not allow the operation of vibrators to cause separation or segregation of the mix ingredients including the downward displacement of large aggregate or the accumulation of laitance on the concrete surface .
The Contractor may reduce the vibration frequency within the specified range if reducing the forward progress of the paver to avoid segregation of the concrete mix .
Connect the power to all vibrators so that they cease when the machine motion is stopped .
Stop paving operations if a vibrator fails to operate within the range specified above .
E .. a Electronic Vibration Monitoring Device For projects with greater than cu .
yd provide an electronic monitoring device meeting the following characteristics and requirements to display the operating frequency of each individual internal vibrator for concrete pavement placed by the slipform method Contains a readout display near the operators controls visible to the paver operator and to the Engineer Operates continuously as the paving machine operates Displays all the vibrator frequencies with manual and automatic sequencing for each of the individual vibrators and Records the following at least every ft of paving or at least every min of time .
Clock time .
Station location .
Paver track speed and .
Operating frequency of individual vibrators expressed as VPM .
Provide an electronic copy containing the record of data after the completion of the concrete paving operation .
Provide vibration data daily as directed by the Engineer .
E. Fixed Form Construction E .. a Setting Forms Provide forms meeting the following requirements and characteristics Steel straight edge sides Depth equal to the pavement thickness shown on the plans Smooth and free of localized indentations and deformities Top face with deviations no greater than ⅛ in in any ft section Faces of straight forms with deviations no greater than ¼ in in any ft section Forms containing no damaged joint locks or pin pockets and Form lengths at least ft long with vertical joint .
For pavements with radii no greater than ft use flexible or curved forms approved by the Engineer .
Provide devices to securely set forms and withstand operation of the paving equipment without springing settlement or lateral displacement .
Provide forms with joint locks to tightly join the ends of abutting form sections .
Connect individual form sections using methods that create a continuous form .
Set the forms to the alignment and grade shown on the plans for a distance equal to at least h ahead of concrete placement .
Compact the foundation before placing the forms in accordance with .. D Subgrade and Aggregate Base Preparations .
Ensure the forms have a firm and uniform bearing over the entire base area are tightly joined and securely staked and are clean and free of accumulations of hardened concrete .
Coat the contact faces of the forms with an approved form coating material in accordance with Form Coating Material before placing the concrete .
During a rain event remove and reset the forms as necessary to allow drainage .
E .. b Fixed Form Placement Place concrete using one or more machines to spread screed and consolidate between previously set side forms .
Accomplish vibration of these areas using handheld or machinemounted internal vibrators .
If not using an electronic monitoring device use a tachometer or similar device to demonstrate to the Engineer that the paving equipment vibration meets the requirements in this section. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Use handheld vibrators to consolidate concrete adjacent to side forms and fixed structures .
Operate the handheld vibrators at a speed of at least VPM .
Do not allow the vibrator head to contact the joints load transfer devices reinforcement grade or side forms .
If the vibrator fails suspend operations and remove unconsolidated concrete .
Continue vibration to achieve adequate consolidation without segregation for the full depth and width of the area placed .
Provide an adequate number and capacity of machines to perform the work at a rate equal to the concrete delivery rate .
Strikeoff concrete with a clary screed unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Finish small or irregular areas that are inaccessible to finishing equipment using other methods as approved by the Engineer .
Discontinue any operation that causes displacement of the side forms from the line or grade or causes undue delay as determined by the Engineer due to mechanical difficulties .
E .. c Removal of Forms Do not remove side forms of pavement and back forms on integrant curb earlier than h after placing the concrete unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Remove forms without exerting shock or strain including temperature variations on the pavement or curb .
Cure concrete in accordance with .. M .. a Membrane Curing Method .
F Placing Concrete Construct mainline pavement in a single layer of concrete .
Place the concrete pavement in one complete pass of the paving machine to minimize the need for hand finishing .
The Engineer will not allow the edges of the pavement including longitudinal joints to deviate from the line shown on the plans by greater than ½ inch at any point .
Place concrete without any vertical surface deviations of the plastic concrete when matching into the beginning and end of the project bridge approaches and decks unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer .
Correct all high and low spots identified within the foot straight edge .
Coordinate paving operations for mixing delivering spreading and extruding the concrete to provide uniform progress of the paver .
Use sufficient trucks to ensure a steady forward progress of the paver .
If the forward movement of the paver stops for a period long enough to create a cold joint or honeycombing construct a header joint in accordance with .. F. Constructing Headers .
Do not add water to the surface of the concrete to aid in finishing without the approval of the Engineer .
The Engineer will give approval to replace evaporated surface water directly behind the paver caused by a halt in forward progress from a short term breakdown in equipment or supply of concrete .
The Contractor can request approval to add water to the surface when cutting bumps or filling dips in the plastic concrete each time additional water is needed .
If the Contractor adds water to the pavement surface without approval by the Engineer the Engineer will not pay watercement or pavement smoothness incentives on sections where the water is added and the Engineer may reject the pavement in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Set manhole and catch basin frames or rings to the elevation shown on the plans during the paving operations .
Do not form boxouts of castings unless approved by the Engineer .
Dump or discharge concrete without causing grade displacement or damage to the existing asphalt or bond breaker layer .
Repair damage to the grade in accordance with .. D Subgrade and Aggregate Base Preparations existing asphalt or bond breaker layer as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
Provide protection for turning concrete trucks .
F. Placement on Aggregate Base Maintain the base in a moist condition until placement of concrete .
F. Placement on Asphalt or Asphalt Bond Breaker When placing concrete on asphalt or asphalt bond beakers comply with the following Do not place concrete on an asphalt surface with an asphalt surface temperature greater than F. Maintain the asphalt surface in a moist condition and at a surface temperature not greater than F before placing the concrete .
The Engineer will allow the Contractor to apply water whitewash of hydrated lime and water or both to cool the asphalt surface or other methods allowed by the Engineer .
Before placing concrete on a milled asphalt surface clean the milled surface by sweeping and patch as shown on the plans in accordance with Bituminous Surface Reconditioning or as directed by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Placement on Type Nonwoven Geotextile Interlayer Furnish Type Geotextile from the ApprovedQualified Products list in accordance with Geotextile .
When placing concrete on the geotextile interlayer comply with the following F .. a Handling and Placement Requirements Prior to the placement of the geotextile interlayer remove loose or deteriorated surfacing in accordance with .
Construction or as directed by the Engineer .
The Contractor may propose a cementitious material or other equivalent patching material as approved by the Engineer .
The patch shall provide a flat tight surface before placement of the geotextile interlayer .
Roll geotextile out on underlying substrate .
Ensure geotextile is tight without excess wrinkles and folds .
Place the geotextile within days of concrete paving in such a way that free drainage of water within the geotextile is not impaired . .
When covering the entire surface with the geotextile the geotextile should overlap by in in .
In no location should more than layers of geotextile overlap . .
When placing geotextile strips only under dowel bar basket assemblies the geotextile width should extend longitudinally to in outside each side of the bottom rungs of the dowel bar basket assembly for the entire width of the roadway .
Geotextile should extend at least in beyond the most outside edge of the new concrete or extended out to the location shown in the plan .
Geotextile must drain into subsurface drains or a drainable pavement layer as shown in the plan .
Place the geotextile interlayer to a grade and tolerance such that the overlying PCC pavement thickness will meet minimum design requirements .
Adhere the geotextile to the underlying substrate using an approved cylinder spray adhesive for geotextiles and recommended by the manufacturer for use to attach the geotextile to the underlying concrete or asphalt .
Apply a minimum in wide adhesive bond to attach any edge of geotextile to the underlying substrate or to another piece of geotextile .
Apply pressure to the geotextile to set the adhesive prior to placing the concrete .
The Contractor may propose and demonstrate alternate methods for satisfactorily anchoring the geotextile to the Engineer for approval .
Slightly dampen but not saturate the geotextile prior to concrete placement .
F .. b Maintenance Requirements Maintain the geotextile interlayer during and after placement throughout its entire length until placement of the concrete overlay .
During this maintenance period correct any deficiencies to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The bond breaker layer shall properly drain at all times .
Do not place geotextile on areas subject to excess traffic until immediately before concrete placement .
During construction keep the geotextile and associated drain trenches free of fine soils or other contaminates .
If contamination of the geotextile interlayer occurs remove and replace or clean the surface to the satisfaction of the Engineer to assure drainage capacity as designed at no cost to the Department .
If a rain event occurs after placement of the geotextile remove excess water from the geotextile by use of rollers or any method acceptable to the Engineer .
F. Placement Adjacent to InPlace Concrete Secure preformed joint filler material for expansion joints in place to maintain the position shown on the plans during concrete placement .
Screed newly placed pavement to the same elevation as the inplace concrete to in or less .
When placing concrete adjacent to inplace concrete protect the following All ends of transverse joints in or wider to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Engineer will allow sawing through the existing joint when sawing the newly placed concrete and The inplace pavement to prevent damage .
F. Constructing Headers Use any approved construction header method as shown in the Standard Plate when constructing construction headers temporary headers and permanent headers as shown on the plans .
In the plastic concrete the Engineer may evaluate headers for vertical surface deviations with a foot straight edge .
Correct all high and low spots identified within the foot straight edge .
The Engineer will not allow incorporating any concrete accumulated in the grout box of the paver into the pavement .
Construct all headers such that the concrete contained in the grout box is removed from the project .
Use internal vibration to consolidate the concrete along header joints before final finishing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Air Content Sample and test the air content of the concrete in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
Using the MnDOT Air Content Chart record all air content test results .
F .. a Air Content Before Consolidation Measure the air content of the plastic concrete after placement on the grade but before consolidation .
Maintain the air content of Type paving concrete at the specified target of .
percent plus .
minus .
of the measured volume .
Make adjustments immediately to maintain the desired target air content in accordance with Specification Conformity with Contract Documents .
F .. a NonConforming Air Content Before Consolidation Only place Type concrete meeting the air content requirements in the work .
If the Contractor places Type concrete not meeting the air content requirements into the work the Engineer will not accept nonconforming concrete at the contract unit price .
For the quantity of nonconforming concrete not meeting the required air content the Engineer will make determinations regarding the disposition payment or removal in accordance with Table .
Table Grade A Paving Concrete Target Air Content .
Air Content Before Consolidation Monetary Reduction .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine the concrete suitability for the intended use in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work . . No deduction for materials placed as approved by the Engineer. . . . per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed . .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine the concrete suitability for the intended use in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
This may include testing on the hardened concrete as required by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer . .
Remove and replace concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work as directed by the Engineer .
This may include testing on the hardened concrete as required by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
If the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer determines the concrete can remain place the Engineer will not pay for the concrete and if the Engineer determines the surface is exposed to saltbrine freezethaw cycling coat with an epoxy penetrant sealer from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
F .. b Air Content After Consolidation If using the slipform paving method determine the air content after consolidation .
Place concrete with an air content of at least .
percent after consolidation .
F .. b AirLoss Correction Factor ACF Determine the ACF by subtracting the air content after consolidation from the air content before consolidation .
If the ACF exceeds .
take another test as soon as possible to verifyadjust for a new ACF .
F .. b ACF Adjustment to Air Content Tests Before Consolidation Each time an ACF is determined apply the ACF to all subsequent air content tests before consolidation and evaluate in accordance with .. F .. b Nonconforming Air Content After Consolidation .
F .. b NonConforming Air Content After Consolidation If the Contractor or Engineer test results in an air content after consolidation of less than .
take the following action A Immediately retest and verify the ACF is correct .
B If the results are still .
make immediate adjustments to the concrete or the consolidation process test any loads that have not been discharged or adjusted at the plant and apply the ACF to determine compliance .
C Test every load of concrete until the air content test results meet the requirements .
D Test at least additional trucks to ensure the concrete remains in compliance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E Perform additional testing on the hardened concrete as required by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
G Placing Pavement Reinforcement Provide and place reinforcement meeting the following requirements and characteristics Provide epoxy coated reinforcement in accordance with Metal Reinforcement except keyway bars and tie bars are not required to have epoxy coated ends .
Provide and place reinforcement bars including keyway bars tie bars taper steel and stopper bars as shown on the plans .
Place keyways when required as shown on the plans when placing fixed formed concrete of any thickness or at the Contractors option when the design thickness is inches or greater .
Provide and place supplemental pavement reinforcement as shown on the plans .
Provide and place reinforcement bars on chairs in stakes utilizing tie bar basket assemblies or by appropriate equipment for depressing the bars to the specified location .
For slipform paving stake the tie bar steel to the roadbed or use a mechanical device attached to the spreader or paver to place tie bar steel required for LT joints as shown on the plans .
Space and depress the tie bar steel to the depth and location shown on the plans .
Do not place tie bars over transverse contraction joints .
H Dowel Bar Placement Place dowel bars parallel to the substrate surface and parallel to the centerline of the pavement .
Space contraction joints at the intervals shown on the plans except shorten the spacing at the following to provide panel lengths at least ft Adjacent to header joints Reinforced panels Railroad grade crossings and Free ends of pavement .
In accordance with Standard Plate provide dowel bar assemblies manufactured in single units for the lane widths shown on the plans unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
For nontypical lane widths do not splice use more than two dowel bar assemblies in any one doweled joint .
Secure dowel bar assemblies with anchors to hold the dowel bars in the correct position and alignment while preventing movement during concrete placement in accordance with Standard Plate and the following Provide a Quality Control Plan for Anchoring Dowel Basket Assemblies in accordance with .. H. Quality Control Plan for Anchoring Dowel Basket Assemblies .
Fasten the baskets to the substrate surface so that they do not move vertically or horizontally more than inch .
Type location number and length of anchors are dependent upon field conditions Before the beginning of concrete pavement placement and each day prior to beginning paving demonstrate the fastening method to the Engineer for approval .
Within h before covering with concrete coat the dowel bars with a thin uniform coating of a form coating or other material in accordance with Form Coating Material .
Before placing the concrete mark the location on both sides of each transverse joint as approved by the Engineer .
Transfer the markings to the top surface of the fresh concrete immediately after completing the final finishing operations .
The Contractor may use a mechanical dowel bar inserter to place dowel bars in the pavement as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
Immediately before inserting the dowels coat the dowels with a thin uniform coating of a form coating material in accordance with Form Coating Material .
If using a dowel bar inserter initially and on each production day demonstrate to the Engineer that the inserted dowel bars in the completed concrete pavement are parallel to the surface and centerline slab and are located at middepth of the slab thickness .
H. Quality Control Plan for Anchoring Dowel Basket Assemblies At least days prior to the beginning of concrete paving provide a Quality Control Plan in writing to the Engineer for acceptance that provides a method for keeping the dowel basket assemblies anchored to the grade the existing concrete or into the asphalt or bond breaker layer and into the underlying concrete .
The Quality Control Plan shall include the following at a minimum Proposed type and number of fasteners Proposed installation equipment Dowel basket assembly anchoring plan i.e .
Anchored all basket assemblies prior to concrete placement one lane at a time anchor all basket assemblies during the concrete placement operation etc .
Action plan if misaligned baskets are identified during concrete pavement placement .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will suspend paving operations if the Contractor fails to comply with their Quality Control Plan .
I Definition of a Lot and Sublot for Concrete Field Testing I .
Lot Establishment The Engineer will select random locations for locating dowel bars reinforcement LT steel pavement texture and concrete probing testing .
The Department defines a lot as all concrete pavement of a single lane added together lineally into a lot .
Doweled concrete shoulders less than ft in paved width and undoweled concrete shoulders are not included as part of the lot .
The Department defines a single lane in accordance with the following From the pavement edge to the adjacent longitudinal joint From one longitudinal joint to the next or In the absence of a longitudinal joint between pavement edges Each ramp and loop ft in width Doweled concrete shoulder ft in width .
I. Sublot Establishment Once established the Engineer will divide the lot into sublots representing linear lane ft .
The Engineer will add partial sublots less than lineal lane ft to the previous sublot .
The Engineer will consider partial sublots equal to or greater than lineal lane ft as individual sublots .
If the project results in less than four sublots the Engineer will divide the project into four sublots of equal length .
The Engineer will provide the sublot testing locations to the Contractor prior to pavement placement .
The Engineer will utilize random numbers to locate specific testing locations within the sublots at the minimum rates defined in .. J .
Minimum Plastic Concrete MITScanT Testing Rates .. K .. a Texture Testing and Spec .. L. Contractor Quality Control Probing .
J Dowel Bar and Tie Bar Placement Testing in Plastic Concrete For concrete paving projects greater than cu .
yd provide a MITScanT nondestructive testing device in accordance with this section for concrete pavement placed by the slipform method .
J. MITSCANT NonDestructive Testing Device The Contractor shall furnish a MITSCANT nondestructive testing device or approved equal as determined by the Concrete Engineer having the ability to locate pavement reinforcement dowel bars and measure concrete pavement thickness in a single device .
Agency and Contractor personnel shall mutually use this nondestructive testing device to locate dowel bar and tie steel placement in the plastic concrete during pavement construction .
Agency observations do not relieve the Contractor of the requirement to properly place the concrete reinforcement and dowel bars as shown in the plans .
In addition the Engineer reserves the right to reject the pavement in accordance with Conformity with Plans and Specifications and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer will not provide additional payment for furnishing the above equipment for the Departments use .
J .
Minimum Plastic Concrete MITScanT Testing Rates The Engineer will identify the MITSCANT testing locations in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control and the following .
Use the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook to determine the random testing locations . .
Provide the MITSCAN T Report generated from the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook to the Contractor prior to the start of paving . .
Offset the location of the dowel bar test to the closest contraction joint .
Unless otherwise approved by the Engineer perform all testing with the MITSCANT device in the presence of the Engineer .
If the concrete pavement is constructed utilizing a slip formpaving machine locate the entire span of the dowel bar and machine placed tie bar LT steel in the plastic concrete utilizing a walk bridge that spans the width of the pavement and the following .
Verify the adequacy of the dowel bar basket anchoring by locating both the upstream and downstream edges of the dowel bar baskets. . Verify the presence and alignment of tie bar LT steel by locating both ends of the tie bar. . Minnesota Standard Specifications J .. a Alignment Tolerances Ensure the dowel bar and tie bar placement complies with the following tolerances For dowel bars the proposed sawcut is centered on the dowel bars inches and that the dowels remain anchored parallel to the roadway centerline .
For tie bars the proposed saw cut is centered on the tie bar inches .
J. Nonconforming Placement If a dowelled contraction joint has dowel bars out of acceptable alignment during placement in accordance with .. J .. a Alignment Tolerances and Standard Plate scan both upstream and downstream from the misaligned transverse doweled joints from concrete placed in the same operation until at least three joints comply with Standard Plate .
If a panel along the tied longitudinal LT joint is found to have two or more tie bars missing or out of acceptable alignment tolerances specified in .. J .. a Alignment Tolerances scan joints on both ends until three consecutive panels meets the correct number of tie bars installed and acceptable tie bar alignment tolerances .
If at any time the Engineer determines the dowel bar anchoring or tie bar placement processes are unacceptable due to alignmenttolerance issues the Engineer may request the Contractor amend the placement process for the operation in question to achieve satisfactory placement of the dowel bars and tie bars .
The Engineer will consider concrete pavement that fails to comply with the alignment tolerances as Unacceptable Work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will evaluate the defective concrete pavement in accordance with .. Q Workmanship and Quality .
K Surface Finishing Use a ⅜ in radius edging tool to finish edges of the pavement .
Do not add water to the surface of the concrete to aid in finishing without the approval of the Engineer .
If satisfactory finishing of the pavement does not occur as determined by the Engineer suspend batching and mixing operations .
After consolidating screeding and floating the concrete give the pavement surface a final finish texture in accordance with .. K. Pavement Texture .
K. Pavement Texture Pull the carpet drag longitudinally over the finished surface to produce a uniform final finish textured surface .
Provide a texture depth of at least .
mm in accordance with ASTM E Test Method for Measuring Surface Macrotexture Depth Using a Sand Volumetric Technique .
Provide artificial grass type carpeting for the carpet drag meeting the following characteristics and requirements Molded polyethylene pile face Blade length from ⅝ in to in and Total weight of at least oz per sq .
yd .
Mount the drag on a bridge having external alignment control .
Provide a drag as wide as the concrete placed without causing edge slump .
Maintain continual contact between the drag and the pavement surface at all times during texturing .
Apply down pressure on the pavement surface as necessary to achieve uniform texturing .
The Contractor may use manual methods including brooms to achieve similar results on the edges of the pavements and ramps and other locations as approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor may use other texturing equipment to obtain an equivalent texture as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
For concrete pavements with a posted vehicle speed less than or equal to mph use either a carpet drag or broom drag longitudinally to achieve a uniform final finish textured surface .
K .. a Texture Testing The Engineer will identify the texture testing locations in accordance with .. I Definition of Lot and Sublot for Concrete Field Testing and the following Use the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook to determine the random testing locations .
Provide the Concrete Texture Report generated from the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCAN T Workbook to the Contractor prior to the start of paving .
Offset the texture test at a point located transversely in the outside wheel path. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Perform surface texture testing of the concrete pavement and provide the test results to the Engineer no later than h after pavement placement unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
K .. b Nonconforming Texture The Engineer will evaluate the texture results in accordance with Table .
If any texture test results fall below the minimum required correct the operation immediately to achieve the minimum required texture .
If the Engineer determines by visual inspection that areas not represented by random testing appear to not meet the minimum texture required the Engineer reserves the right to require additional testing in those specific areas to determine compliance .
Run additional tests at ft intervals before and after the failing test location to determine the limits of any individual failing test .
Table Pavement Texture Depth Texture Depth Test Results for Individual Tests Resolution .
mm Meets requirements No action required .
mm to .
mm The Engineer will accept the work if the Contractor amends the operation to achieve the required depth of at least .
mm as approved by the Engineer .
If the Contractor fails to correct the operation the Engineer will suspend the paving operation until corrections produce the required results. . mm Perform concrete grinding of the pavement represented by this test to attain the minimum texture of .
mm as required by the Engineer .
L Pavement Thickness Requirements Provide pavement with a finished pavement thickness as shown on the plans or as modified in writing by the Engineer .
L. Thickness Evaluation Procedure The Engineer will evaluate each differing concrete pavement thickness required on the project .
The Engineer will evaluate the concrete pavement through random probing and core measurements in accordance with the following Contractor Quality Control Probe QCP Probe Verification Core PVC and Quality Acceptance Core QAC .
The Engineer will identify the QCP PVC and QAC thickness measurement locations in accordance with .. I Definition of Lot and Sublot for Concrete Field Testing and the following Using the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook to determine the random testing locations .
Adjust the location to ensure the Contractor takes no measurements within ft of the pavement edge and takes no measurements within ft of any transverse or longitudinal joint or other obstructions .
Prior to the start of paving provide the Field Probing Report generated from the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook to the Contractor .
L. Contractor Quality Control Probing QCP Measure the pavement thickness of freshly finished concrete pavement at a rate of at least one probe measurement per sublot .
Notify the Engineer before performing probing thickness measurements in the plastic concrete so they may observe the Contractors probe tests .
Record the probing results on the Field Probing Report .
Provide daily summary reports listing the results of the days QCP thickness measurements and additional probing results to the Engineer .
L .. a Contractor QCP Probing Equipment and Probing Method Provide the following equipment as approved by the Engineer to perform probing Probing rod meeting the following characteristics and requirements .
Nonflexing .
Length capable of completely penetrating the pavement for measuring .
Utilizes a circular or square top plate .
Contains a centrally located hole in the top plate with a diameter allowing for easy maneuvering along the length of the probing rod and .
Fitted with a locking device fixing the angle between the top plate and the probing rod at degrees when locked. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Base plate meeting the following characteristics and requirements .
cm .
mm diameter µm µm thick steel US ASTM Standard A Type Commercial Grade G circular plate supplied by Kessler Soils Engineering Products Inc. or approved equal and .
Rigid when in place allowing the probing rod to be pushed against it without flexing .
Work bridge meeting the following characteristics and requirements .
Spans the full width of the freshly laid concrete .
Supports a person and .
Height above the concrete allows for the use of the probing device .
Tape measure accurate to nearest ⅛ in and with a length capable of measuring the depth of penetration of the probing device into the plastic concrete pavement .
Perform probing in accordance with the following Place the base plates at the randomly selected locations and anchor the plates to prevent movement during concrete placement .
Mark the locations of the base plates to ensure ease of locating the plates after the paver has passed .
Position the bridge at the selected locations to reach and locate each point .
Assemble the probing device .
Keeping the probing rod perpendicular to the pavement surface insert the rod into the plastic concrete until the rod strikes the base plate .
Slide the top plate down the probing rod until it contacts the pavement surface then lock to the probing rod .
Withdraw the probing device .
Measure the length of the probing rod inserted into the plastic concrete from the underside of the top plate to the end of the probing rod .
Record this measurement to the nearest ⅛ in .
L .. b Individual Deficient Probe If an individual probe measurement shows a thickness deficiency greater than ½ in from plan thickness take a core QCPCore at the probe location to determine if the pavement is defective .
L. Quality Acceptance Testing Coring After concrete pavement placement the Engineer will mark the core locations identified on the Field Coring Report generated from the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook .
The Contractor will core the designated PVC and QAC locations .
L .. a Probe Verification Core PVC Take PVC at the same location as a probe measurement at the rate of one core for every four probe measurements .
If the probe measurements are not divided evenly by four for each plan thickness take one additional core in the remaining probes .
The Engineer will compare PVC measurement to the initial probe measurement .
L .. b Quality Assurance Cores QAC Take one random core every lineal lane ft for each plan thickness .
Add partial segments less than lineal lane ft to the previous lineal lane ft and take one core .
If partial segments are equal to or greater than lineal lane ft take one random core .
If the plan thickness for the entire project is less than lineal lane ft take one random core .
L .. c PVC and QAC Coring Method The Engineer will allow coring after the concrete meets the requirement of .. O Opening Pavement to Traffic .
Use U concrete or another concrete mix approved by the Engineer to fill the core holes within h of coring at no additional cost to the Department .
Provide traffic control for coring Cut in nominal diameter cores at marked locations .
Lay the cores next to the holes in a curing condition .
Protect the cores .
Do not submit cores out of round not perpendicular or containing ridges The Engineer will field measure the core thickness to the nearest ⅛ in verify Field ID Number the cores and record the field measurement on the Field Coring Report generated from the MnDOT Probing Coring Texture MITSCANT Workbook Pick up the cores accompanied by the Engineer .
Store the cores in a water tank heated from F to F at the Department field office .
The Engineer will not require the storage of cores in a curing condition for concrete older than days The Engineer will transport the cores in a curing condition unless older than days to the MnDOT Office of Materials and Road Research and L .. d Final Pavement Thickness Core Measurement The MnDOT Office of Materials and Road Research will determine the final pavement thickness by measuring the length of the PVC and QAC cores in accordance with the following Use nine probe testing device to obtain the average length of the core in one operation .
Report the lab measured core length to the nearest .
in. . Minnesota Standard Specifications After Department thickness verification the Department will test all of the cores for compressive strength at days of age for information only .
The Department will test three of the cores from the entire project for rapid chloride permeability RCP in lieu of compressive strength testing for information only .
L. Evaluation of Cores to Determine Acceptance The Engineer will use labmeasured cores QCPCore PVC and QAC to determine acceptance and price adjustment based upon the following Individual core thickness in accordance with Table and Final average core thickness for each plan thickness PT .
Table Acceptable Concrete Pavement Thickness Individual Lab Measured Core QCPCore PVC or QAC Exploratory Coring Required Resolution PT ½ No .. L. PT ½ in to in .. L. .. L .. a PT .. L. .. L .. b L. Exploratory Coring The Engineer will require an exploratory core in the adjacent lane if placed in the same paving operation .
If the length of the exploratory core in the adjacent lane is at least equal to the plan thickness minus ½ in the Engineer will not require additional cores in the adjacent lane .
Take exploratory cores in accordance with the following procedure At any location within ft on each side of the deficient thickness location and at the same distance from the pavement centerline .
If the length of each of the first exploratory cores is at least equal to the plan thickness minus ½ in the Engineer will not require additional cores from this location .
If any cores do not fall within the plan thickness minus ½ in take additional exploratory cores at ft intervals and at the same distance from the pavement centerline as directed by the Engineer .
Perform coring in the direction of the deficiency until obtaining a core with a length at least equal to the plan thickness minus ½ in in each lane separately .
The Engineer will use exploratory cores to determine the extent of deficient pavement thickness for adjusting the contract unit price or requiring pavement removal and replacement .
L. Nonconforming Thickness The Department defines the defective pavement area as the entire area surrounding the deficient core within the entire width of the traffic lane and between acceptable cores .
The Department considers the pavement acceptable to remain in place in the remaining areas as the increment where the cores show a thickness deficiency no greater than plan thickness minus ½ in .
L .. a Defective Pavement Area between ½ in and in For cores showing a pavement thickness greater than the plan thickness minus ½ in to in the Contractor may choose one of the following Remove and replace the defective pavement area at no additional cost to the Department or Leave the pavement in place with a monetary deduction of .
per sq .
yd for the defective pavement area as approved by the Engineer .
L .. b Defective Pavement Area in For cores showing a pavement thickness greater than in below the plan thickness the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine whether the Contractor will do one of the following Remove and replace the defective pavement area at no additional cost to the Department or Leave the pavement in place at no cost to the Department and apply a monetary deduction of .
per sq .
yd for the defective pavement area in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents .
L. Final Average Core Thickness After all coring including exploratory coring is completed the Engineer will use all the cores QCPCore PVC or QAC to determine the final average core thickness for each plan thickness .
If all of the cores QCPCore PVC or QAC meet the design plan thickness requirements of the project the Engineer will consider the final average core thickness for each plan thickness acceptable .
If any of the cores QCPCore PVC or QAC do not meet the design plan thickness requirements of the project the Engineer will determine the final average core thickness for each plan thickness except for the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications If exploratory cores are taken to identify the defective pavement area substitute the two outside exploratory cores that are within plan thickness minus ½ in for the deficient PVC or QAC .
If the length of a PVC or QAC exceeds the plan thickness plus .
in the Engineer will limit the core length to the plan thickness plus .
in .
If the final average core thickness for each plan thickness is deficient by more than the plan thickness minus .
in the Engineer will pay for the pavement by the plan thickness at the contract unit price less the monetary deductions in Table excluding areas of defective pavement as indicated above .
Table Monetary Deductions for Final Average Core Thickness Each Plan Thickness Thickness Deficiency Exceeding Permissible Deviations in Adjusted contract unit price per sq .
yd of Payment . . None tolerance .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . M Concrete Curing and Protection After completing final finishing operations cure all exposed concrete surfaces .
Use one of the following curing methods In accordance with .. M .. a Membrane Curing Method place the membrane curing compound conforming to PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound or Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound within minutes of concrete placement or once the bleed water has dissipated unless the Engineer directs otherwise in accordance with .. M .. a Membrane Curing Method .
Place the membrane curing compound on the edges within minutes after permanent removal of the forms or curing blankets unless the contract requires otherwise .
Place plastic curing blankets or completely saturated burlap curing blankets in accordance with .. M .. b Curing Blanket Method as soon as practical without marring the surface .
Whenever weather conditions are such as to cause unusual or adverse placing and finishing conditions or equipment failures occur expedite the application of a curing method or temporarily suspend the mixing and placing operations as the conditions require .
If necessary to remove the coverings to saw joints or perform other required work and if the Engineer approves remove the covering for the minimum time required to complete that work .
Failure to comply with the above provisions will result in the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer applying a monetary deduction in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents .
When there is not a separate contract unit price for Structural Concrete the Engineer will apply a monetary deduction of .
per cu .
yd or percent of the Contractorprovided invoice amount for the concrete in question whichever is less .
M. Curing Methods M .. a Membrane Curing Method Before application agitate the curing compound as received in the shipping container to obtain a homogenous mixture .
Protect membrane curing compounds from freezing before application .
Handle and apply the membrane curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Apply the curing compound in accordance with the following .
At a minimum rate of gal per sq .
ft of surface curing area . .
Apply curing compound homogeneously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces equal to a white sheet of typing paper at the time of application .
If using a Department approved curing compound with a nonwhite base color apply the compound to provide a uniform solid opaque consistency meeting the intent of the requirement in this section . .
If the curing compound is damaged during the curing period immediately repair the damaged area by re spraying . .
If the Engineer determines that the initial or corrective spraying result in unsatisfactory curing the Engineer may require the Contractor to use the blanket curing method at no additional cost to the Department .
Use the fullyautomatic selfpropelled mechanical power sprayer approved by the Engineer to apply the curing compound in accordance with the following .
Operate the equipment to direct the curing compound to the surface from two different lateral directions .
Do not allow the sprayer to ride on the pavement surface .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Ensure the sprayer covers the entire lane width and atomizes the curing compound and .
If puddling dripping or nonuniform application occurs suspend the operation to perform corrections as approved by the Engineer .
Use a fully automatic selfpropelled mechanical power sprayer equipped with the following as approved by the Engineer .
A recirculating bypass system that provides for continuous agitation of the reservoir material .
Separate filters for the hose and nozzle .
Check valve nozzles .
Multiple or adjustable nozzle system that provides for variable spray patterns .
A shield to control loss of material by wind action and .
A spraybar drive system that operates independently of the wheels or track drive system .
For applying the curing compound on pavements that are ft wide or less and irregular shaped surfaces the Engineer will allow an airless spraying machine that complies with the following .
A recirculating bypass system that provides for continuous agitation of the reservoir material .
Separate filters for the hose and nozzle and .
Multiple or adjustable nozzle system that provides for variable spray patterns .
M .. b Curing Blanket Method After completion of the finishing operations and without marring the concrete cover the concrete with curing blankets .
Install in a manner that envelops the exposed concrete and prevents loss of water vapor .
After the concrete has cured apply membrane curing compound to the concrete surfaces that will remain exposed in the completed work .
M. Protection Against Rain Protect the concrete from damage due to rain .
Have available near the site of the work materials for protection of the edges and surface of the concrete .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until corrective action is taken and may subject the raindamaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If corrective work is performed to the satisfaction of the Engineer the Engineer will provide payment for incentives provided the concrete meets all other requirements of Concrete Pavement .
M. Protection Against Cold Weather If the national weather service forecast for the construction area predicts air temperatures of F or less within the next h and the Contractor wishes to place concrete the Contractor shall submit a cold weather protection plan .
Protect the concrete from damage including freezing due to cold weather .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until corrective action is taken and may subject the damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
M .. a Cold Weather Protection Plan Submit a proposed time schedule and plans for cold weather protection of concrete in writing to the Engineer for acceptance that provides provisions for adequately protecting the concrete during placement and curing .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer accepts the cold weather protection plans .
M. Vibratory and Backfilling Protection Protect newly placed concrete from damage by adjacent vibratory or backfilling operations for a minimum of h. Resume vibratory and backfilling operations after the concrete has reached a minimum compressive strength of psi or a flexural strength of psi .
Cast concrete control specimens in accordance with .. G. Test Methods and Specimens .
The Engineer will test the control specimens .
If the Engineer discovers evidence of damaged concrete the Engineer will suspend work until the Contractor corrects the work .
The Engineer may reject damaged concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Contractor may use handoperated concrete consolidation equipment walkbehind vibratoryplate compactors rollers in static mode and fine grading machines h after placing the concrete and other equipment as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
N Joint Construction Operations Unless otherwise shown on the plans construct all joints perpendicular to the grade .
N. Joint Sawing Equipment Provide wetcut saws for joint establishment in the all concrete .
If the Contractor would like to use lighter weight drycut saws commonly referred to as early entry submit a Quality Control Plan to the Engineer defining the intended use for the earlyentry saws .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will evaluate the QC plan to determine if their use is acceptable. . Minnesota Standard Specifications When using earlyentry saws use saw blades and skid plates specifically designed for the type coarse aggregate used in the concrete in accordance with the saw manufacturers recommendation .
N. Joint Establishment Provide initial joint sawing as shown on the plans .
Perform the initial sawing as soon as the concrete will support the joint sawing operation without raveling and before random cracking occurs .
If raveling of joints occurs due to the sawing operations review the sawing operation and make immediate correction to the sawing operations .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will evaluate the raveled joints in accordance with .. Q Workmanship and Quality .
During sawing of joints provide one or more backup saws and an adequate supply of blades .
Immediately after completing the joint sawing use water under nozzle pressure to remove the sawing residue from each joint and the pavement surface .
If widening is necessary do not widen the joints to full width until the concrete is at least h old or longer if the sawing causes raveling of the concrete .
Extend transverse joints constructed in the pavement through the integrant curb .
N. Joint Sealing When joint sealing is required by the Contract provide a joint sealant in accordance with HotPoured ExtraLow Modulus ElasticType Joint and Crack Sealer unless the type of sealant for contraction joints is otherwise specified in the contract .
If the concrete mixture contains Class B coarse aggregate as defined in Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete do not seal joints with silicone .
Perform joint sealing as shown on the plans and in accordance with the following Seal joints after the Engineer inspects and approves the joints Perform joint sealing on surface dry concrete after cleaning the joints of debris dirt dust and other foreign matter including accumulations of concrete Lightly sandblast the joint walls before final compressed air cleaning Immediately before sealing the joints clean the joints with a jet of compressed air under pressure of at least psi Seal transverse integrant curb joints and shoulders with the same joint sealer used to seal the pavement joints Seal joints in accordance with the tolerances shown on the plans Provide backer rod material compatible with the sealer as shown on the plans and Remove and replace sealer at joints filled above the permissible level shown on the plans at no additional cost to the Department .
Handle and place joint sealer material as recommended by the manufacturer and in accordance with the following requirements N .. a HotPoured Sealers Heat hotpoured sealers in a doubleboiler type kettle or melter .
Fill the space between inner and outer shells with oil or other material as allowed by the manufacturer .
Provide heating equipment with automatic temperature control mechanical agitation and recirculating pump .
Use heating equipment as recommended by the manufacturer of the sealer material .
Do not melt quantities of sealer material greater than the quantity used within the same day .
After heating the sealer material to the application temperature maintain the material temperature until placement .
Place the sealer material within h after the initial heating to the application temperature .
Apply sealant to the pavement at ambient pavement temperatures greater than F. N .. b Silicone Sealers Install silicone sealers as recommended by the manufacturer .
N .. c Preformed Sealers Provide preformed seals in one continuous length for each joint except the Contractor may use butt splices in transverse joints at longitudinal joints .
Do not stretch the preformed sealer material in the installation process by greater than percent of the joint length .
O Opening Pavement to Traffic Do not open a new pavement slab to general public traffic or operate paving or other heavy equipment on it for days or until the concrete has reached a minimum flexural strength meeting the requirements of Table or minimum compressive strength of psi whichever occurs first. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If the pavement joints are widened seal the joints before operating paving or other heavy equipment and general public traffic on the pavement .
Cast the field control specimens in accordance with .. G. Test Methods and Specimens .
Cure the field control specimens in the same manner and under the same conditions as the pavement represented .
The Engineer will test the field control specimens in accordance with .. G. Test Methods and Specimens .
Table Minimum Strength Requirements for Opening Pavements to Construction and to General Public Traffic Slab Thickness in Flexural Strength psi . . . . . .
Perform operations on new pavement as approved by the Engineer and in accordance with the following When moving on and off the pavement construct a ramp to prevent damage to the pavement slab .
Protect the concrete pavement surface and joints from damage due to heavy loads or equipment in accordance with Restrictions on Movement and Storage of Heavy Loads and Equipment .
Sweep the pavement surface free of debris prior to placing the protective material or tracked paving equipment onto the slab .
Operate equipment on a slab without causing damage .
If damage results suspend operations and take corrective action as approved by the Engineer .
Do not operate the equipment wheels or tracks within in of the slab edge .
When hauling aggregate and other materials across newly constructed joints keep the pavement surface free of debris by sweeping or other method as approved by the Engineer to prevent spalling of the pavement joints .
O .
Early Opening of Pavement to Traffic For early use of the pavement as required by the Engineer construct a section of pavement of highearly strength concrete in accordance with .. L Concrete Mix Design Requirements at important road crossings intersections driveway entrances or other locations as shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Take precautions to satisfactorily finish cure and protect highearly strength concrete pavements .
P Pavement Smoothness IRI International Roughness Index Provide concrete pavement smoothness in accordance with Pavement Surface Smoothness .
For any pavement sections not subjected to Pavement Surface Smoothness the Engineer will use a ft straightedge to evaluate the hardened concrete pavement in accordance with .. Q Workmanship and Quality .
Q Workmanship and Quality The Engineer may use the ft straightedge as necessary to determine any defects in the hardened concrete .
When measuring the hardened concrete using the straightedge the Engineer will Measure the hardened concrete for surface deviations greater than in in ft .
Evaluate transverse joints by centering the straightedge longitudinally across the transverse joint .
Not lay the straightedge across a lane break with differing cross slopes .
The Engineer will require corrective work on vertical surface deviations greater than in within the span of the straightedge in any direction .
If the Engineer and Contractor mutually agree to not perform corrective work the Engineer will assess a monetary deduction of .
per event per lane .
For corrected variations the Engineer will accept deviations less than or equal to in within the span of a ft straightedge in any direction .
Q .
Defective Pavement The Engineer will pay for concrete pavement meeting the requirements and tolerances in accordance with this section at the contract unit price .
Pavement that fails to meet the minimum requirements when placed and tested in the prescribed manner is considered defective .
The Engineer may reject or adjust the payment for defective concrete pavement in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer will determine the limits of each individual defective pavement area .
If adjusting the price for defective payment the Engineer will measure the area to the nearest whole square yard except the Engineer will consider areas less than .
Minnesota Standard Specifications sq .
yd as sq .
yd .
The Engineer will determine the condition of each individual defective area of pavement based on the calculation of greatest deficiency within the area .
Q .
Random or Uncontrolled Cracking Repair or replace pavement with random or uncontrolled cracks as directed by the Engineer .
If repairing the pavement as directed by the Engineer use a dowel bar load transfer technique in accordance with the MnDOT Concrete Pavement Rehabilitation Details .
Submit the intended repair technique to the Engineer for approval .
Perform pavement repairs at no additional cost to the Department .
If the repair fails replace the pavement at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will accept repairs in accordance with Acceptance .
Q. Pavement Smoothness after Corrective Work In any location where the Contractor must remove and replace concrete full depth pavement due to Workmanship the Engineer will require reprofiling in accordance with Pavement Surface Smoothness . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Concrete Pavement If the contract includes the contract item Concrete Pavement or Concrete Pavement High Early the Engineer will measure in accordance with the following Measure the concrete pavement placed to a uniform crosssection thickness by the surface area of the pavement as constructed including integrant curb Include measurements for concrete pavement without regard to grade strength or type of concrete width or thickness of the pavement in a single measurement except if the plans include a contract item for highearly strength concrete and Apply incentive or disincentive for Concrete Pavement based on the theoretical volume of concrete used by multiplying the measured square yard of concrete by the thickness shown on the plans .
B Place Concrete Pavement If the contract includes the contract item Place Concrete Pavement the Engineer will measure concrete pavement placed by area based on specified dimensions including integrant curb .
This measurement will represent the surface area of the pavement as constructed .
B .
Structural Concrete If the contract includes the contract item Structural Concrete or Structural Concrete High Early the Engineer will measure the volume in accordance with the following Measure the volume of structural concrete placed to a variable crosssection thickness using the average end area method .
Verify the volume measurements from the computerized batch ticket printouts from the plant as verified by .. C. Concrete Ingredient Summaries and the consideration of any waste as agreed with the Engineer .
Include the volume of all specified concrete pavements into a single item without regard to grade strength width or thickness of the concrete pavement except if the plans include a contract item for highearly strength concrete .
Apply incentives or disincentives based on the cubic yard of Structural Concrete .
C Supplemental Pavement Reinforcement The Engineer will measure supplemental pavement reinforcement over culverts storm sewers and water mains by weight .
D Expansion Joints The Engineer will separately measure dowelled expansion joints of each design designation as shown on the plans by length along the joint line .
E Reinforcement Bars The Engineer will not separately measure keyway bars tie bars taper steel stopper bars and other reinforcement bars .
F Integrant Curb The Engineer will separately measure integrant curb of each design by length .
G Dowel Bars The Engineer will measure dowel bars by the actual number of individual dowels placed .
The Engineer will not measure dowels included in the contract linear foot price for Dowelled Expansion Joints Design ___ .
H Concrete Coring The Engineer will not separately measure the number of cores taken identified and delivered as required by the contract or directed by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
BASIS OF PAYMENT A Concrete Pavement Unless the plans include a separate contract item the Engineer will consider the contract square yard price for Concrete Pavement to include the cost of constructing the pavement including the cost of batch materials and mixing operations plantlab office producing the concrete fine grading forming including all headers providing and installing keyway and keyway bars tie bars taper steel stopper bars and other reinforcement bars delivering depositing placing spreading screeding vibration monitoring finishing curing protecting sawing and sealing the concrete .
If the plans include a separate contract item for Concrete Pavement HighEarly or if the Contractor requests highearly and the Engineer approves the Department will not provide extra compensation for the production of highearly strength concrete .
The contract square yard price for Concrete Pavement HighEarly includes the cost of constructing the pavement including the cost of batch materials and mixing operations plantlab office producing the concrete fine grading forming including all headers providing and installing keyway bars tie bars taper steel stopper bars and other reinforcement bars delivering depositing placing spreading screeding vibration monitoring finishing curing protecting sawing and sealing the concrete .
If the plans do not include a separate contract item for Concrete Pavement HighEarly and the Engineer orders highearly concrete the Department will pay for the additional cement at a rate of the invoice cost plus percent .
B Place Concrete Pavement Unless the plans include a separate contract item the Engineer will consider the contract square yard price for Place Concrete Pavement to includes the cost of constructing the pavement including fine grading forming including all headers providing and installing keyway and keyway bars tie bars taper steel stopper bars and other reinforcement bars placing spreading screeding vibration monitoring finishing curing protecting sawing and sealing the concrete .
B .
Structural Concrete The Engineer will field calculate the volume of Structural Concrete and Structural Concrete High Early placed .
Due to variations in the asphalt or asphalt bond breaker layer the Contractor may request additional volume up to percent of the Engineers field calculated final volume of Structural Concrete Structural Concrete High Early or both for the entire project .
The Engineer will verify additional volume of concrete from the computerized batch ticket printouts from the plant with consideration of any waste .
If the Engineer finds the Contractors request for the additional final volume valid the Engineer will pay for the additional volume up to percent of the calculated quantity for the entire project .
The contract cubic yard price for Structural Concrete and Structural Concrete HighEarly includes the cost of producing delivering and depositing the concrete including the cost of the batch materials mixing operations and the plantlab office .
If the plans include a separate contract item for Structural Concrete HighEarly or if the Contractor requests highearly and the Engineer approves the Department will not provide extra compensation for the production of highearly strength concrete .
If the plans do not include a separate contract item for Structural Concrete HighEarly and the Engineer orders highearly concrete the Department will pay for additional cement at a rate of the invoice cost plus percent .
C Other Concrete Items The Department will pay for furnished and installed Type geotextile in accordance with .
Geotextiles Basis of Payment .
The contract pound price for Supplemental Pavement Reinforcement includes the cost of providing and placing the metal reinforcement including tie wires supporting devices and splicing .
The contract linear foot price for Dowelled Expansion Joints Design ___ includes the cost of constructing the joints complete in place as shown on the plans including the costs of providing and placing dowel bar assemblies filler and sealer materials .
The contract linear foot price for Integrant Curb Design ___ includes the cost of forming and finishing the curb and protecting and curing the concrete .
The relevant contract unit price for Concrete Pavement or Place Concrete Pavement includes the cost of coring including the cost of material labor equipment delivery core hole filling and traffic control. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will pay for concrete pavement on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Dowel Bar Each .
Dowelled Expansion Joints Design ___ linear foot .
Integrant Curb Design ___ linear foot .
Concrete Pavement ___ in square yard .
Concrete Pavement ___ in HighEarly square yard .
Place Concrete Pavement ___ in square yard .
Structural Concrete cubic yard .
Structural Concrete HighEarly cubic yard .
Supplemental Pavement Reinforcement pound ULTRATHIN BONDED WEARING COURSE UTBWC .
DESCRIPTION This work is the construction of an ultrathin bonded wearing course on a prepared pavement .
An ultrathin bonded wearing course is the application of a polymer modified emulsion membrane followed immediately with an ultrathin wearing course mixture. . MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS A Bituminous Materials A. Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane Provide a polymer modified emulsion membrane meeting the requirements of .. G A. Asphalt Binder Use a Performance Graded binder PG V that meets MnDOT .. A .
B Aggregate Meets MnDOT .. B .
Mineral Filler Mineral filler shall meet the requirements in AASHTO M . C Mix Design .
It is the Contractors responsibility to design the UTBWC mixture that meets the requirements of this specification .
At the optimum binder content the mixture must meet the requirements in Table UTBWC Mixture Requirements .
Each design shall include the additional design trial points that bracket the optimum AC content and with at least one point at .
above and below the optimum AC content .
Draindown testing and adjusted AFT determinations are required on these trial points .
D. Mix Design Submittal Submit a proposed job mix formula JMF in writing to the Department Bituminous Engineer for review as specified meeting the requirements in Table UTBWC Aggregate Gradation Broadband and Table UTBWC Mixture Requirements and include the following Source pit ID and description of the materials used .
The proportion and gradation of each material in the JMF .
The composite gradation of the design blend .
Bulk and apparent specific gravities and water absorption by weight of dry aggregate .
Both coarse and fine aggregate for each product used in the mixture .
Use MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method and .
The tolerance allowed between the Contractors and the Departments specific gravities are Gsb individual .
and and Gsb combined .. Test results and worksheets for all properties required in Tables UTBWC Mixture Requirements and Tables to .
Testing results and worksheets for the additional design points that bracket the optimum AC point. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table UTBWC Mixture Requirements Test Criteria Test Reference Asphalt Content .. MnDOT Laboratory Manual or Adj .
AFT Calculated .
µm minimum MnDOT Laboratory Manual Draindown Test .
max AASHTO T Lottman TSR min Voids MnDOT Laboratory Manual D. Job Mix Formula Properties Base gradation asphalt binder content and adjusted AFT on the current Department reviewed Mixture Design Report .
The JMF limits are the target plus or minus the limits in accordance with table UTBWC JMF Limits .
Use JMF limits as the criteria for acceptance of materials based on individual sample testing .
Stop production if the test results vary from the JMF by more than the limits in Table UTBWC JMF Limits .
Identify the cause and document in detail the corrective action .
The JMF may only be adjusted if the revised JMF meets the mixture requirements in Tables UTBWC Mixture Requirements and Table UTBWC Aggregate Gradation Broadbands .
Do not resume paving until brought back into specification limits .
Table UTBWC JMF Limits Gradation Broad Band Limits Asphalt Content .
Adj .
AFT .
Note The above limits shall not exceed the Mixture Requirements in Table D. JMF Adjustments The Contractor may make a request to the Bituminous or District Materials Engineer for a JMF adjustment if the QC test results indicate a necessary change to the design .
A Certified Level II Bituminous QM Mix Designer will review the requested change for the Department .
If the request meets the requirements in Table UTBWC Aggregate Gradation Broadband and Table UTBWC Mixture Requirements a revised Mixture Design Report will be issued. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Weather Restrictions The pavement surface temperature and ambient air temperature shall be at least F. A damp pavement surface is acceptable if it is free of standing water and favorable weather conditions are expected .
B Surface Preparation Complete the following incidental work prior to the paving operations .
Remove thermoplastic and tape traffic markings greater than .in thick .
Protect manhole covers drain grates catch basins and other utility structures with plastic or building felt .
Clean the pavement surface .
C Equipment Use a paver designed and built for the purpose of applying the ultrathin bonded wearing course .
The paving machine shall incorporate a receiving hopper feed conveyor a storage tank for polymer modified emulsion membrane polymer modified emulsion membrane spray bar and a variable width and heated vibratory or tamper bar screed .
The screed shall have the ability to crown the pavement at the center both positively and negatively and have vertically adjustable extensions to accommodate the desired pavement profile .
D Paving Mixture must be produced by a certified plant .
Apply the polymer modified emulsion membrane and the ultrathin bonded wearing course in one pass .
Spray the polymer modified emulsion membrane so it is not driven on immediately prior to the application of the UTBWC .
Use a metered mechanical pressure spray bar at a temperature of F. Accurately and continuously monitor the rate of spray and provide a uniform application across the entire pavement width .
Use a spray rate in the range of .
galyd² .
galyd² .
Make adjustments based upon the existing pavement surface conditions and recommendations of the polymer modified emulsion membrane supplier .
Apply the UTBWC at a temperature of F as measured in front of the screed .
No wheel or other part of the paving machine shall come in contact with the polymer modified emulsion membrane before the UTBWC is applied .
Use a heated vibratory or tamper bar screed .
Open the new pavement to traffic after the rolling operation is complete and the material has cooled below F. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E Thickness The minimum finished wearing course thickness is in with a maximum ½ inch vertical edge at the adjacent shoulder pavement edge .
F Rolling Roll the wearing course a minimum of two passes before the material temperature has fallen below F. Use steel double drum asphalt rollers with a minimum weight of tons .
Do not allow the rollers to remain stationary on the freshly placed UTBWC .
Roll in static mode only immediately following the placement of the UTBWC in order to seat the mix .
G Pavement Smoothness Conduct paving operations to produce a smooth UTBWC .
The UTBWC surface will show no variation greater than inch from the edge of a foot straightedge laid parallel to or at right angles to the centerline .
If no new lift of HMA is placed under the UTBWC then no Pavement Surface Smoothness evaluation will be required .
Pavement Surface Smoothness is required to be followed except for the following changes .
Replace section .C .
with the following For Ultra Thin Bonded Wearing Course projects ALR will be collected only on asphalt pavement laid during this project before the UTBWC .
No smoothness will be paid for on that asphalt pavement .
Identify ALR using the ProVAL Smoothness Assurance analysis calculating IRI with a continuous short interval of ft with the mm filter .
Replace the first paragraph in section .D .
with the following Evaluate smoothness requirements after the UTBWC is laid using equations and criteria in accordance with the following tables Table for bituminous pavements Table for percent improvement projects .
No ALR will be measured on the UTBWC .
Replace the second and third paragraphs in section .E with the following Perform corrective work for ALR on the asphalt pavement before placing the UTBWC .
No corrective work is allowed on the UTBWC .
Any Mean Roughness Index MRI values for the .
mile segments on the UTBWC indicating corrective work will be assessed a deduct of for each .
mile segment .
H Quality Control The Contractor is responsible for obtaining all the quality control QCQA sampling and testing as per the Materials Control Schedule .
I Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane Verify the application rate of the polymer modified emulsion membrane by dividing the volume of polymer modified emulsion membrane used by the area of paving for that day .
J Quality Assurance The Engineer is responsible for all quality assurance QA sampling according to Materials Control Schedule MCS .
The QA sample is the Departments companion sample to the Contractors QC sample and tested as required .
J. Verification Sampling and Testing The Department will test at a minimum one verification sample per day to assure compliance of the Contractors QC program .
The Department will decide daily which QCQA companion samples are to be submitted and tested as the verification sample .
The verification sample can be any one or all of the QCQA split samples .
In addition the Engineer may obtain additional verification samples at any time and location during production to determine quality levels of the mixture .
When additional verification samples are taken the Department will provide the Contractor a verification companion .
The contractor is required to test and use this verification companion sample as part of the QC program .
Use the verification companion sample to replace the next scheduled QC sample .
Compare the verification companion sample to the verification sample for compliance with allowable tolerances in Table UTBWC Allowable Difference between Contractor and Department Test Results .
The Departments verification test results will be available to the Contractor within working days from the time the sample is delivered to the District Laboratory. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If the tolerances between the Contractors verification companion and the Departments verification sample do not meet the requirements of Table UTBWC Allowable Difference between Contractor and Department Test Results the Department will retest the material .
If the retests fail to meet tolerances the Department will substitute the Departments verification test results for the Contractors results in the QC program and use those results for acceptance .
The Department will only substitute the outoftolerance parameters .
The Department will test the previously collected QA samples until they meet the tolerances or until the Department has tested all of the remaining samples .
After testing the samples the Department will test QA samples subsequent to the verification sample until tolerances are met .
If the adj .
AFT calculation does not meet the tolerance in table equalize the Departments adj .
AFT result by increasing the original Department value by .
microns .
The increased Department adj .
AFT will be the basis for acceptance .
The Department will base acceptance on QC data with substitution of Department test results for those parameters that are out of tolerance .
Cease mixture production and placement if reestablished test results do not meet tolerances within h. Resume production and placement only after meeting the tolerances .
Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results Test Item Allowable Difference Asphalt Binder Chemical Extraction Incinerator Oven . .
Mixture max gravity Gmm Rice Test .
Adj .
AFT Calculated .
Gradation Passing inch No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No. . K Failures The Department will base material acceptance on individual test results and those exceeding the JMF limits as failing .
The Department will reduce payment for failing tests in accordance to Table UTBWC Reduced Payment Schedule .
The Department will calculate the quantity of unacceptable material on the tonnage placed from the sample point of the failing test to the sample point when the testing result is back within the JMF .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subjected to reduced payment .
If an individual failing test for Asphalt Binder Content adjusted AFT or Gradation exceeds the limits in Table UTBWC Mixture Requirements or Table UTBWC Aggregate Gradation Broadband then the mix will be subject to an assessment according to Table UTBWC Reduced Payment Schedule Table UTBWC Reduced Payment Schedule Item Pay Factor Asphalt Content Adjusted AFT .
Adjusted AFT .
to .
Adjusted AFT .
to .
Adjusted AFT .
R R Gradation Lowest Pay Factor applies when there are multiple reductions on a single test .
Remove and replace at no expense to Department The Department will reduce payment if the mat thickness is less than inch or greater than inch or the pavement edge is greater than ½ inch .
Any mixture placed outside of this requirement will be assessed a pay reduction or remove and replaced as determined by the Engineer full width by station. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Measure the Ultrathin Bonded Wearing Course by area of pavement surfaced . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for the accepted quantity of Ultrathin Bonded Wearing Course at the Contract unit price of measure will be compensation in full for all costs of furnishing and applying all materials required in this specification .
The unit price includes all labor materials and equipment necessary to complete the work .
Item No .
Item Unit .
Ultrathin Bonded Wearing Course Square yard MICROSURFACING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing microsurfacing on a prepared pavement. . MATERIALS Microsurfacing is a mixture of polymer modified asphalt emulsion wellgraded crushed mineral aggregate mineral filler water and other additives .
A Bituminous Material Provide a polymer modified CQSP or CQShP for bituminous material for microsurfacing in accordance with H Micro Surfacing Emulsified Asphalt .
Unless modified by the Contract use CQShP for rut filling and CQSP for nonrut filling applications .
B Aggregate Provide aggregate in accordance with .
MicroSurfacing Requirements and as specified in the Contract .
If no aggregate is specified use Class A per Graded Aggregate for Bituminous Mixtures and Type per .
Micro Surfacing Requirements .
C Mineral Filler Provide portland cement or hydrated lime based on the mix design results and in accordance with the following Portland cement Type I in accordance with Portland Cement and Hydrated lime in accordance with Hydrated Lime .
D Water Provide potable water in accordance with Water for Concrete and Mortar .
E Mixture Requirements E. Mix Design Submit a complete mix design business days before beginning production .
List the source of materials used for the mix design .
Show that the individual proportions of each of the materials when combined meet the mix design requirements of Table .
Testing procedures may be obtained from the International Slurry Surfacing Association ISSA .
Table Mix Design Test Requirements Test Description Specification ISSA TB Wet stripping ISSA TB Wet track abrasion loss h soak .
ozsq .
ft ISSA TB Wet track abrasion loss day soak .
ozsq .
ft ISSA TB Saturated abrasion compatibility g loss ISSA TB Mix time at F Controllable to s ISSA TB Mix time at F Controllable to s The requirement is for CQShP only report only for CQSP and other emulsions .
Provide a Job Mix Formula JMF containing from .
percent to .
percent of residual asphalt by dry weight of aggregate and .
percent to .
percent mineral filler by dry weight of aggregate .
Submit a new mix design to the Engineer if aggregate source aggregate blend or asphalt emulsion sources is changed. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E. Mix Design Format Submit the final mix design with information in the following format Source of each individual material .
Aggregate .
Gradation .
Sand equivalent .
Abrasion resistance and .
Soundness .
Field simulation tests .
Wet stripping test .
Wet track abrasion loss hour day .
Saturated abrasion compatibility and .
Trial mix time at F and F. Interpretation of results and the determination of a JMF .
Minimum and maximum percentage of mineral filler .
Minimum and maximum percentage of water including aggregate moisture .
Percentage of mix set additive if necessary .
Percentage of modified emulsion .
Residual asphalt content of modified emulsion and .
Percentage of residual asphalt .
Signature and date. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Equipment A. Mixing Machine Provide a continuous microsurfacing lay down machine .
Provide a positive connection conveyer belt aggregate delivery system and an interconnected positive displacement waterjacketed gear pump to accurately proportion aggregate and asphalt emulsion .
Locate the mineral filler feed to ensure that the proper amount of mineral filler drops on the aggregate before discharging into the pugmill .
Provide a pugmill meeting the following characteristics Capable of providing a continuous flow Twin shaft Multiblade At least ft long and Blade size and side clearance meeting the equipment manufacturers recommendations .
Introduce the asphalt emulsion within the first third of the mixer length to ensure proper mixing of materials before exiting from the pugmill .
Use a selfpropelled front feed and continuous loading machine with dual driving stations .
Provide a remote forward speed control at the back mixing platform for the back operator to control forward speed and the level of mixture in the spreader box .
Use sufficient transport units to assure a continuous operation during mix production and application .
Provide individual volume or weight controls for proportioning each material .
Position the controls for access at any time .
Use the controls to calibrate the operation before production and to determine the amount of each material used at any time .
Provide a water pressure system and nozzle type spray bar to spray water ahead of and outside the spreader box if necessary .
Dampen the surface .
Do not create free flowing water ahead of the spreader box .
A. Spreader Box Spread the mix uniformly using a mechanical type spreader box attached to the mixer and equipped with spiral augers mounted on adjustable shafts .
Continually agitate and distribute the mixture to prevent stagnation excessive material buildup or lumps .
Equip the spreader box with front and rear flexible seals to achieve direct contact with the surface of the road .
Use a secondary strike off attached to the spreader box to provide a smooth finished surface texture .
Do not use burlap drags .
A. Rut Filling Box Provide a rut filling box meeting the following characteristics Steel Vconfiguration screed rut box .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Commercially designed and manufactured to fill ruts Capable of spreading the mixture at a width from ft to ft and Strike off to control crown .
A .
Weighing Equipment Use portable scales to weigh material certified in accordance with .
Mass and as modified as follows Recertify the scale after any change in location and Randomly spot check the scale once a week or once per project whichever is greater .
B Operations B. Microsurfacing Types B.a Rut Fill Type per .
Rut fill pavement segments longer than ft if the average rut depth is greater than ½ in .
Provide a rut box for each designated wheel track .
Provide a clean overlap and straight edges between wheel tracks .
Construct each rutted wheel track with a crown ¼ in per inch of rut depth to allow for proper consolidation by traffic .
B .. b Scratch Course Type or Type per .
as shown on the plans Apply full lane width in one course .
Use a metal strike off bar on the spreader box .
Do not allow excess buildup or uncovered areas .
B ..
Surface Course Type per .
Apply full lane width in one course .
Do not allow excess buildup or uncovered areas .
B. PrePaving Meeting Hold a prepaving meeting with the Engineer onsite before beginning work to discuss the following JMF Equipment condition Equipment calibration Test strips Detailed work schedule .
and Traffic control plan .
B. Calibration Calibrate each mixing machine before use .
Maintain documentation showing individual calibrations of each material at various settings relating to the machines metering devices .
Supply materials and equipment including scales and containers for calibration ISSA MA .
Recalibrate machines on the job after a change in aggregate asphalt emulsion source or repairs are made to the aggregate feeding belt gate or emulsion pump .
B .
Test Strip Construct a test strip in a location approved by the Engineer .
For each machine used construct a onelane wide test strip ft long .
Begin construction after dark at least hr after sunset and at least hr before sunrise .
Check for variances in surface texture and appearance .
Do not construct the test strip until the emulsion temperature falls below F. If any of the following elements of the system used with a job mix change or field evidence does not meet specifications construct a new test strip Type of emulsion Type and size of aggregate Type of mineral filler and The lay down machine .
Allow traffic on the test strip within hr after application the Engineer will evaluate whether any damage occurs .
The Engineer will inspect the completed test strip again after hr of traffic to determine if it is acceptable .
The Contractor may begin full production after the Engineer accepts a test strip .
The Engineer may waive the test strip requirement if the Contractor submits evidence of the successful construction of a test strip on another project constructed during the same construction season using the same mix design .
B .
Surface Preparation Clean the surface immediately before placing the microsurfacing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B. Fog Seal Apply fog seal to surfaces before the first course of micro surfacing .
Provide and apply a CSS or CSSh emulsion in accordance with Bituminous Fog Seal and the following Apply the diluted emulsion at a rate of .
gal per sq .
yd to .
gal per sq .
yd .
Limit the daily application of fog seal to the pavement area receiving micro surfacing that day .
Do not open fog sealed areas to traffic until after applying and curing the first course of micro surfacing .
Allow the fog seal to cure before applying micro surfacing .
Protect drainage structures monument boxes and water shutoffs during the application of the fog seal and during microsurfacing .
B .
Surface Quality Except for areas within in of the edge line lane line or center line ensure the transverse cross section of the restored pavement surface is no greater than ⅜ in if measured using a ft straight edge or in if measured with a ft straight edge .
Construct the surface course without excessive scratch marks tears rippling and other surface irregularities .
Repair tear marks wider than ½ in and longer than in .
Repair transverse ripples or streaks deeper than ¼ in if measured by a ft straight edge .
Construct longitudinal joints with no greater than ¼ in overlap thickness if measured with a ft straight edge and less than in overlap on adjacent passes .
Locate longitudinal construction joints and lane edges to coincide with the proposed painted lane lines shown on the plans .
Place overlapping passes on the uphill side to prevent water from ponding .
Construct transverse joints with no greater than ⅛ in difference in elevation across the joint if measured with a foot straight edge .
Construct edge lines along curbs and shoulders with no greater than in of width variance in any ft length .
Do not allow runoff in these areas .
Stop microsurfacing work if requirements of this section are not being met .
Make corrections as approved by the Engineer before restarting work .
Protect drainage structures monument boxes and water shutoffs .
Make repairs to microsurfacing defects to the full width of paving pass with spreader box .
Do not perform hand repairs after micro surfacing mix has set .
B .
Open to Traffic Do not open the microsurface to traffic until the microsurface cures sufficiently to prevent pickup by vehicle tires .
The Department considers properly constructed microsurface as microsurface capable of carrying normal traffic within hour of application without damage .
Protect the new surface from potential damage at intersections and driveways .
Repair damage to the surface caused by traffic at no additional cost to the Department .
Confirm that the microsurface cured within hour on the first day of production after the construction of the test strip .
The Engineer will conduct three hour spot checks .
If a spot check fails stop work and construct a new test strip .
The Department will consider any spot check or test strip failure as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
After successful completion of three onehour spot checks on the first day of production the Engineer will perform spot checks once a day .
If a hour spot check fails the Department will require the construction of a new test strip .
After a test strip the Engineer will perform the first day of production procedure .
B .
Weather and Time Limitations Begin construction when the air and pavement surface temperatures are at least F and rising .
Do not place micro surfacing during rain or if the forecast indicates a temperature below F within hour of the planned microsurfacing .
Do not start work after September .
C Contractor Quality Control QC Testing and Documentation Perform Quality Control QC sampling and testing .
C. Emulsion Provide a material Bill of Lading BOL for each batch of emulsion used .
Include the suppliers name plant location emulsion grade residual asphalt content volume gross and net gallons and batch number. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Aggregate Sample and test according to the Schedule of Materials Control .
Provide QC test results daily to the Engineer and a summary upon completion of the work .
C .. a Gradation and JMF Tolerance Provide companion samples to the Engineer .
The QC tolerances for the JMF are listed in Table .
The tolerance range may not exceed the limits set per .. C .. b Sand Equivalent Test The Sand Equivalent quality control tolerance is percent of the value established in the mix design percent minimum .
Run the sand equivalent test at the stockpile site .
C .. c Moisture Content Determine the moisture content of the aggregate .
Perform additional testing upon a visible change in moisture .
Use the average daily moisture to calculate the oven dry weight of the aggregate .
C. Asphalt Binder Application Rate Randomly calculate and record the percent asphalt content of the mixture from the equipment counter readings .
The asphalt tolerance is .
percent residual asphalt .
C. Design Application Rate The design application rate shall be the total amount of microsurfacing material placed to meet the requirements for cross section and surfacing .
This amount will be the combination of all courses placed .
C. Documentation Provide a daily report containing the following information to the Engineer within one working day Date and air temperature at work start up Beginning and ending locations for the days work Length width total area square yard covered for the day Application rate pounds per square yd of aggregate Daily asphalt spot check reports gallons of emulsion Asphalt emulsion bill of lading Beginning ending and total counter readings Control settings calibration values percent residue in emulsion Percent of each material percent of asphalt cement Calibration forms Sand Equivalence Aggregate certification or shipment of tested stock report and Contractors authorized signature .
D Agency Quality Assurance QA Testing Sample and test the following according to the Schedule of Materials Control. . Asphalt Emulsion .
Aggregate Gradation .
Moisture Content of the Aggregate E Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure the Bituminous Material for MicroSurfacing and undiluted Bituminous Material for Fog Seal by volume at F. The Engineer will measure the MicroSurfacing Rut Fill MicroSurfacing Scratch Course and MicroSurfacing Surface Course by weight of oven dry weight of aggregate . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract gallon price for the accepted quantity of Bituminous Material for Microsurfacing includes the costs of additives as indicated above constructing the microsurfacing as shown in the plans and all testing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will pay for bituminous material for fog seal in accordance with .
Basis of Payment .
A Monetary Price Adjustments The Department will deduct from the contract amount for each spot check failure and anytime there is evidence of the system being out of specification per .. E. as determined by tests in .. C. The Department will calculate price reductions for failing gradations based on percent of the unit price per ton for each percent passing result outside of a gradation range for all sieves Table .
The Department will apply this price reduction schedule for micro surfacing construction to nonwarranty work .
The Department will pay for seal coat microsurfacing on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Material for MicroSurfacing gallon .
MicroSurfacing Rut Fill ton .
MicroSurfacing Scratch Course ton .
MicroSurfacing Surface Course ton BITUMINOUS FOG SEAL .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing a fog seal on a prepared surface as shown on the plans. . MATERIALS Bituminous Material Provide bituminous emulsion as shown in the plans meeting the following requirements CSSh .. D. or CRSPd .E ..
Dilute during manufacture .
Do not dilute in the field. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Weather Limitations Perform fog seal operations only during daylight hours and not during foggy weather .
Begin fog seal operations when the pavement and air temperatures are F and rising .
The Contractor may perform fog sealing on a damp road surface but not on a road surface with standing water .
B Road Surface Preparation Clean pavements including depressions before fog sealing .
Cover metal surfaces to prevent adherence of the bituminous material .
Remove the protective coverings before opening the road to traffic .
C Application of Bituminous Material Begin using the rate of application for bituminous fog seal as shown in Table Fog Seal Application Rates and within the temperatures specified in Table Fog Seal Application Temperatures .
Demonstrate a uniform application of asphalt emulsion producing percent coverage of the surface after curing as approved by the Engineer .
Stop operations if the application demonstration does not meet the coverage requirements .
Minimize the amount of overspray during the fog seal operation .
Using a distance of feet perform a yield check at the beginning of each project to verify the application rate is correct .
The Engineer may require additional yield checks be performed if the application rate is questioned .
The Engineer may also require the Contractor to verify application is within of the intended application rate by ASTM D test method A .
Table Fog Seal Application Rates Application Rates gallonssquare yard CSSh CRSPd .
to . . to . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Fog Seal Application Temperatures Bituminous Material Minimum Temperature Ideal Temperature CRSPd F F F CSSh F F F D Protection of the Surface Do not allow traffic on the fog sealed surface until after the bituminous material has set and will not pick up on vehicle tires .
E Equipment E. Distributor Use a distributor in accordance with .. B .. d Distributor .
E. Brooms Provide motorized brooms with a positive means of controlling vertical pressure and with the capability to clean the road surface prior to spraying bituminous material . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure the diluted bituminous material for fog seal by volume at F. .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for fog seal on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Material for Fog Seal gallon BITUMINOUS SEAL COAT AND BITUMINOUS UNDERSEAL .
DESCRIPTION This work applies to both a Bituminous Seal Coat which goes on top of a bituminous surface and a Bituminous Underseal which is placed beneath a new bituminous surface .
This specification applies to both processes unless it is specified only for the Bituminous Seal Coat or the Bituminous Underseal .
The work consists of applying bituminous material a single layer of aggregate and a fog seal on a prepared surface. . MATERIALS A Bituminous Material Provide CRSP bituminous material for seal coat meeting the requirements of E. Provide Cationic Emulsified Asphalt for fog seal meeting .. D. or .. D .. B Seal Coat Aggregate Provide aggregate meeting the gradation job mix formula tolerance and quality requirements of Tables and for the gradation specified in the Contract .
If no requirements are specified in the Contract provide aggregate meeting the requirements of Tables and for FA .
C Blank D Water Use potable water compatible with the seal coat and meeting the requirements of Water for Concrete and Mortar .
E Seal Coat Design Use the Minnesota Seal Coat Handbook MNRC available on the MnDOT website to design the seal coat and determine the starting application rate for the bituminous material and seal coat aggregate .
Base the mix design on the traffic volume and pavement conditions .
Provide the following to the Engineer at least weeks before beginning construction Gradation and quality test results as specified in .
Seal coat aggregate design application rate Bituminous material design application rate and lb sample of aggregate from each proposed aggregate source .
The Contractor can not start work until submittal of the design and approval by the Engineer in accordance with the requirements of this section. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department considers the seal coats design aggregate application rate as a target amount. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Any failure of QC or QA in the mix design submittal preproduction and production gradation or quality tests constitute a Hold Point per .N .
This includes test results which are outside the job Mix formula tolerance of Tables and .
Provide a remediation plan for all failures originating by any cause including a failing stockpile or poor handling procedures .
Bucket blending of a stockpile to remediate for failing material is not acceptable .
The remediation plan must be accepted by the Engineer .
A Weather Time and Date Limitations A. Bituminous Seal Coat Apply the bituminous seal coat in accordance with the following From May to August if located in the North or NorthCentral Road Spring Restriction Zone Zones are defined on the MnDOT Pavement Design Website From May to August if located south of the North and NorthCentral Spring Road Restriction Zone Work only during daylight hours Begin work when the pavement and air temperatures are º F and rising .
The road surface may be damp but ensure that the road is free of standing water and Do not perform work during foggy weather .
A. Bituminous Underseal Construct bituminous underseal operations including traffic restrictions on the freshly constructed bituminous underseal according to the following The road surface may be damp but there shall be no standing water .
No construction is allowed in foggy weather .
Follow restrictions for weather and date per .. A .
B Equipment B .
Distributor Use a distributor in accordance with .. B .. d Distributor .
B .
Aggregate Spreader Use a selfpropelled mechanical type aggregate spreader mounted on pneumatictired wheels capable of distributing the aggregate uniformly to the width required by the contract and at the design application rate .
B. PneumaticTired Rollers Provide at least three selfpropelled pneumatictired rollers in accordance with .. B .. e Pneumatic Tired Rollers .
B. Brooms Provide motorized brooms with the following characteristics Positive means of controlling vertical pressure Capable of cleaning the road surface before applying bituminous material and Capable of removing loose aggregate after seal coating .
C Road Surface Preparation Clean pavements including depressions before seal coating .
Cover iron fixtures in or near the pavement to prevent adherence of the bituminous material .
Remove the protective coverings before opening the road to traffic .
D Application of Bituminous Material D. PreTreat Longitudinal Pavement Markings Apply bituminous material one foot wide over all longitudinal pavement markings .
Cover center line skip stripe with continuous coverage .
Apply in a rate range of .
to .
gallons per square yard .
Apply bituminous material for seal coat immediately after pretreating pavement markings. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Application of Bituminous Material for Seal Coat Begin the rate of application for the bituminous material as determined by the mix design .
Construct a test strip ft long to ensure the bituminous material application rate is adequate given the field conditions .
After applying the bituminous material to this test strip place the seal coat aggregate at the design application rate .
Inspect the aggregate in the wheel paths for proper embedment .
Make adjustments to the rate of application if necessary .
Construct one full lane width at a time .
Apply the bituminous material in accordance with Table Table Recommended Application Temperatures Bituminous Material Minimum Temperature CRSP F CSSh F Intended for uniform lay down of emulsion E Application of Aggregate Before construction calibrate the aggregate spreader to meet the requirements of ASTM D in the presence of the Engineer .
Maintain the aggregate application rate within lb per square yard of the design .
Provide uniformly moistened aggregates at the time of placement .
Place aggregate within min after applying the bituminous material .
Do not use previously applied aggregates .
F Rolling Operations Complete the initial rolling within min after applying the aggregate at a speed no greater than mph to prevent turning over aggregate .
Make at least three complete passes over the aggregate .
Roll the aggregate so the entire width of the treatment area is covered in one pass by all the rollers .
G Sweeping Remove surplus aggregate on the same day as the seal coat construction .
Resweep areas the day after the initial sweeping .
Dispose of the surplus seal coat aggregate as approved by the Engineer .
H Protection of the Surface Do not allow traffic on the seal coated road surface until after rolling is completed and the bituminous material has set .
I Protection of Motor Vehicles The Contractor is responsible for claims of damage to vehicles until the roadways and shoulders have been swept free of loose aggregate and permanent pavement markings have been applied .
If the Department applies the permanent pavement markings the Contractors responsibility ends after completion of the fog seal and placement of temporary pavement markings .
J Application of Bituminous Material for Fog Sealing The application of a fog seal is required for a Bituminous Seal Coat .
A fog seal is not required for a Bituminous Underseal unless the underseal is not paved within seven calendar days of the application of the underseal .
Apply fog seal to seal coated areas after sweeping and before placement of permanent pavement markings .
Apply the fog seal in accordance with Bituminous Fog Seal and as modified as follows Construct a ft test strip Review the application of diluted bituminous material and adjust the application rate as necessary to yield a uniform and full coverage of the underlying seal coat Apply from .
gal to .
gal per sq .
yd diluted Apply the fog seal to minimize the amount of overspray and Do not allow traffic on the fog seal until it has cured .
K Progress of Work Allow the seal coat to cure for at least one day before fogging .
Place interim pavement markings after the fog seal cures and before removal of traffic control .
Do not place permanent pavement markings using latex paint before three days after placing the fog seal .
Place all other types of permanent pavement markings at least days after placement of the fog seal .
L Contractor Quality Control Testing Sample and test according to the rates in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Submit test results to the Engineer within hours of test completion. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Verify and report the average daily bituminous material application rate by dividing the volume used by the area covered .
If gradations fall outside of the Job Mix Formula Tolerance of Table but within specifications stop placement and submit a new mix design .
M Agency Quality Assurance QA Sampling and Testing Sample and test according to the rates in the Schedule of Materials Control .
N Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure the bituminous material for fog seal per ..
Conversion factors are located in the MnDOT Bituminous Manual .
The Engineer will measure the bituminous material for seal coat by volume at º F. The Engineer will measure the seal coat by area of pavement surfaced . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT For Bituminous Seal Coat the Department will pay for bituminous material for fog seal in accordance with .
Basis of Payment .
For Bituminous Underseal payment for bituminous material for fog seal is incidental .
The contract gallon price for accepted quantities of Bituminous Material for Seal Coat including necessary additives includes the costs of providing and applying the material as required by the contract .
The contract square yard unit price for Bituminous Seal Coat includes the cost of providing and applying the material as required by the contract .
The contract square yard price for Bituminous Seal Coat includes the cost of all applied aggregate and all testing .
A Monetary Price Adjustments The Engineer may allow the Contractor to accept a monetary price adjustment instead of removing and replacing failing materials in accordance with the following The Department will reduce the Contract price by percent for each failing quality test per Table .
The Department will reduce the contract price for bituminous seal coat by .
percent for each percent passing outside of the requirements for any sieve as specified in Fine Aggregate for Bituminous Seal Coat except for the sieve as determined by QA testing .
The Department will reduce the contract price for bituminous seal coat by percent for each .
percent passing outside of the requirements for the sieve as specified in Fine Aggregate for Bituminous Seal Coat as determined by QA testing .
The maximum monetary price adjustment is .
Material placed that has a cumulative monetary price adjustment greater than is subject to remove and replace per .
Unacceptable Work .
The monetary price adjustment for .. A. and .. A. are based upon the contract bid price for bituminous seal coat however if the contract bid price is less than of the Departments average bid price for Bituminous Seal Coat the Engineer may use the average bid price to assess the monetary price adjustment .
The Department will add the monetary price adjustments for all failing test results together .
The Department will pay for Bituminous Seal Coat and Bituminous Underseal on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Seal Coat square yard . . Bituminous Material for Fog Seal Bituminous Material for Seal Coat gallon gallon Minnesota Standard Specifications BITUMINOUS TACK COAT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of applying bituminous material emulsion or cutback asphalt on a bituminous or concrete pavement prior to paving a new lift of Plant Mixed Asphalt. . MATERIALS A Bituminous Material The bituminous material for tack coat will be limited to one of the following kinds of emulsified asphalt .
Use of medium cure cutback asphalt MC is allowed during the early and late construction season when it is anticipated the air temperature may drop below degrees Fahrenheit .
Allowable grades are as follows Emulsified Asphalt AASHTO Dilution of the emulsion to parts emulsion to parts water is only allowed by the supplier .
No field dilution is allowed .
The storage tank for diluted emulsion must have a recirculation system or agitator that will prevent settlement or separation of the material .
Table Residual Asphalt Content Minimum Residual Asphalt Content Emulsion Undiluted Diluted CSS or CSSh Cutback Asphalt Medium Cure Liquid Asphalt MC Only Certified Sources are allowed for use .
The Certified Source List is located on MnDOTs website. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions Conduct tack coat operations in a manner that offers the least inconvenience to traffic .
Maintain movement in at least one direction at all times without pickup or tracking of the bituminous material .
Do not apply the tack coat when the road surface or weather conditions are unsuitable as determined by the Engineer .
Limit the daily application of tack coat to approximately the area on which construction of the subsequent bituminous course can reasonably be expected to be completed that day .
B Equipment Apply the bituminous material with a distributor meeting the requirements of .. B .. d. C Road Surface Preparations Remove all foreign matter on the road surface before applying tack coat and dispose of as approved by the Engineer .
Apply the bituminous tack coat material to a dry and clean roadway surface .
All necessary repairs or reconditioning must have been completed as provided for in the Contract and approved by the Engineer .
D Application of Bituminous Tack Coat Material Unless otherwise indicated in the Plans or provisions apply the bituminous tack coat material within the application rates shown below in Table Tack Coat Application Rates as based on pavement type or condition and type of bituminous material .
Dilution of asphalt emulsion in the field is not allowed .
Before placing an abutting bituminous course provide a uniform coating of liquid asphalt or emulsified asphalt to the contact surfaces of all fixed structures and at the edge of the inplace mixture in all courses at transverse joints and in the final wearing course at longitudinal joints .
All tack must break turn from brown to black before paving the subsequent lift or course .
Do not allow vehicles to drive on tack that has not broken .
Apply a uniform tack coat to the existing asphalt or concrete surface and to the surface of each course or lift constructed except for the final course or lift .
Tack each lift when placing multiple lifts in the same day .
Uniform application will not have .
Minnesota Standard Specifications streaks corn rows bare spots puddles or other irregular patterns .
The Engineer will compare the freshly sprayed emulsion to a brown sheet of construction paper or a black sheet of construction paper for broken tack to determine conformance with tack application uniformity .
Using a distance of feet perform a yield check at the beginning of each project to verify the application rate is correct .
The Engineer may require additional yield checks be performed if the application rate is questioned .
The Engineer may also require the Contractor to verify application is within of the intended application rate by ASTM D test method A .
Table Tack Coat Application Rates Application Rates gallonssquare yard Surface Type Undiluted Emulsion Diluted Emulsion MC Cutback New Asphalt .
to . . to . . to .
Old Asphalt and PCC .
to . . to . . to .
Milled Asphalt and Milled PCC .
to . . to . . to .
As provided by the asphalt emulsion supplier see .. A Use when approved by the Engineer Older than year E Bituminous Temperature The application temperature of the bituminous material will be CSS CSSH to º F MC to º F F Bituminous Sampling Sample asphalt emulsion from either the spigot or a nozzle on the distributor according to the schedule of materials control .
G Pedestrian Crossings Spread sand on newly tacked surfaces at regularly utilized and open for public use pedestrian crossings .
H Acceptance of Tack Material The Engineer will address failures related to Bituminous Material or deficiencies related to workmanship or application in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The basis of measurement for tack failures or deficiencies is the full width of the lane by station .
The Engineer may deduct up to of the mixture Unit Price for failures related to . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Bituminous material used for tack coat will be measured by volume at F . BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for the accepted quantity of asphalt emulsion and cutback shall be at the Contract price per unit of measure .
The cost of providing and applying sand at pedestrian crossings will be incidental .
contract items .
Payment for the tack coat will be made on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Material for Tack Coat gallon If the contract does not contain a pay item for Bituminous Material for Tack Coat the cost will be incidental to the project work with no direct compensation made .
Minnesota Standard Specifications BITUMINOUS PRIME COAT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of treating a prepared base with bituminous material prior to placing a bituminous pavement. . MATERIALS A Medium Curing Liquid Asphalt Provide Medium Curing Liquid Asphalt in accordance with .. B Medium Curing Liquid Asphalt for MC or MC. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions A .
Base Moisture Content Place bituminous prime coat on a prepared base when the base moisture content of the upper inches is less than percent of optimum moisture content .
A .
Traffic If road is open to traffic maintain traffic in at least one direction and only close a portion of the traveled way for construction not to exceed percent .
B Equipment Use a distributor in accordance with .. B .. d Distributor .
C Application Apply the bituminous prime coat at a continuous uniform spread rate of .
gal per sq .
yd .
to .
gal per sq .
yd .
D Bituminous Temperature Apply MC bituminous prime coat at temperatures from F to F. Apply MC bituminous prime coat at temperatures from F to F. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure bituminous material for prime coat by volume at F. .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract gallon price for Bituminous Material for Prime Coat includes the costs of providing and applying the material as required by the contract .
The Department will pay for bituminous prime coat on the basis of the following schedule .
Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Material for Prime Coat gallon PLANT MIXED ASPHALT PAVEMENT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing plant mixed asphalt pavement on a prepared surface .
Plant mixed asphalt pavement designed according to a gyratory mix design method for use as a pavement surface .
A Mixture Designations The Department will designate the mixture for asphalt mixtures in accordance with the following The first two letters indicate the mixture design type .
SP Gyratory Mixture Design .
The third and fourth letters indicate the course .
WE Wearing and shoulder wearing course and .
NW Nonwearing Course .
The fifth letter indicates the maximum aggregate size .
A ½ in SP . . B ¾ in SP . . C in SP .
and .
D ⅜ in SP ..
The sixth digit indicates the Traffic Level ESALs in accordance with Table Traffic Levels. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Traffic Levels Traffic Level Year Design ESALs See SMA Provision NOTE The requirements for gyratory mixtures in this specification are based on the year design traffic level of the project expressed in Equivalent Single Axle Loads ESALs ESALs AADT AADT to The last two digits indicate the air void requirement . . percent for wear mixtures and . . percent for nonwear and shoulder .
The letter at the end of the mixture designation identifies the asphalt binder grade in accordance with Table Asphalt Grades .
Ex Gyratory Mixture Designation SPWEBE Design Type Lift Aggr .
Size Traffic Level Voids Binder .
MATERIALS A Aggregate Use aggregate materials in accordance with .. B Asphalt Binder Material C Additives The Department defines additives as material added to an asphalt mixture or material that does not have a specific pay item .
Do not incorporate additives into the mixture unless approved by the Engineer .
Add antifoaming agents to asphalt cement at the dosage rate recommended by the manufacturer .
The Contractor may add mineral filler in quantities no greater than percent of the total aggregate weight .
The Contractor may add hydrated lime in quantities no greater than percent of the total aggregate weight .
Do not add a combination of mineral filler and hydrated lime that exceeds percent of the total aggregate weight .
Use methods for adding additives as approved by the Engineer .
C. Mineral Filler AASHTO M C .. a Mineral Filler Hydrated Lime Provide hydrated lime for asphalt mixtures with no greater than percent unhydrated oxides as received basis and meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Use a method to introduce and mix hydrated lime and aggregate as approved by the Engineer before beginning mixture production .
C. Liquid AntiStripping Additive Contractor Added If adding a liquid antistrip additive to the asphalt binder complete blending before mixing the asphalt binder with the aggregate .
Only use liquid antistrip additives that ensure the asphalt binder meets the Performance Grade PG requirements in .
The Contractor may use asphalt binder with liquid antistrip added at the refinery or the Contractor may add liquid antistrip at the plant site .
If using asphalt binder with liquid antistrip added at the refinery ensure the supplier tests the binder and additive blend to confirm compliance with the AASHTO M . If an antistrip agent is added at the plant the plant mixed asphalt Table Asphalt Grades Letter Grade A PG S B PG S C PG H E PG H F PG V H PG V I PG E L PG S M PG S . Minnesota Standard Specifications producer is considered a supplier and the binder must conform to the requirements of .
Do not pave until the asphalt binder and additive blend testing results meet the criteria in .. B Asphalt Binder Material .
C .. a Mixture Requirements at Design Design the mixture with the same asphalt binder supplied to the plant site using mixture option Laboratory Mixture Design or mixture option Modified Mixture Design .
Provide documentation with either design option and include the amount of antistrip needed to meet the minimum tensile strength requirements .
Verify that the binder with the antistrip meets the PG binder requirements for the mixture .
C .. b Contractor Production Testing Requirements Sample and test the asphalt binder and antistrip blend daily .
The Contractor may test the blend by viscosity penetration or dynamic sheer rheometer DSR of the blend .
If the contract requires the use of a polymer modified asphalt binder in the mixture use the DSR as the daily QC test .
Send the Engineer and MnDOT Chemical Laboratory Director a weekly QC report summarizing the results of the daily testing .
Perform at least one test biweekly per project to ensure the binder and antistrip blend meets the requirements of AASHTO M . Send the test results to the Engineer and MnDOT Chemical Laboratory Director .
Provide asphalt binder and antistrip blend field verification samples in accordance with .. G. Production Test .
C .. c Liquid AntiStrip Additive Metering System Include a liquid antistrip flow meter and an antistrip pump with the metering system .
Connect the flow meter to the liquid antistrip supply to measure and display only the antistrip being fed to the asphalt binder .
Position the meter readout so that the inspector can easily read it .
Provide means to compare the flow meter readout with the calculated output of the antistrip pump .
Provide a system that displays the accumulated antistrip quantity being delivered to the mixer unit in gallons liters to the nearest gallon or in units of tons to the nearest .
ton .
Calibrate and adjust the system to maintain an accuracy of percent .
Calibrate each plant setup before producing the mixture .
Stick the antistrip tank at the end of the days production to verify antistrip usage quantities .
The Engineer may require sticking on a daily basis .
Ensure the system has a spigot for sampling the binder and antistrip after blending .
Use alternative blending and metering systems only when preapproved by the Engineer .
C. Coating and Anti Stripping Additive C. Warm Mix Asphalt WMA WMA is allowed on all projects .
Any mix that is produced at temperatures F or lower than typical HMA mixing temperature of the asphalt binder as defined by the asphalt supplier is considered as WMA .
The WMA can be manufactured through use of foamed asphalt andor chemical additive processes .
Notify the Engineer in advance of using any WMA additive or process .
When chemical additives are used provide the plant mixing and the laboratory mixing and compaction temperatures as recommended by the manufacturer of the additive .
D Bituminous Tack Coat E Mixture Design E. Submittal Location Submit documentation and sample aggregate materials for review to the District Materials Laboratory .
E. Aggregate Quality Provide aggregate in accordance with .. E. Restrictions Do not add aggregates and materials not included in the original mixture submission unless otherwise approved by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E. Responsibility Design a gyratory mixture that meets the requirements of this specification in accordance with the following MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method The Asphalt Institutes Superpave Mix Design Manual SP Use a h short term aging period for volumetric and The Laboratory Manual .
E. Type of Mixture Design Submittal E .. a Option Laboratory Mixture Design E .. a Aggregate Submit the aggregate samples for option at least working days before beginning production samples for quality testing .
At least calendar days before beginning asphalt production submit samples of aggregates that require the magnesium sulfate soundness test to the District Materials Laboratory .
Test the samples for quality of each source class type and size of virgin and nonasphaltic salvage aggregate source used in the mix design .
Retain a companion sample of equal size until the Department issues a Mixture Design Report .
Provide h notice of intent to sample aggregates to the Engineer .
Provide samples in accordance with the following Table Aggregate Sample Size Classification Sieve Weight Virgin Retained on No .
lb Virgin Passing No .
lb Recycled asphalt pavement RAP lb Recycled asphalt shingles RAS lb sample of representative RAS material E .. a Mixture Sample At least working days before the start of asphalt production submit the proposed Job Mix Formula JMF in writing and signed by a Level II Quality Management mix designer for each combination of aggregates to be used in the mixture .
Include test data to demonstrate conformance to mixture properties as specified in Table Mixture Requirements and .
Bituminous Aggregates .
Use forms approved by the Department for the submission .
Submit an uncompacted mixture sample plus briquettes in conformance with the JMF compacted at the optimum asphalt content and required compactive effort for laboratory examination and evaluation .
Provide a mixture sample size and the number of compacted briquettes and in accordance with the following Table Mixture Sample Requirements Item Gyratory Design Uncompacted mixture sample size lb Number of compacted briquettes E .. a Tensile Strength Ratio Sample At least days before actual production submit sample to the District Materials Laboratory for verification of moisture sensitivity retained tensile strength ratio TSR .
The Engineer may test material submitted for TSR verification for maximum specific gravity Gmm compliance in addition to TSR results .
The Engineer will reject the submitted mix design if the tested material fails to meet the Gmm tolerance .
If the Engineer rejects a mix design submit a new mix design in accordance with .. E Mixture Design .
The Contractor may use one of the following options to verify that the TSR meets the requirements in Table Mixture Requirements .
E .. a Option A Batch material at the design proportions including optimum asphalt .
Split the sample before curing and allow samples to cool to room temperature approximately F. Submit lb of mixture to the District Materials Laboratory for curing and test verification .
Use a cure time of h minutes at F cure time for both groups and follow procedures Laboratory Manual Method .
E .. a Option B Batch and cure in accordance with Option A .
Compact and submit briquettes and uncompacted mixture in accordance with Table Option B Mixture Requirements. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Option B Mixture Requirements Item Gyratory Design Uncompacted mixture sample size g Number of compacted briquettes Compacted briquette air void content . . in specimens .
For both options cure for h min at F meeting the requirements in the MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method .
E .. a Aggregate Specific Gravity Determine the specific gravity of aggregate in accordance with Laboratory Manual Methods and .
E .. b Option Modified Mixture Design The Contractor may use the modified mixture design if testing shows that the aggregates meet the requirements of .
in the current construction season and if the Level II mix designer submitting the mixture design has at least years experience in mixture design .
The Department will not require mixture submittal .
E .. b Mixture Aggregate Requirements Size grade and combine the aggregate fractions in proportions that are in accordance with .. E .. b JMF Submittal At least working days before beginning asphalt production submit a proposed JMF in writing to the District Materials Laboratory signed by a Level II Quality Management mix designer for each combination of aggregates .
For each JMF submitted include documentation in accordance with .. E .. a Option Laboratory Mixture Design to demonstrate conformance to mixture properties as specified in Table Mixture Requirements and Table Mixture Aggregate Requirements .
Submit the JMF on forms approved by the Department .
E .. b Initial Production Test Verification The Department will take a mix verification sample within the first four samples at the start of production of each mix type .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor electronically when a sample is to be taken and tested for tensile strength ratio TSR .
Initial production testing will be done within the first tons of the start of production .
E. Mixture Requirements The Department will base mixture evaluation on the trial mix tests and in accordance with Table Mixture Requirements .
Table Mixture Requirements Traffic Level year design ESALs million million million million Gyratory mixture requirements Gyrations for Ndesign Air voids at Ndesign wear . . . . Air voids at Ndesign Nonwear and all shoulder . . . .
Adjusted Asphalt Film Thickness minimum µ . . . . TSR minimum Fineseffective asphalt . . . . . . . . Use in specimens in accordance with .. I Field Tensile Strength Ratio TSR .
MnDOT minimum MnDOT minimum E. Minimum Ratio of Added Asphalt Binder to Total Asphalt Binder Control recycled materials used in mixture by evaluating the ratio of new added asphalt binder to total asphalt binder as show in Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Requirements for Ratio of Added New Asphalt Binder to Total Asphalt Binder min Specified Asphalt Grade Recycled Material RAS Only RAS RAP RAP Only PG X PG S PG PG S Wear NonWear PG X Wear NonWear The ratio of added new asphalt binder to total asphalt binder is calculated as added bindertotal binder x The Contractor can elect to use a blending chart to verify compliance with the specified binder grade .
The Department may take production samples to ensure the asphalt binder material meets the requirements .
The blending chart is on the Bituminous Office Website .
XSHVE E. Adjusted Asphalt Film Thickness Adj .
AFT MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method Ensure the adjusted asphalt film thickness Adj .
AFT of the mixture at design and during production meets the requirements of Table Mixture Requirements .
Base the Adj .
AFT on the calculated aggregate surface area SA and the effective asphalt binder content .
E. Documentation Include the following documentation and test results with each JMF submitted for review Names of the individuals responsible for the QC of the mixture during production Low project number of the contract on which the mixture will be used Traffic level and number of gyrations The following temperature ranges as supplied by the asphalt binder supplier .
Laboratory mixing and compaction .
Plant discharge and .
Field compaction .
The percentage in units of percent except the No .
sieve .
mm in units of .
percent of aggregate passing each of the specified sieves including the No .
No .
No .
and No .
for each aggregate to be incorporated into the mixture .
Derive the gradation of the aggregate from the RAP after extracting the residual asphalt .
Source descriptions of the following .
Location of material .
Description of materials .
Aggregate pit or quarry number and .
Proportion amount of each material in the mixture in percent of total aggregate .
Composite gradation based on and above .
Include virgin composite gradation based on and above for mixtures containing RAPRAS .
Bulk and apparent specific gravities and water absorption by weight of dry aggregate .
Both coarse and fine aggregate for each product used in the mixture including RAPRAS .
Use MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method and .
The tolerance allowed between the Contractors and the Departments specific gravities are Gsb individual .
and and Gsb combined .. FHWA .
power chart represented by the composite gradation plotted on Federal Form PR Test results from the composite aggregate blend at the proposed JMF proportions showing compliance with Table .
Coarse Aggregate Angularity .
Fine Aggregate Angularity and .
Flat and Elongated Extracted asphalt binder content for mixtures containing RAPRAS with no retention factor included .
Asphalt binder percentage in units of .
percent based on the total mass of the mixture and the PG grade .
Each trial mixture design includes the following .
At least different asphalt binder contents with at least .
percent between each point with at least one point at one point above and one point below the optimum asphalt binder percentage . .
Maximum specific gravity for each asphalt binder content calculated based on the average of the effective specific gravities measured by using at least two maximum specific gravity tests at the asphalt contents above and below the expected optimum asphalt binder content. . Test results on at least two specimens at each asphalt binder content for the individual and average bulk specific gravities density and heights . .
Percent air voids of the mixture at each asphalt binder content. . Adj .
AFT for each asphalt binder content . .
Fines to Effective Asphalt FA ratio calculated to the nearest .
percent. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
TSR at the optimum asphalt binder content. . Graphs showing air voids adjusted AFT Gmb Gmm and unit weight vs. percent asphalt binder content for each of the three asphalt binder contents submitted with trial mix . .
Evidence that the completed mixture will conform to design air voids Va Adj .
AFT TSR FAe Fines to effective asphalt ratio. . Gyratory densification tables and curves generated from the gyratory compactor for all points used in the mixture submittal. . new asphalt binder to total asphalt binder .
The Contractor has the option of augmenting the submitted JMF with additional sand or rock .
When using this option provide samples of the aggregate for quality analysis in accordance with .. E. Type of Mixture Design Submittal .
Also provide mix design data for two additional design points per addmaterial .
Provide one point to show a proportional adjustment to the submitted JMF that includes percent by weight addmaterial at the JMF optimum asphalt percent .
Provide a second point to show a proportional adjustment to the submitted JMF that includes percent by weight add material at the JMF optimum asphalt percent .
Report the following information for each of these two points .
The maximum specific gravity determined by averaging two tests .
Test results showing the individual and average bulk specific gravity density and height of at least two specimens at the optimum asphalt binder content .
Percent air voids for the mixture for each point .
Fines to Effective Asphalt ratio calculated to the nearest .
of a percent .
Crushing of the coarse and fine aggregate .
Adj .
AFT and .
Up to two add materials will be allowed .
F Mixture Design Report The Department will provide a Mixture Design Report consisting of the JMF .
Include the following in the JMF Composite gradation Aggregate component proportions Asphalt binder content of the mixture Design air voids Adj .
asphalt film thickness and Aggregate bulk specific gravity values .
Show the JMF limits for gradation control sieves in accordance with aggregate gradation broadbands shown in Table percent asphalt binder content air voids and Adj .
AFT .
If the Department issues a Mixture Design Report this report only confirms that the Department reviewed the mixture and that it meets volumetric properties shown in Table and Table .
The Department makes no guaranty or warranty either express or implied that compliance with volumetric properties ensures specification compliance regarding placement and compaction of the mixture .
Provide materials meeting the requirements of the aggregate and mixture design before issuing a Mixture Design Report .
The Department will review two trial mix designs per mix type designated in the plan per contract at no cost to the Contractor .
The Department will verify additional mix designs at a cost of per design .
Provide a Department reviewed Mixture Design Report for all paving except for small quantities of material as described in .. G Small Quantity Paving .
For city county and other agency projects provide the District Materials Laboratory a complete project proposal including addenda supplemental agreements change orders and plans sheets including typical sections affecting the mix design before the Department begins the verification process .
G Mixture Quality Management G. Quality Control QC The Contractor will perform Quality Control QC as part of the production process .
QC is the process control of the operations related to mixture production and determining the quality of the mixture being produced .
The QC sample is the Contractors sample taken and tested during production and used to control the production process .
Provide and maintain a QC program for plant mix asphalt production including mix design process control inspection sampling and testing and adjustments in the process related to the production of an asphalt pavement .
G .. a Certification Provide the following to obtain certification Completed and submitted request form application for plant inspection .
Site map showing stockpile locations .
Signed asphalt plant inspection report showing the plant and testing facility passed as documented by Asphalt Plant Inspection Report TP TP .
The inspection report must also include documentation .
Minnesota Standard Specifications showing plant and laboratory equipment has been calibrated and is being maintained to the tolerance shown in the Bituminous Manual and sections and of the MnDOT Laboratory Manual .
A Departmentsigned Mixture Design Report MDR before mixture production .
G .. b Maintaining Certification Maintain plant certification by documenting the production and testing of the certified plant asphalt mixtures .
Sample and test asphalt mixtures in accordance with this section and meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
G .. b Annual Certification Perform annual certification after winter suspension .
G .. b Sampling Rate Sample at the rate in accordance with .. G. and the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
G .. b Plant Moved Recertify the plant if the plant moves to a new or previously occupied location .
G .. c. Plant Certification Revocation The Engineer may revoke certification for any of the following reasons If the mix does not meet the requirements of .. E. .. E and .
If there is a failure to meet the testing rates or If it is determined records were falsified .
If the Engineer revokes plant certification the Department may revoke the Technical Certification of the individual or individuals involved .
The Department will maintain a list of companies with revoked certifications .
G. Quality Assurance QA The Engineer will perform Quality Assurance QA as part of the acceptance process .
QA is the process of monitoring and evaluating various aspects of the Contractors testing as described below .
The QA sample is the Departments companion sample to the Contractors QC sample .
QA testing is performed to accept the work .
The Engineer will perform the following Conduct QA and verification sampling and testing Observe the QC sampling and tests Monitor the required QC summary sheets and control charts Verify calibration of QC laboratory testing equipment Communicate Department test results to the Contractors personnel on a daily basis and Ensure Independent Assurance IA sampling and testing requirements are met .
If the Engineer observes that the Contractor is not performing sampling and quality control tests in accordance with the applicable test procedures the Engineer may stop production until the Contractor takes corrective action .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor of observed deficiencies promptly both verbally and in writing .
The Engineer may obtain additional samples at any time and location during production to determine quality levels in accordance with .. G. Verification Sample .
The Department will post a chart with the names and telephone numbers for the personnel responsible for QA .
The Engineer will calibrate and correlate laboratory testing equipment in accordance with the Bituminous Manual and Laboratory Manual. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results Item Allowable Difference Mixture bulk specific gravity Gmb .
Mixture maximum specific gravity Gmm .
Adjusted AFT calculated .
Fine Aggregate Angularity uncompacted voids U Coarse Aggregate Angularity fractured faces P Aggregate Individual Bulk Specific Gravity No . .
Aggregate Individual Bulk Specific Gravity No . .
Aggregate combined blend Specific Gravity Gsb .
Tensile strength ratio TSR Table Asphalt binder content Meter method .
Spot check method .
Chemical extraction methods .
Incinerator oven .
Chemical vs. meter spot check or incinerator methods .
Incinerator oven vs. spot check .
Gradation sieve passing in ¾ in ½ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No. . Test tolerances listed are for single test comparisons .
G. Verification Sample The Department will test a minimum of one of the companion samples to the Contractors QC samples and identify this as a verification sample .
The Departments verification sample is used to assure compliance of the Contractors QC program .
The verification samples can be any one or all of the splits to the Contractors QC samples .
Additionally the Department can take a random sample at any time from behind the paver or from the truck box and will consider this a verification sample .
The split of this sample given to the Contractor must be tested by the Contractor and will replace the next scheduled QC sample .
The Department recommends sampling enough material to accommodate retesting in case the samples fail .
The Department will perform verification testing on at least one set of production tests in accordance with .. G .. b Production and .. G. Production Test on a daily basis per mix type .
Use the verification companion sample to verify the requirements of Table Table and Table .
Compare the verification companion sample to the verification sample for compliance with allowable tolerances in Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results .
These include the mixture properties of Gmm mixture maximum gravity Gmb mixture bulk gravity asphalt binder content Adjusted AFT calculated Coarse and Fine Aggregate crushing and gradation .
Perform one test per week on a verification companion for coarse and fine aggregate crushing meeting the requirements of .. G .. g Coarse Aggregate Angularity and .. G .. h Fine Aggregate Angularity .
These do not include the aggregate bulk specific gravity Gsb fines to effective asphalt or the tensile strength ratio TSR .
Determine the asphalt binder content and gradation in accordance with the extraction method specified in .. G .. a Asphalt Binder Content or .G .. b Gyratory Bulk Specific Gravity .
The Contractor may access the Departments verification test results for Gmm mixture maximum gravity Gmb mixture bulk gravity air voids calculated asphalt binder content within working days from the time the sample is delivered to the District Laboratory .
The Department will provide the gradation crushing and Adj .
AFT calculated results to the Contractor within three working days .
The Department will include the verification test results on the test summary sheet .
The Department will compare the results with the Contractors verification companion for the allowable tolerances in Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results .
The Department will consider the verification process complete if the Contractors verification companion meets the tolerances in Table .
If the tolerances between the Contractors verification companion and the Departments verification sample do not meet the requirements of Table the Department will retest the material .
If the retests fail to meet tolerances the Department will substitute the Departments verification test results for the Contractors results in the QC program and use those results for acceptance .
The Department will only substitute the outoftolerance parameters and will recalculate volumetric properties if applicable .
If the Adj .
AFT calculation does not meet the tolerance equalize the Department Adj .
AFT result by increasing the original Department value by .
microns .
Use the increased Department Adj .
AFT for the Individual Adjusted AFT result and to calculate the Moving Average Adj .
AFT results .
The increased Department Adj .
AFT will form the basis for acceptance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If the verification sample retests do not meet tolerances the Department will immediately investigate the cause of the difference that will include a review of testing equipment procedures worksheets gyratory specimen height sheets and personnel to determine the source of the problem .
The Engineer may require both the Department and Contractor to perform at least one hotcold comparison of mixture properties .
To perform a hotcold comparison split the sample into three representative portions .
The Engineer will observe the Contractor testing .
Immediately compact one part while still hot .
Apply additional heating to raise the temperature of the sample to compaction temperature if necessary .
Allow the second and third part to cool to air temperature .
Retain the second part and transport the third part to the District Materials Laboratory .
On the same day and at the same time as the District Materials Laboratory heat samples to compaction temperature and compact .
Develop a calibration factor to compare the specific gravity of the hot compacted samples to reheated compacted samples .
Use at least two gyratory specimens for each test .
The Engineer or the Contractor may request that this test be repeated .
Reheat mix samples to F to allow splitting of the sample into representative fractions for the various tests .
Do not overheat the mixture portions used for testing maximum specific gravity test .
The Department will test the previously collected QA samples until they meet the tolerances or until the Department has tested all of the remaining samples .
After testing the samples the Department will test QA samples subsequent to the verification sample until tolerances are met .
The Department will base acceptance on QC data .
The Department will base acceptance on QC data with substitution of Department test results for those parameters out of tolerance .
Cease mixture production and placement if reestablished test results do not meet tolerances within h. Resume production and placement only after meeting the tolerances .
The process for dispute resolution is available on the Bituminous Office website .
If the Engineer analyzes the data using methods for determination of bias on file in the Bituminous Office and finds a bias in the test results the Engineer will specify which results to use .
If through analysis of data it is determined that there is a bias in the test results the Engineer will determine which results are appropriate and will govern .
G. Contractor Quality Control G .. a Personnel Submit an organizational chart listing the names and phone numbers of individuals and alternates responsible for the following Mix design Process control administration and Inspection .
Provide QC technicians certified as a Level I Bituminous Quality Management QM Tester meeting the requirements of the MnDOT Technical Certification Program for QC testing and Level II Bituminous QM Mix Designer to make process adjustments .
Provide at least one person per paving operation certified as a Bituminous Street Inspector .
Provide a laboratory with equipment and supplies for Contractor quality control testing and maintain with the following Uptodate equipment calibrations and a copy of the calibration records with each piece of equipment Telephone Fax and copy machine however the Engineer may waive the requirement to have a fax machine if internet and email are available Internet and Email Computer Printer and Microsoft Excel version or newer Laboratory equipment need to meet the requirements listed in Section of the Bituminous Manual Laboratory Manual and these specifications including having extraction capabilities .
Before beginning production the laboratory equipment needs to be calibrated and operational .
Calibrate and correlate all testing equipment in accordance with the Bituminous Manual and Laboratory Manual .
Keep records of calibration for each piece of testing equipment in the same facility as the equipment .
G .. b Sampling and Testing Take QC samples at random tonnage or locations quartered from a larger sample of mixture .
Sample randomly and in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
Determine random numbers and tonnage or locations using the Bituminous Manual Section .
Table A or ASTM D Section or an Engineer approved alternate method of random number generation .
Sample either behind the paver or from the truck box at the plant site .
Other sampling locations can be approved by .
Minnesota Standard Specifications the Engineer .
The Contractor must decide and notify the Engineer where samples will be taken before production begins .
The Contractor and Engineer must both agree to a change of sampling location once production has begun .
The procedure for truck box sampling is on the Bituminous Office website .
The Contractor will obtain at least a pound sample .
Split the sample in the presence of the Inspector .
The Inspector will retain possession of the Agency portion of each split sample that is taken and randomly submit a minimum of one sample on a daily basis to the District Laboratory for Verification testing see .. G .. Store compacted mixture specimens and loose mixture companion samples for calendar days .
Label these split companion samples with companion numbers .
If coarse and fine aggregate angularity are not evaluated for every QC sample retain the extracted gradation samples for the respective QC samples for additional testing .
Keep the aggregate samples in containers with field identification labels for a period of calendar days .
The Engineer will identify which extracted gradation sample is the Verification Companion and whether it is to be tested for coarse and fine aggregate angularity .
G. Production Test Requirements Determine the planned tonnage for each mixture planned for production during the production day .
Divide the planned production by and round to the next highest whole number .
The result is the number of production tests required for the mixture .
Table Production Testing Rates shows the required production tests .
Split the planned production into even increments and select sample locations as described above .
If actual tonnage is greater than the planned tonnage repeat the calculation above and provide additional tests if the calculation results in a higher number of production tests .
During production the Department will not require mixture volumetric property tests if mix production is no greater than ton .
Provide production tests if the accumulative weight on successive days is greater than ton .
If there is a choice of more than one MnDOT approved test procedure select one method at the beginning of the project with the approval of the Engineer and use that method for the entire project .
The Contractor and Engineer may agree to change test procedures during the construction of the project .
G.a Establishing an Ignition Oven Correction Factor MnDOT Lab .
Manual Appendix On the first day of production for each mixture type both the Contractor and the Agency will establish an ignition oven correction factor from the produced mixture .
Reestablish correction factors when There are aggregate or RAP substitutions There are or more tolerance failures on the extracted asphalt content between the Agency and the Contractor as defined by Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results .
G. Production Testing Rates G .. a Start Up At the start of production for the first ton of each mix type perform testing at the following frequencies Table Production StartUp Testing Rates Production Test Testing Rates Laboratory Manual Method Section Bulk Specific Gravity test per ton .. G .. b Maximum Specific Gravity test per ton .. G .. c Air Voids calculated test per ton .. G .. d Asphalt Content test per ton .. G .. a Add ACTotal AC Ratio calculated test per ton .. G .. a Adj .
AFT Calculated test per ton .. E .. b Gradation test per ton .. G .. f Coarse Aggregate Angularity test per tons .. G .. g Fine Aggregate Angularity FAA test per ton .. G .. h Fines to Effective Asphalt Ratio calculated test per ton .. G .. f .. G .. a . Minnesota Standard Specifications G .. b Production After producing the first ton of each mix type test at the following frequencies Table Production Testing Rates Production Test Sampling and Testing Rates Test Reference Section Bulk Specific Gravity Divide the planned production by .
Round the number to the next higher whole number Laboratory Manual .. G .. b Maximum Specific Gravity Divide the planned production by .
Round the number to the next higher whole number .
Laboratory Manual .. G .. c Air Voids calculated Divide the planned production by .
Round the number to the next higher whole number Laboratory Manual .. G .. d Asphalt Content Divide the planned production by .
Round the number to the next higher whole number Laboratory Manual .. G .. a Add ACTotal AC Ratio calculated Divide the planned production by .
Round the number to the next higher whole number Laboratory Manual .. G .. a Adj .
AFT Calculated Divide the planned production by .
Round the number to the next higher whole number Laboratory Manual .. E .. e Gradation gradation per tons or portion thereof at least one per day Laboratory Manual .. G .. f Coarse Aggregate Angularity tests per day for at least days then per day if CAA is met .
If CAA of requirement sample per day but test per week .
Laboratory Manual .. G .. g Fine Aggregate Angularity FAA tests per day for at least days then per day if FAA is met .
If FAA of requirement sample per day but test per week .
Laboratory Manual .. G .. h Fines to Effective Asphalt Ratio calculated Divide the planned production by .
Round the number to the next higher whole number Laboratory Manual .. G .. f .. G .. a TSR As directed by the Engineer Laboratory Manual .G .. i Aggregate Specific Gravity As directed by the Engineer Laboratory Manual and .G .. j Mixture Moisture Content Daily unless otherwise required by the Engineer Laboratory Manual .G .. k Asphalt Binder Sample first load each grade then per gal sample size qt MnDOT Bituminous Manual .
.G .. l . Minnesota Standard Specifications G. Production Tests G .. a Asphalt Binder Content Spotchecks are required only when the Engineer has waived the requirements of .G relating to furnishing a computerized printout of the plant blending control system .
A minimum of spotcheck per day per mixture blend is required to determine the new added asphalt binder .
Use an incinerator oven meeting the requirements of the Laboratory Manual Method .
Do not use the incinerator oven if the percentage of Class B material is greater than percent within the composite blend unless the Contractor determines a correction factor approved by the Engineer .
Perform chemical extraction meeting the requirements of Laboratory Manual Method or .
G .. b Gyratory Bulk Specific Gravity Gmb Use two specimens to determine gyratory bulk specific gravity meeting the requirements of Laboratory Manual Method .
Set Gyratory to an internal angle of . . according to AASHTO TP .
G .. c Maximum Specific Gravity Gmm Determine maximum specific gravity meeting the requirements of Laboratory Manual Method .
G .. d Air Voids Individual and Isolated Calculation Calculate the individual and isolated air voids meeting the requirements of Laboratory Manual Method .
Use the maximum mixture specific gravity and corresponding bulk specific gravity from a single test to calculate the isolated air voids .
Use the maximum specific gravity moving average and the bulk specific gravity from a single test to calculate the individual air voids .
Compact gyratory design to Ndesign in accordance with Table Mixture Requirements for the specified traffic level .
G .. e Adjusted Asphalt Film Thickness AFT Calculation Calculate the Adj .
AFT meeting the requirements of the Laboratory Manual Method .
G .. f Gradation Blended Aggregate Determine the gradation of blended aggregate sample from an extracted bituminous mixture meeting the requirements of Laboratory Manual Method .
G .. g Coarse Aggregate Angularity Test the Coarse Aggregate Angularity CAA meeting the requirements of Laboratory Manual Method to determine the CAA on composite blend from aggregates used in production of hot mix asphalt .
Ensure CAA test results meet the requirements in accordance with Table .
The Contractor may test mixtures containing virgin aggregates from composite belt samples .
Test mixtures containing RAP from extracted aggregates taken from standard production samples .
Test the percentage of fractured faces of the composite aggregate blend less than percent twice a day for each mixture blend for at least two days then one test per day if the test samples meet the CAA requirements .
If the CAA crushing test results are greater than percent of the requirements take one sample per day and perform one test per week .
Report CAA results on the test summary sheet .
The Department may reduce payment in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results for mixture placed and represented by results below the minimum requirement in accordance with Table .
The Department will calculate tonnage subjected to reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of the failing test to the sampling point where the test result meets the specifications .
G .. h Fine Aggregate Angularity Use Laboratory Manual Method to test the composite blend from aggregates used in production of asphalt mixtures for Fine Aggregate Angularity FAA meeting the requirements of Table .
The Contractor may test mixtures that contain virgin aggregates from composite belt samples .
Test mixtures that contain RAP from extracted aggregates taken from standard production samples .
Perform two tests per day for each mixture blend for at least two days to test the percentage of uncompacted voids from the composite aggregate blend then one test per day if the samples meet FAA requirements .
If FAA test results are greater than percent of the requirement take one sample per day and one test per week .
Report FAA results on the test summary sheet .
The Department may reduce payment in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results for mixture placed and represented by results below the minimums in accordance with Table .
The Department will calculate tonnage subjected to reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of the failing test to the sampling point where the test result meets the specifications .
G .. i Field Tensile Strength Ratio TSR Laboratory Manual Method If the Engineer requires sampling and testing of the mixture to verify tensile strength ratio TSR both the Contractor and the Department will be required to test these samples within h after sampling .
The Contractor shall obtain a sample weighing at .
Minnesota Standard Specifications least lb kg and split the sample in half to provide a sample for the Department and the Contractor .
Label the Department companion of this split with the following information Date Time Project number and Cumulative tonnage to date .
After the sample is split and labeled give the Departments companion sample to the Department Street Inspector or Plant Monitor or to the Materials Engineer within h of sampling as directed by the Engineer .
When using Option obtain the sample within the first ton of plant mixed asphalt produced or by the second day of production whichever comes first to verify tensile strength ratio TSR.Take mixture samples from the windrow or truck box .
Provide a in specimen for gyratory design .
The Contractor may test the sample at a permanent lab site or a field lab site .
Refer to Table Mixture Type Minimum TSR for the minimum acceptable TSR values for production .
Stop production immediately if the material does not meet minimum TSR requirements .
Do not resume production until after adding antistrip to the asphalt binder .
Determine the responsible party for the cost of the antistrip in accordance with the Department and Contractor TSR values in Table .
If the Department is responsible for the cost of the antistrip the Department will only pay for the cost of the antistrip for mixtures placed on that project .
The Department will not pay for delay costs associated with making changes related to this testing .
Table Mixture Type Minimum TSR Traffic Level Traffic Level Contractor MnDOT Contractor MnDOT Table AntiStrip Cost Responsibility Gyratory Level Contractor TSR MnDOT TSR Responsibility No antistrip required Contractor Department Contractor No antistrip required Contractor Department Contractor Take another sample and test within the first ton after production resumes .
Stop production if the retest fails to meet the minimum specified value .
Discuss a proposal to resolve the problem with the Engineer before resuming production .
Do not operate below the specified minimum TSR if at least successive tests fail the TSR requirements .
A new sample and retest is automatically required if a proportion changes by greater than percent from the currently produced mixture for a single stockpile aggregate or the Engineer directs the Contractor to sample and retest .
G .. j Aggregate Specific GravityGsb Laboratory Manual Methods Sample and test aggregate stockpiles to verify aggregate specific gravity if directed by the Engineer in conjunction with the District Materials Engineer .
Provide lb representative stockpile samples for each aggregate component .
Split samples in half to provide material for both the Department and the Contractor .
Label the Department companion with the following information Date Time Project number and Approximate cumulative tonnage to date .
Give the Department companion to the Department Street Inspector or Plant Monitor immediately after splitting or to the Materials Engineer within h of sampling as directed by the Engineer .
The Materials Engineer will compare the aggregate specific gravity results to the Contractors values on the current Mix Design Report .
If the results deviate beyond the tolerance in accordance with Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results the Materials Engineer will notify the Contractor and issue a new Mix Design Report with the current specific gravity results .
Base new mixture placed after receiving notification of new specific gravity values on the Department results .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor regarding new specific gravity values .
The dispute resolution procedure for aggregate specific gravity is on the Bituminous Office website. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G .. k Moisture Content Laboratory Manual Method Provide a mixture with moisture content no greater than .
percent .
Measure moisture content in the mixture behind the paver or if approved by the Engineer in the truck box .
Sample and test as directed by the Engineer .
Store the sample in an airtight container .
Do not perform microwave testing .
Do not provide plant mixed asphalt with a moisture content greater than .
percent .
G .. l Asphalt Binder Samples Obtain asphalt binder samples from a sampling valve located between the pump and the drum .
Sample each type of asphalt binder used in mixture production after tons of mixture has been produced then sample at a rate of one per gal A minimum of gallon of binder must be drawn and wasted from the sampling valve before the actual sample is drawn .
For batch plants obtain the asphalt binder sample from the weigh pod .
Provide a qt sized sample .
The Inspector will monitor the sampling the Contractor performs .
Record sample information on an Asphalt Sample Identification Card .
Submit the sample to the Central Materials Laboratory .
Contact the Department Chemical Laboratory Director for disposition of failing asphalt binder samples .
G. Documentation Maintain documentation including test summary sheets and control charts on an ongoing basis .
Maintain a file of gyratory specimen heights for gyratory compacted samples and test worksheets .
File reports records and diaries developed during the work as directed by the Engineer .
These documents become the property of the Department .
Number test results in accordance with the MDR and record on forms approved and provided by the Department .
Send production test results on test summary sheets to the District Materials Laboratory and to other sites as directed by the Engineer by AM of the day following production by facsimile or email when approved by the Engineer .
Include the following production test results and mixture information on the Department approved test summary sheet Percent passing on all sieves in accordance with Table including No .
No .
No .
No .
Coarse and fine aggregate crushing Maximum specific gravity Gmm .
Bulk specific gravity Gmb Percent total asphalt binder content Pb New added asphalt binder content Ratio of new added asphalt binder to total asphalt binder Calculated production air voids Va Calculated adjusted AFT Adj .
AFT Composite aggregate specific gravity Gsb reflecting current proportions Aggregate proportions in use at the time of sampling Tons where sampled Tons represented by a test and cumulative tons produced Fines to effective asphalt ratio FAe Signature Line for MnDOT and Contractor Representative Mixture Moisture Content and MnDOT verification sample test result .
Identify when used the WMA additive or process and dosing rates .
Submit copies of failing test results to the Engineer on a daily basis .
Provide the Engineer with asphalt manifests or bill of ladings BOL on a daily basis .
Provide a daily plant diary including a description of QC actions taken .
Include changes or adjustments on the test summary sheets .
Provide weekly truck scale spot checks .
Provide a Department approved accounting system for mixes and provide a daily and final project summary of material quantities and types .
Provide a final hard and electronic copy of QC test summary sheets and control charts and density worksheets at completion of bituminous operations on the project to the Engineer .
Provide an automated weigh scale and computer generated weigh ticket .
Ensure the ticket indicates the following information Project number Mix designation including binder grade Mixture Design Report number .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Truck identification and tare Truck tare weight is not required when the plant silo is equipped with a load cell to weigh the mixture independent of the truck weight .
Truck tare weight is only required when a driveover truck scale is utilized to determine the batch weight .
Net mass and Date and time of loading .
Do not include deviations from the minimum information on the computer generated weigh ticket unless otherwise approved by the Engineer in writing .
Continue test summary sheets charts and records for a mixture produced at one plant site from contract to contract .
Begin new summary sheets and charts annually for winter carryover projects .
Begin new summary sheets and charts when an asphalt plant is resetup in the same location after it has moved out .
Furnish an electronic printout long form recordation from an automated plant blending control system at minute intervals when the plant is producing mixture .
The Engineer may waive this requirement if the plant does not have the capability to produce the automated blending control information however the Contractor must then perform daily spotchecks to determine percent new asphalt added .
Include the following information on the plant control printout for Drum Plants Both the virgin and recycle belt feed rates tonshr Feeder bin proportions Total asphalt cement in the mixture Virgin asphalt cement added Mixture Temperature F Mixture code Date and time stamp and Current tons of mixture produced and daily cumulative tons of mixture produced at time of printout .
Provide a daily electronic printout of the plant calibration SPAN numbers for each bin and meter .
Include the following information on the plant control printout for Batch Plants Both the virgin and recycle belt feed rates tonshr Feeder bin proportions Mixture Temperature F Mixture code Date and time stamp and Current tons of mixture produced and daily cumulative tons of mixture produced at time of printout .
Provide a daily electronic printout of the plant calibration SPAN numbers for each bin and meter .
G. Control Charts Provide control charts and summary sheets computer generated from software approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor may use software available at the Bituminous Office .
Record the following data on standardized control charts Blended aggregate gradation include sieves in accordance with Table for specified mixture Percent asphalt binder content Pb Maximum specific gravity Gmm Production air voids Va and Adj .
AFT .
Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer plot individual test results for each test point and connect individual points with a solid line .
Plot the moving average for each test variable starting with the fourth test and connect with a dashed line .
Plot the Departments QA and verification test results with triangles .
Plot the specification JMF limits on the control charts using a dotted line .
G. JMF Limits Base the production air voids and Adj .
AFT on the minimum specified requirements in accordance with Table Mixture Requirements .
Base gradations and asphalt binder content limits on the current Department reviewed Mixture Design Report .
Provide gradation control sieves in accordance with Table .
Refer to the Mixture Design Report for the mixture .
Minnesota Standard Specifications production targets .
JMF limits are the target plus or minus the limits in accordance with Table JMF Limits N. Use JMF limits as the criteria for acceptance of materials based on the moving average .
Table JMF Limits N Item JMF Limits Adj .
AFT .
Production air voids .
Asphalt binder content .
Sieve passing in ¾ in ½ in ⅜ in No .
Broad band limits No .
Broad band limits No .
Broad band limits G. Moving Average Calculation Calculate a moving average as the average of the last four test results .
Continue the calculation without interruption except begin new summary sheets and charts annually for winter carryover projects and if an asphalt plant is resetup in the same site after it has been moved out .
G. JMF Bands JMF Bands are the area between the target as identified on the Mixture Design Report and the JMF limits .
G. JMF Adjustment Begin mixture production with aggregate proportions within percent of the design proportions and mixture parameters in Table within the JMF limits shown .
Use all the aggregate proportions included on the Mixture Design Report unless the aggregate proportion is shown as percent .
If the Contractor provides the District Materials Laboratory with prior documented production data showing how production affects the mixture properties or if the Contractor provides the District Materials Laboratory with a written justification or explanation of material changes since the original mixture submittal waive the preceding requirements .
G .. a JMF Request for Adjustment The Contractor may make a request to the Bituminous Engineer or District Materials Engineer for a JMF adjustment to the mix design if the QC test results indicate a necessary change to achieve the specified properties .
Do not use aggregates or materials not part of the original mix design to make adjustments unless otherwise approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the District Materials Engineer or the Department Bituminous Engineer .
A Certified Level II Bituminous QM Mix Designer will review the requested change for the Department .
If the request meets the design requirements in Table Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands Table Mixture Aggregate Requirements and Table Mixture Requirements the Department will issue a revised Mixture Design Report .
Each trial mixture design submittal in accordance with .. E Mixture Design may have three JMF adjustments per mixture per project without charge .
The Department will charge the Contractor for each additional JMF adjustment requests .
Perform an interactive process with the Engineer before making JMF adjustments .
Make JMF adjustments only within the mixture specification gradation design broadbands in accordance with Table .
Submit a new JMF if redesigning the mixture .
Only reduce the JMF asphalt content if the moving average Adj .
AFT is .µ or more and Individual Adjusted AFT is at least .
µ .
The department will not allow consecutive requests for a JMF adjustment without production data .
Continue calculation of the moving average after the approval of the JMF .
G .. b JMF Request for Adjustment for Proportion Change If requesting a JMF adjustment for a proportion change greater than percent from the currently produced mixture for a single stockpile aggregate provide supporting production test data from at least four tests run at an accelerated testing rate of one test per ton with the adjustment request .
The Department will base acceptable verification and approval of the requested JMF on individual and moving average test results in addition to the requirements listed above .
Individual test results must be within twice the requested JMF limits for percent asphalt binder production air voids and Adj .
AFT .
Individual gradations must be within the Broad Bands .
The moving average values must be within the control limits in accordance with Table .
Continue to calculate the moving average after the change in proportions .
If the mixture meets the design requirements as discussed in G .. a the District Materials Laboratory will sign the request for JMF adjustment effective from the point of the proportion change .
If the mixture fails to meet the design requirements the Department will either reduce the payment or direct the Contractor to remove and replace .
Do not make consecutive requests for JMF adjustments without production data .
G .. c JMF Request for Adjustment When Cumulative Proportion Changes .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Submit a request for JMF adjustment when the cumulative change on any one product exceeds from the original MDR .
The Department will issue a revised MDR provided the mixture meets the requirements in Table Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands Table Mixture Aggregate Requirements and Table Mixture Requirements .
G. Failing Materials The Department will base material acceptance on individual and moving average test results .
The Department will use isolated test results for acceptance of air voids at the start of mixture production .
The Department will consider individual test results greater than two times the JMF bands as failing .
The Department will fail moving average test results exceeding the JMF limits .
Begin new summary sheets annually for winter carryover projects .
Stop production and make adjustments if the moving average values exceed the JMF limits .
Restart production after performing the adjustments and notifying the Engineer .
Resume testing at the accelerated rates and for the tests listed in Table Production StartUp Testing Rates for the next ton of mixture produced .
Continue calculating the moving average after the stop in production .
The Department will consider mixture produced where the moving average of four exceeds the JMF limits as unsatisfactory in accordance with .. G .. d Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids .. G .. e Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp Adjusted AFT .. G .. f Moving Average Failure Production Air Voids and .. G .. g Moving Average Failure Percent Asphalt Binder Content Gradation and Adj .
AFT .
If the total production of a mixture type for the entire project requires no greater than four tests the Department will accept the material in accordance with .. G .. b Isolated Failures at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids and .. G .. c Individual Failure Gradation Percent Asphalt Binder Production Air Voids and Adj .
AFT .
If the Contractors testing data fails to meet the tolerances in accordance with Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results the Department will substitute QA and verification data to determine the payment factor .
G .. a Ratio of New Added Asphalt Binder to Total Asphalt Binder Acceptance Criteria Minimum design ratio of new added asphalt binder to total asphalt binder is shown in Table below .
During production the ratio must meet individual and moving average requirements as listed in Table Ratio of New Added Asphalt Binder to Total Asphalt Binder Acceptance Criteria .
If the individual or moving average ratio drops below the minimum requirement the Contractor must stop production and make adjustments to correct the process .
Restart production only after notifying the Engineer of the adjustments made .
The calculation of the moving average will continue after the stop in production .
Table Ratio of New Added Asphalt Binder to Total Asphalt Binder Acceptance Criteria Specified Asphalt Grade Recycled Material RAS Only RAS RAP RAP Only PG XX PG S PG PG S Wear ind.moving average NonWear ind.moving average PG X Wear NonWear ind.moving average XSHVE G .. b Isolated Failures at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids At the startup of mixture production use the first three isolated test results for production air voids before establishing a moving average of four .
Calculate isolated production air voids using the maximum mixture specific gravity and the corresponding bulk specific gravity from that single test .
After testing four samples and establishing a moving average of four the Department will base acceptance on individual and moving average production air voids .
The Department will not accept the material if any of the first three isolated test results for production air voids exceeds twice the JMF bands from the target listed on the Mixture Design Report at the start of production .
The Department will reduce payment for unacceptable material in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results .
The Department will calculate the quantity of unacceptable material on the tonnage placed from the sample point of the failing test to the sample point when the isolated test result is back within twice the JMF bands .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of production the Department will calculate the tonnage subject to reduced payment as described above including the tonnage from the start of production .
If isolated air voids are less than .
percent or greater than .
percent the Engineer will either reduce the payment or order the material removed and replaced at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to test inplace mixture to better define the removal and replacement limits .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to test inplace .
Minnesota Standard Specifications mixture placed before the failing test result .
If the Engineer reduces the payment the Department will pay for the material at percent of the contract unit price .
G .. c Individual Failure Percent Asphalt Binder Production Air Voids and Adj .
AFT Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results Item Pay Factor Coarse and fine aggregate crushing Asphalt binder content Production air voids individual and isolated Apply the lowest pay factor when using multiple reductions on a single test .
Calculate individual air voids using the moving average maximum specific gravity and the bulk specific gravity from that single test .
Calculate the isolated air voids from the maximum specific gravity and the bulk specific gravity from that single test .
The Engineer will only use isolated void test results for acceptance for the first three tests after mixture production startup .
If the individual test result for adjusted AFT is less than .µ the Department may either reduce payment in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results Adjusted AFT or order the material removed and replaced represented by the individual test .
This tonnage includes all material placed from the sample point of the failing test to the sample point when the test result meets specification requirements .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include the tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subject to reduced payment or removal and replacement .
Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results Adjusted AFT Individual Adjusted AFT µ Pay Factor . . . . . . RR Remove and replace at no expense to the Department .
The Department will not accept material if the individual tests for percent asphalt binder content or production air voids exceeds twice the JMF bands from the target listed on the Mix Design Report .
The Department will reduce payment in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results .
The Department will calculate the material subject to reduced payment as the material placed from the sample point of the failing test until the sample point when the test result is back within twice the JMF limits .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subjected to reduced payment .
The Department will not accept material if individual air voids are less than .
percent or greater than .
percent Remove and replace unacceptable material at no additional cost to the Department as directed by the Engineer .
Test inplace mixture to better define the area to be removed and replaced as directed by the Engineer .
Test mixture placed before the failing test result as directed by the Engineer .
The Department may reduce payment for unacceptable material at percent of the relevant contract unit price .
G .. d Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids If a moving average failure occurs within any of the first three moving average results after mixture startup tests the Department will accept the mixture if the individual air void corresponding to the moving average failure meets the JMF limits .
The Department will not accept material if the individual air void fails to meet the JMF limit .
The Department will reduce payment for unacceptable material unless the Engineer determines that the isolated air void corresponding to the individual air void meets the JMF limit .
The Department will pay for unacceptable material at percent of the relevant contract unit price .
The Department will calculate the quantity of material subject to reduce payment as the tons placed from the sample point of the failing moving average result and corresponding individual air void beyond the JMF limit to the sampling point when the individual test result is back within the JMF limit .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subjected to reduced payment .
G .. e Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp Adj .
AFT The Engineer will calculate the Moving Average n Adj .
AFT during the sixth test after the beginning of mixture production of that specific mixture .
The Engineer will include the individual results of calculations for tests No .
No .
No .
and No .
with this calculation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G .. f Moving Average Failure Production Air Voids A moving average production air void failure occurs when the individual production air void moving average of four exceeds the JMF limit .
The Department will consider the mixture unacceptable and subject to reduced payment .
The Department will pay for unacceptable mixture at percent of the contract unit price .
The Department will calculate the quantity of mixture subject to reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of all individual test results beyond the JMF limits which contributed to the moving average value that exceeded the JMF limit to the sampling point where the individual test result meets the JMF limits .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include the tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subject to reduced payment .
Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Moving Average Test Results Item Pay Factor Gradation Coarse and fine aggregate crushing NA individual failures only Adjusted AFT Asphalt binder content Production air voids Lowest Pay Factor applies when there are multiple reductions on a single test .
G .. g Moving Average Failure Percent Asphalt Binder Content Gradation and Adj .
AFT The Engineer will consider the mixture unacceptable and subject to reduced payment for mixture properties including asphalt binder content and gradation where the moving average of four exceeds the JMF limits .
The Department may reduce payment for unacceptable mixture properties in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Moving Average Test Results .
The Department will calculate the quantity of material subject to replacement or reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of all individual test results beyond the JMF limits which contributed to the moving average value that exceeded the JMF limit to the sampling point when the individual test result is back within the JMF limits .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include the tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subjected to reduced payment .
The Engineer will calculate the Moving Average n Adjusted AFT during the sixth test after the beginning of mixture production of that specific mixture .
The Engineer will include the individual results of calculations for tests No .
No .
No .
and No .
with this calculation .
The Department will consider material with the Moving Average n of the Adjusted AFT is less than .
µ as unsatisfactory and will pay for the material at percent of the relevant contract unit price .
The Department will calculate the quantity of material subject to replacement or reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of all Individual Adjusted AFT results less than .µ which contributed to the Moving Average value that was less than .µ to the sample point where the Individual Adjusted AFT is at least .µ .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include the tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subject to reduced payment .
G .. h Coarse and Fine Aggregate Crushing Failure If any CAA or FAA test results do not meet the requirements specified in Table the Department may reduce payment for the placed material in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results .
The Department will calculate the quantity of material subject to reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of the failing test until the sampling point where the test result meets the specifications .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include the tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subjected to reduced payment. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions A. Asphalt Release Agents Do not use petroleum distillates to prevent adhesion of asphalt mixtures to equipment .
An asphalt release agent must meet the criteria for Effect on Asphalt as described in the most recent Asphalt Release Agent on file in MnDOTs Office of Environmental Services .
A .
Edge Drop Off Protect traffic from dropoff conditions when traffic is carried during construction .
Dropoff conditions are covered in the most current MnDOT Field Manual .
A .
Surge and Storage Bins Store the asphalt mixture for no more than h at storage facilities that prevent segregation of the mix and drainage of asphalt from the mix .
Maintain the mixture at within F of the temperature when discharged from the silo or mixer and prevent excessive cooling or overheating. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Weather Limitations and Paving Date Do not perform work within the roadway in the spring until removal of seasonal load restrictions on roads in the vicinity unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Do not place asphalt mixtures when weather or roadbed conditions or moisture conditions of the roadway surface are judged unfavorable by the Engineer .
Do not place asphalt pavement final wearing course lift after October north of an eastwest line between Browns Valley and Holyoke or after November south of an eastwest line between Browns Valley and Holyoke .
The Engineer may waive these restrictions when The Contractor is not placing asphalt mixture on the traveled portion of the roadway The roadway involved is closed to traffic during the following winter or The Engineer provides written direction to place the mixture .
A. Mixing and Discharge of Materials Notify the Engineer of the recommended plant mixing temperatures as provided from the asphalt supplier .
Unless authorized by the Engineer do not produce the mixture more than F above the recommended maximum mixing temperature .
Use the automated plant control printout to monitor discharge temperature .
The Department will not pay for or allow placement of any mixture produced at more than F above the recommended maximum mixing temperature unless the higher mixing temperatures have been approved by the Engineer .
B Equipment B .
Plant B .. a Segregation Provide plant mixed asphalt from a plant capable of producing a uniform mix free of segregation .
B .. b Scales Test and calibrate scales in accordance with .
B .. c Mineral Filler Add mineral filler to the mixture using a storage silo equipped with a device to ensure a constant and uniform feed .
B .. d Storage Tanks Provide storage tanks equipped to heat and maintain the material at the temperatures recommended by the certified asphalt supplier .
Place the discharge end of the circulating line below the surface of the asphalt material .
Provide agitation for modified asphalt as recommended by the supplier .
Provide an outage table or chart and measuring stick for each storage or working tank .
Equip tanks with provisions to take asphalt binder material samples .
After delivery of asphalt binder material to the project do not heat the material at temperatures greater than F. Do not store modified asphalt at temperatures greater than the manufacturers recommendation .
B .. e Asphalt Binder Control If proportioning asphalt binder material by volume equip the plant with either a working tank or a metering system to determine asphalt binder content of the mixture .
Provide a working tank with a capacity from gal to gal L to L. Calibrate and supply the working tank with a calibrated measuring stick .
The Contractor may connect the tank to a mixing unit and use it only during spot check operations as long as it is available at all times .
Return feedback to the working tank during spot check operations .
Provide a metering system with at least one approved asphalt binder flow meter and an asphalt binder pump .
Connect the flow meter to the asphalt binder supply to measure and display only the asphalt binder being fed to the mixer unit .
Position the meter readout for convenient observation .
Provide a means to compare the flow meter readout with the calculated output of the asphalt binder pump .
Provide a system to display that shows the accumulated asphalt binder quantity being delivered to the mixer in gallons or to the nearest .
ton .
Calibrate and adjust the system to maintain an accuracy of percent error for each plant setup before producing the mixture .
Provide an outage table or chart and measuring stick for each storage or working tank .
Equip tanks with provisions to take asphalt binder material samples .
After delivery of asphalt binder material to the project do not heat the material at temperatures greater than F. Do not store modified asphalt at temperatures greater than the manufacturers recommendation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .. e Asphalt Binder Sampling Valve Provide an asphalt binder sampling valve located between the pump and the drum .
Sample asphalt binder from the weigh pod for batch plants .
B .. f Dryer The Department will not allow unburned fuel in the mix .
B .. g Temperature Control Equip the plant with enough temperature sensors to ensure temperature control of the aggregate and asphalt binder .
B .. h Pollution B .
Street Equipment B .. a Paver Provide a paver capable of spreading and finishing to widths as shown on the plans and with an operational vibratory screed and automatic screed control to place mix without segregation .
Use an asphalt paver to place the mixture .
When necessary the Contractor may use a motor grader when approved by the Engineer to spread mixtures in areas that are inaccessible to a paver or when the quantity of mixture makes it impractical to place with a paver .
Use a shouldering machine to spread the mixture on shoulder surfacing and uniform width widening when the placement width is too narrow for a paver .
Using a screed or strikeoff assembly produce a finished surface of the required evenness and texture without tearing shoving or gouging .
For mainline paving if the paving width is greater than the basic screed auger and mainframe extensions which meet manufacturers recommendations for the paving width are required unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The Department will not allow strikeoff only extension assemblies for mainline wearing course paving unless the Engineer directs otherwise .
Equip all pavers with an approved automatic screed control .
Sensoroperated devices need to include automatic controls that follow reference lines or surfaces on one or both sides of the paver as required .
Adjust the speed of the paver to produce the best results .
A string line is only required if stated in the contract .
Spread all mixtures without segregation to the cross sections shown on the plans excluding tight blade and scratch course applications .
The objective on the leveling layer is to secure a smooth base of uniform grade and cross section so that subsequent courses will be uniform in thickness .
The Contractor may spread the leveling layer with a properly equipped paver or when approved by the Engineer a motor grader equipped with a leveling device or with other means for controlling the surface elevation of the leveling layer .
Place each course over the full width of the section under construction on each days run unless the Engineer directs otherwise .
B .. b Trucks Provide trucks with tight clean and smooth truck haul beds .
Do not allow mixture to adhere to the truck beds .
When directed by the Engineer provide a cover that extends at least ft over the truck bed sides and attach to tiedowns if the truck is not equipped with a mechanical or automated covering system .
B .. c Motor Graders Use a motor grader with the following characteristics Selfpropelled Equipped with pneumatic tires with a tread depth of ½ in or less Equipped with a moldboard blade that is at least feet and With a wheelbase of at least feet .
B .. d Distributor Provide a distributor capable of uniformly applying material up to ft wide and equipped with the following An accurate volume measuring device with tachometer Pressure gauges Thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents Poweroperated pump and Full circulation spray bars with lateral and vertical adjustments. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .. e Rollers Compact each lift of asphalt to the density require in .. D Compaction .
B .. e SteelWheeled Rollers Selfpropelled steel wheeled compacting equipment must weigh at least ton .
If using vibratory rollers provide rollers that produce lbf per ft of width and a vibratory frequency of at least vpm using the low amplitude setting .
Provide a roller capable of reversing without backlash and equipped with spray attachments for moistening rollers on both sets of wheels .
B .. e Pneumatic Tired Rollers Selfpropelled pneumatic tired compacting equipment must have a compaction width of at least ft and a gross wheel load force of at least lb per wheel for traffic level and level mixtures lb per wheel for traffic level and level mixtures and if using vibratory at least ton total mass .
Provide a roller with a tire arrangement that obtains full compaction over the full width with each pass of the roller .
B .. e Trench Rollers Selfpropelled trench rollers must weigh at least lb per foot of width .
B .
Tack Coat Apply a uniform asphalt tack coat to the clean and dry existing asphalt or concrete surface and to the surface of each course or lift constructed except for the final course or lift in accordance with .
Coat the contact surfaces of all fixed structures and the edge of the inplace mixture in all courses at transverse joints and in the wearing course at longitudinal joints .
Do not coat the longitudinal joint if a rubberized asphalt joint adhesive will be applied to the vertical face of the joint .
A uniform application will not have streaks corn rows bare spots puddles or other irregular patterns .
Allow emulsified asphalt tack coats to break as indicated by a color change from brown to black before placing subsequent lifts .
Take tack samples from the asphalt distributor according to rates provided in the Material Control Schedule .
The Inspector will monitor the sampling the Contractor performs .
C Joints C. Construction Joints Compact joints to produce a neat tightly bonded joint that meets surface tolerances as described in .. E. Transverse and longitudinal joints are subject to the density requirement in accordance with .. D Compaction .
C. Transverse Joints Construct a transverse joint the full width of the paver at right angles to the centerline when mixture placement operations are suspended .
When work resumes cut the end vertically for the full depth of the layer unless constructing a formed edge as approved by the Engineer .
C. Longitudinal Joint Construct the longitudinal joint between strips and parallel to the pavement centerline .
In multiple lift construction construct the longitudinal joints between strips in each lift at least in measured transversely from the longitudinal joints in the previously placed lift .
If constructing a wearing course in an even number of strips place one longitudinal joint on the centerline of the road .
When constructing a wearing course in an odd number of strips locate the centerline of one strip on the centerline of the road provided that no joint is located in the wheel path area of a traffic lane .
The Contractor will align longitudinal joints in multiple lift construction over portland cement concrete pavements directly over the concrete pavement longitudinal joints as approved by the Engineer .
At longitudinal joints formed by placing multiple strips ensure the adjoining surface is higher but does not exceed ⅛ in after final compaction of the previously placed strip .
When constructing a strip adjoining a previously placed strip or a concrete pavement remove to the longitudinal joint line any fresh mixture that overlaps a previously placed strip or pavement before rolling .
D Compaction After spreading each course compact in accordance with the maximum density method as described in .. D. unless the ordinary compaction method is called for in the special provisions or as described in .. D. Ordinary Compaction .
Do not allow rollers to stand on the uncompacted mixture or newly rolled pavement with a surface temperature greater than F. Do not roll with steelwheeled rollers if rolling produces aggregate that is crushed cracked or pulverized or causes displacement of the mixture .
To maintain a true surface correct the following by removing and replacing the material in the defective areas as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department Variations such as depressions or high areas which may develop during rolling operations and Lean fat or segregated areas .
When spreading mixtures with a motor grader compact the mixture with pneumatic tired rollers simultaneously with the spreading operation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Maximum Density Compact the pavement to at least the minimum required maximum density values in accordance with Table Required Minimum Lot Density Mat and Table Longitudinal Joint Density Requirement .
Density evaluation will include compacted mat density and compacted longitudinal joint density .
Density evaluation will not include longitudinal joint density on lifts with a percent reduced density requirement .
Table Required Minimum Lot Density Mat Design Voids Design Voids One Percent Reduced Density Design Voids Design Voids Gmm Reduce density required on the first lift constructed over PCC pavements .
Reduce density when maximum density is waived for the first lift constructed on aggregate base mainline and shoulder reclaimed or cold in place recycled base courses and first lift of an overlay on roadway with a spring load restriction no greater than ton including shoulders .
Table Longitudinal Joint Density Requirement Location Confined Edge of Mat Unconfined Edge of Mat Long joint Design Voids . . Long joint Design Voids . .
The Department defines confined as the edges of the placed mat abutting another mat pavement surface or curb and gutter .
The Department defines unconfined or unsupported as no abutment on the side of the mat being placed with another mat or pavement surface .
D .. a Shoulders Greater Than ft Unless otherwise shown on the plans or required by the special provisions compact shoulders wider than ft paved using the maximum density method .
When shoulders are compacted by the maximum density method and are paved separately from the driving lane or have a different required minimum density than the driving lane delineate the lot tonnage placed on the shoulder in separate lots from the driving lanes for the day paving was conducted .
D .. b Shoulders Equal to or Less Than ft Unless otherwise shown on the plans or required by the special provisions use the ordinary compaction method in accordance with .. D. to compact a narrow shoulder no wider than ft paved in the same pass as a driving lane or paved separately .
The Department will exclude mixture compacted under ordinary compaction from lot density requirements and from incentive or disincentive payment .
When compacting a narrow shoulder using the maximum density method compact to densities in accordance with Table .
If the minimum required density of the shoulder is different than the driving lane delineate the tonnage placed on the shoulder in separate lots from the driving lane .
D .. c Echelon Paving The Department considers echelon paving two pavers running next to each other in adjacent lanes as separate operations .
D .. d Density Determination Core Bulk Density Calculate each individual lots maximum density by averaging the results of the cores within the lot expressed as the percentage of the maximum specific gravity .
Use Laboratory Test Method to determine core density unless the mixture is considered coarse graded .
If percent or less of the aggregate material passes the No .
sieve the Engineer may require bulk specific gravity be determined in accordance with Laboratory Manual Method Corelok .
Obtain the maximum specific gravity value for calculating the percentage density for the lot from the maximum gravity values taken from production tests during that days paving .
If the production tests during that days paving result in only one or two maximum specific gravity values use the moving average value at that test point .
If production tests during that days paving result in three or more maximum specific gravity values use the average of those tests alone as indicated above. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D .. e Timeline Complete compaction within h of mixture placement and before obtaining core samples .
Only use pneumatic tired or static steel rollers for compaction performed between h and h after mixture placement .
Do not reroll compacted mixtures with deficient densities .
D .. f Stop Production If all the lots in a days production or greater than percent of the lots on multiple days fail to meet the minimum density requirement stop production and determine the source of the problem .
Discuss with the Engineer what corrective action will be taken to bring the work into compliance with specified minimum required density .
D .. g Lot Determination Table Lot Determination Daily Production ton Lots If producing no greater than ton of mix establish the first lot when the total weight is greater than ton .
Add one lot for each additional tons or part thereof .
D .. h Mat Density Cores Obtain four cores in each lot .
Take two cores from random locations as directed by the Engineer .
Take the third and fourth cores the companion cores within ft longitudinally from the first two cores .
Submit the companion cores to the Engineer immediately after coring and sawing .
If the random core location falls on a longitudinal joint cut the core with the outer edge of the core barrel ft away laterally from the edge of the top of the mat .
Do not take cores for compacted mat density within ft of any longitudinal joint .
The Contractor is responsible for maintaining traffic coring patching the core holes and sawing the cores to the paved lift thickness before density testing .
The Engineer may require additional density lots to isolate areas affected by equipment malfunction heavy rain or other factors affecting normal compaction operations .
D .. i Contractor Core Testing Take and test cores at least in in diameter at locations determined and marked by the Engineer .
Mark samples with the lot number and core number or letter .
Transport the cores to the laboratory daily taking care to prevent damage to them .
Schedule the approximate time of testing during normal project work hours to allow the Engineer to observe the test and to record the saturated surface dry and immersed weight of the cores .
Determine the density by the end of the next working day after compaction .
Measure each core three times for thickness before saw cutting .
Report the average lift thickness on the core sheet .
If placing multiple layers in a single day saw and separate cores for each layer test and report by the end of the next working day .
Place and compact mix into the coring hole to restore the surface within h after coring or the Department will fine the Contractor per working day per lot until restored .
D .. j Companion Core Testing The Department will select at least one of the two companion cores per lot to test for verification .
For lots designated as longitudinal joint density lots the Department will test at least one of the mat density companion cores and at least one of the longitudinal joint density companion cores .
D .. k Tolerance Comparison D .. k Tolerance Comparison Individual Compare the individual core bulk specific gravities obtained by the Contractor and by the Department .
If the bulk specific gravity between the Contractor and the Department cores differ by more than .
use the Departments bulk specific gravity .
D .. k Tolerance Comparison Days Shrinking Tolerance For a second comparison of the cores that pass the individual tolerance criteria compare the average of the Contractors bulk specific gravities with the average of the Departments bulk specific gravities .
Determine the tolerance by dividing .
by the square root of the number of samples compared .
Use all the Departments results for the days paving if the cores do not fall within the determined tolerance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D .. l Recoring The Engineer may allow the Contractor to recore a sample if the sample was damaged in the coring process or damaged in transit to the laboratory through no fault of the Contractor .
D .. m Waiving Maximum Density One Percent Reduced Density The Contractor may elect to waive the maximum density requirement and reevaluate the density in accordance with one percent reduced density requirement Table Required Minimum Lot Density Mat .
The Department will exclude incentive payments for reduced minimum density in accordance with Table Required Minimum Lot Density Mat .
The Contractor may elect to waive the reduced density requirement and reevaluate the density in accordance with Table Percent Reduced Table .
The Contractor must notify the Engineer in writing by the end of the third day of paving of their intent to waive maximim density .
Once maximum density has been waived the reduced density will remain in effect for the duration of mixture placement on that lift .
For multiyear projects the waiving of maximum density will be for that year only and will be re evaluated for subsequent years on an annual basis .
The Contractor is required to comply with any construction requirements on subsequent lifts .
One percent reduced density is required for the first lift constructed over PCC pavements .
D .. n Longitudinal Joint Density Evaluate longitudinal joint density in one lot per day unless the total daily weight is greater than ton .
If the total daily weight is greater than ton evaluate two lots per day .
Randomly select the location to take cores for longitudinal joint density from the mat density core locations .
Take six cores at this location .
Take cores for longitudinal joint density with the outer edge of the core barrel within in from the edge of the top of the mat for both sides of the mat .
Take a companion core ft . m longitudinally from each core .
Take two cores for mat density at either ft right or ft left of the center of the mat the Contractor is paving regardless of random number generation .
D .. o Imaginary Joint An actual longitudinal joint will not exist if pulling the shoulder and driving lane in the same paving pass .
Do not cut a core on the imaginary line where a joint would have existed had the shoulder and the drive lane been paved separately .
D .. p Shoulders D .. p Shoulder Ordinary Compaction If compacting the shoulder under the ordinary density specification do not take longitudinal joint cores in shoulders .
Core at the centerline longitudinal edge cores in from the joint and at the mat density cores ft right or left of the center of the paving pass .
D .. p ShoulderMaximum Density Specification Core at the following locations Centerline longitudinal edge cores in from the joint Mat density cores ft right or left of the center of the paving pass and Edge of the shoulder in from the outside edge .
Do not cut cores on the imaginary line at the edge of the shoulder adjacent to the driving lane .
Move coring locations on imaginary lines to in inside the edge of the shoulder .
D .. q Payment Schedule .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Payment Schedule for Maximum Mat Density Density Design Void Density Design Void Mat Density Pay Factor A Traffic Level Traffic Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Calculate the percent of maximum specific gravity to the nearest tenth .
Payment will only apply if the days weighted average individual production air voids fall within ½ percent of the target air void value .
Base the weighted average air voids on all the mixture production tests in accordance with .. G. Production Tests for the corresponding day and weight by the tons the corresponding test represents .
The Department will pay for the HMA material represented by the lot at percent of the relevant contract unit price unless a single core density in the lot is less than .
percent of the maximum specific gravity Gmm .
If a single core density is less than .
percent of Gmm the Engineer will decide if the mixture is subject to removal and replacement or if will be accepted at a reduced payment of percent of the relevant contract unit price .
If the Engineer decides the material is to be removed and replaced the Contractor will do so at no additional cost to the Department .
Take additional core samples to determine the limits of the removal and replacement area or payment using the same offset from centerline as the original core .
If the original low density core was taken within ½ ft of an edge of the paver pass take the additional cores at ½ ft from the edge of the paver pass .
Determine the densities at ft intervals both ahead and behind the point of unacceptable core density until finding a point of acceptable core density .
for void and reduced voids and .
for voids .
If the ft incremental testing extends into a previously accepted lot removal and replacement may be required but these results will not be used to recalculate the previously accepted lot density .
Perform the additional coring and testing at no cost to the Department .
The Department will calculate the area of unacceptable pavement as the product of the longitudinal limits as determined by the ft cores and the full width of the paver pass laying in the traffic lane or lanes .
The Department will exempt shoulders from this calculation unless density failure occurred in the shoulder area .
Establish an additional density lot for the pavement that has been removed and replaced .
Cut cores randomly with companions for the Department total cores and determine average density .
Make payment in accordance with Table or Table excluding any incentive payment .
Determine the density for the remainder of the lot by averaging the original acceptable core density value with the first two acceptable core densities taken ahead and behind the unacceptable core density .
Make payment in accordance with Table or Table excluding any incentive payment. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Payment Schedule for Longitudinal Joint Density Design Void Longitudinal Joint Confined Edge Density Pay Factor B Longitudinal Confined Edge Longitudinal Joint Unsupported Edge Density Pay Factor C Unsupported Edge Traffic Level Traffic Level Traffic Level Traffic Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Department will limit incentive payment for longitudinal joint density to lots with evaluated longitudinal joint densities .
Calculate the percent of maximum specific gravity to the nearest tenth .
Payment will only apply if the days weighted average individual production air voids fall within ½ percent of the target air void value .
Base the weighted average air voids on all the mixture production tests in accordance with .. G. Production Tests for the corresponding day and weight by the tons the corresponding test represents .
Table Percent Reduced Table Density Design Void Density Design Void Payment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Reduce the minimum by percent for the first lift constructed on aggregate base mainline and shoulder reclaimed or cold inplace recycled base courses and first lift of an overlay on a roadway with a spring load restriction including shoulders no greater than ton .
Reduce the minimum by percent on the first lift constructed on PCC pavements reduced density can not be waived on PCC .
Calculate the percent of maximum specific gravity to the nearest tenth .
The Department will pay for the HMA material represented by the lot at percent of the relevant contract unit price unless a single core density in the lot is less than .
percent of the maximum specific gravity Gmm .
If a single core density is less than .
percent of Gmm the Engineer will decide if the mixture is subject to removal and replacement or if will be accepted at a reduced payment of percent of the relevant contract unit price .
If the Engineer decides the material is to be removed and replaced the Contractor will do so at no additional cost to the Department .
Take additional core samples to determine the limits of the removal and replacement area or payment using the same offset from centerline as the original core .
If the original low density core was taken within ½ ft of an edge of the paver pass take the additional cores at ½ ft from the edge of the paver pass .
Determine the densities at ft intervals both ahead and behind the point of unacceptable core density until finding a point of acceptable core density .
for void and reduced voids and .
for voids .
If the ft incremental testing extends into a previously accepted lot removal and replacement may be required but these results will not be used to recalculate the previously accepted lot density .
Perform the additional coring and testing at no cost to the Department .
The Department will calculate the area of unacceptable pavement as the product of the longitudinal limits as determined by the ft cores and the full width of the paver pass laying in the traffic lane or lanes .
The Department will exempt shoulders from this calculation unless density failure occurred in the shoulder area .
Establish an additional density lot for the pavement that has been removed and replaced .
Cut cores randomly with companions for the Department total cores and determine average density .
Make payment in accordance with Table or Table excluding any incentive payment .
Determine the density for the remainder of the lot by averaging the original acceptable core density value with the first two acceptable core densities taken ahead and behind the unacceptable core density .
Make payment in accordance with Table or Table excluding any incentive payment. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Payment Schedule for Longitudinal Joint Density Design Void Longitudinal Joint Confined Edge Density Pay Factor B Longitudinal Confined Edge Longitudinal Joint Unsupported Edge Density Pay Factor C Unsupported Edge Traffic Level Traffic Level Traffic Level Traffic Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Department will limit incentive payment for longitudinal joint density to lots with evaluated longitudinal joint densities .
Calculate the percent of maximum specific gravity to the nearest tenth .
Payment will only apply if the days weighted average individual production air voids fall within ½ percent of the target air void value .
Base the weighted average air voids on all the mixture production tests in accordance with .. G. Production Test for the corresponding day and weight by the tons the corresponding test represents .
D .. r Pay Factor Determination Determine the pay factor in accordance with the following Case Total Pay Factor Pay Factor A Pay Factor B Pay Factor C Case Total Pay Factor Pay Factor A Pay Factor B Pay Factor B Case Total Pay Factor Pay Factor A Pay Factor C Pay Factor C Where Pay Factor A Mat density Pay Factor B Confined edge density Pay Factor C Unsupported edge density .
Use a pay factor of .
for Pay Factor B Pay Factor C or both in lots where no cores are taken at the longitudinal joint .
D. Ordinary Compaction Perform ordinary compaction for the following Layers identified in the typical sections with a minimum planned thickness less than ½ in mm Thin lift leveling Wedging layers Patching layers Driveways and Areas the Contractor can not compact with standard highway construction equipment and practices .
Bike paths walking paths and other similar nontraffic paving areas If using the ordinary compaction method to evaluate density use a control strip to establish a rolling pattern .
Use the rolling pattern to compact the asphalt mixture for the layer on which the control strip is constructed or until constructing a new control strip .
The Engineer may waive the control strip requirement in small localized areas or other areas not conducive to its establishment .
D .. a Control Strip Construct a control strip at least sq .
yd and of the same thickness as the lift the control strip represents at the beginning of the work on each lift of each course .
Begin compacting immediately after spreading the mixture .
Continue compacting until additional roller coverage does not produce appreciable increase in density .
Determine densities by means of a portable nuclear testing device or approved alternate and create a growth curve to determine the optimum rolling pattern .
Provide documentation of the growth curve to the Engineer .
Roll the remainder of that course in accordance with the pattern developed in the test strip for that roller .
Provide a new control strip in accordance with the following If using a new JMF with a proportion change greater than percent when compared to the currently produced mixture for a single stockpile aggregate If changing the source of either aggregate or binder or After days of production. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D .. b Equipment Use rollers that meet the requirements in .. B .. e. Use the same equipment type and weight on the remainder of the pavement course that was used to construct the control strip .
Provide at least two rollers .
Provide a tandem steel wheeled roller for final rolling .
The Contractor may use trench rollers or mechanical tampers to compact areas inaccessible to the conventional type rolling equipment .
D .. c Mixture Temperature Refer to Table Minimum Temperature Control for the minimum laydown temperatures in all courses of the asphalt mixture as measured behind the paver or spreading machine .
Do not pave when the air temperature is less than F unless otherwise directed by the Engineer in writing .
Table Minimum Temperature Control Air Temperature F Compacted Mat Thickness in ½ in in in Not applicable if using a Warm Mix Asphalt WMA additive or process that meets the requirements in .. C .. Use at least one pneumatictire roller for intermediate rolling unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer may specify or modify the minimum laydown temperature in writing .
Based on the lift thicknesses shown on the plans .
D. Mat Density Cores Optional Department Only Core Testing The Contractor can request all density cores be tested by the Department .
The written request should be made at the preconstruction meeting and a written response from the Department either approving or denying the request will be made within calendar days from the date of the request .
Once approval is granted Department Only Core Testing will remain in effect for the duration of the project .
For multiyear projects Department core testing will be for that year only .
Cores will be tested in either the Departments Field Lab or in the Contractors Field Lab .
The Contractor is permitted to observe and record all weighing of the cores .
D .. a Contractor Coring Responsibilities Obtain two cores in each lot .
Take cores of at least in in diameter at locations determined and marked by the Engineer .
If the random core location falls on a longitudinal joint cut the core with the outer edge of the core barrel ft away laterally from the edge of the top of the mat .
Do not take cores for compacted mat density within ft of any longitudinal joint .
Label samples with the lot number and core number or letter .
The Contractor is responsible for maintaining traffic coring patching the core holes .
Measure each core three times for thickness before saw cutting .
Report the average lift thickness to the Engineer .
If placing multiple layers in a single day measure and record lift thickness and then saw and separate cores for each layer .
Place and compact mix into the coring hole to restore the surface within h after coring or the Department will fine the Contractor per working day per lot until restored .
The Engineer may require additional density lots to isolate areas affected by equipment malfunction heavy rain or other factors affecting normal compaction operations .
D .. b Department Testing Responsibilities The Department will take possession of the cores after they have been measured and cut .
The Department will test all cores .
Density results will be determined by the end day in which the cores were cut provided they are in the Departments possession by am otherwise results will be available the next working day .
Test results will be reported on the Core Density Sheet .
D .. c Longitudinal Joint Density Evaluate longitudinal joint density in one lot per day unless the total daily weight is greater than ton .
If the total daily weight is greater than ton evaluate two lots per day .
Randomly select the location to take cores for longitudinal joint density from the mat density core locations .
Take three cores at this location .
Take cores for longitudinal joint density with the outer edge of the core barrel within in from the edge of the top of the mat for both sides of the mat .
Take one core for mat density at either ft right or ft left of the center of the mat the Contractor is paving regardless of random number generation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E Surface Requirements After compaction the finished surface of each lift shall be reasonably free of segregated open and torn sections and shall be smooth and true to the grade and cross section shown on the plans with the following tolerances Table Surface Requirements CourseLocation Description Tolerance Levelingst lift using automatics Tolerance also applies to st lift placed other than leveling when automatics are used .
½ in Wear Tolerance of final lifts from the edge of a foot straightedge laid parallel to or at right angles to the centerline .
¼ in Shoulder Wear Temporary Wear bypasses Tolerance from the edge of a foot straightedge laid parallel to or at right angles to the centerline .
¼ in Transverse jointsconstruction joints Tolerance from the edge of a foot straightedge centered longitudinally across the transverse joint .
Correction by diamond grinding required unless the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a deduct of .. ¼ in ft. pavement section excluded from IRI and ALR testing in Table .
Tolerance from the edge of a foot straightedge placed parallel to or at right angles to centerline .
Does not include measurement at terminal header bridge deck and approach panels .
Corrective Work required unless both the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a deduct of .
¼ in Transverse Slope Tolerance for surface of each lift exclusive of final shoulder wear .
Not to vary by more than .
from plans .
Distance from edge of each lift and established centerline .
No less than the plan distance or more than inches greater than the plan distance .
The edge alignment of the wearing lift on tangent sections and on curve sections of degrees or less cant deviate from the established alignment by more than inch in any foot section .
See Description Final wear adjacent to concrete pavements .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to concrete pavements must be slightly higher but not to exceed inch than the concrete surface .
See Description Final wear adjacent to fixed structures .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to gutters manholes pavement headers or other fixed structures must be slightly higher but not to exceed inch than the surface of the structure .
See Description Finished surface of each lift .
Must be free of segregated and open and torn sections and deleterious material .
Excluding tight blade and scratch courses .
See Description Cut or saw and then remove and replace material placed outside the described limitations at no additional cost to the Department .
If the Engineer determines the material can remain in place outside the limits the Department will pay for the material at a reduced cost of per sq .
yd .
The Department will consider any single occurrence of material outside the limitations to have a minimum dimension of at least sq .
yd in any dimension .
The requirements of .. E are in addition to Pavement Surface Smoothness if specified in the Contract .
When is required in Special Provisions but no pavement smoothness equation is specified evaluate using equation HMAB .
E. Lift Thickness After compaction the thickness of each lift shall be within a tolerance of ¼in of the thickness shown on the plans except that if automatic grade controls are used this thickness requirement will not apply to the first lift placed .
This thickness requirement will not apply to a leveling lift whether or not automatic grade controls are required .
The Engineer may require removal and replacement of any part of any lift that is constructed to less than the minimum required thickness at no additional cost to the Department .
Measure cores taken for density determination for thickness also .
Measure each core three times for thickness before sawing .
Report the average of these three measurements .
Document each lots average core thickness and submit to the Engineer .
If the average of the two Contractor cores exceed the specified tolerance an additional two cores may be taken in the lot in question .
The Engineer will use the average of all core thickness measurements per day per lift to determine daily compliance with thickness specifications .
On that portion of any lift constructed to more than the maximum permissible thickness the materials used in the excess mixture above that required to construct that portion of the lift to the plan thickness plus ¼ in may be excluded from the pay quantities or at the discretion of the Engineer and at the Contractors expense may be required to be removed and replaced. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F Asphalt Mixture Production FOB Department Trucks Produce asphalt mixture for the Department .
Load the mixture being produced onto Department furnished trucks at the mixing plant at a time agreed on by the Engineer and Contractor .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor of the total quantity of mixture required not less than weeks prior to completion of the final wearing course .
The Engineer will not accept the asphalt mixture if it is unsuitable for the intended use .
G Small Quantity Paving A MDR is not required for planned project quantities less than sq .
yd inches sq .
yd per inch thickness etc or ton .
Verify in writing that the asphalt mixture delivered to the project meets the requirements of Table and Table Mixture Requirements .
The Department will obtain samples as determined by the Engineer to verify mixture requirements and to perform material acceptance in accordance with .. G .. b Isolated Failures at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids .
G .. c Individual Failure Gradation Percent Asphalt Binder Production Air Voids and Adj .
AFT and .. G .. h Coarse and Fine Aggregate Crushing Failure . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT When paying for material by weight the Engineer will measure separately asphalt mixture of each type by weight based on the total quantity of material hauled from the mixing plant .
The Engineer will not make deductions for the asphalt materials .
When paying for material by area the Engineer will separately measure asphalt mixture of each type and for each specific lift by area and by thickness on the basis of actual final dimensions placed . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for asphalt mixture used in each course includes the cost of constructing the asphalt surfacing and providing and incorporating asphalt binder mineral filler hydrated lime .
Antistripping additives may be permitted or required as indicated in .. C. The Department will pay for additives required by the contract at the relevant contract unit price for the mixture .
The Department will pay for additives incorporated as directed by the Engineer as extra work in accordance with .
Extra Work .
The Department will apply reduced payment if the mixture includes steel slag as one of the aggregate proportions and the production lab density at the design gyrations at the recommended or established asphalt content is greater than lb per cu .
ft kg per cu .
m. The Department will pay for the mixture at the contract unit price calculated as follows _ _ _ _ gyrations design at density production Payment _ _ _ _ gyrations design at density production Payment If the plans do not show a contract pay item for shoulder surfacing and other special construction the Department will include payment for the quantities of material used for these purposes in the payment for the wearing course materials .
Complete yield checks and monitor thickness determinations to construct the work as shown on the plans .
Use the tolerances for lift thickness in accordance with .. E Surface Requirements and surface smoothness requirements in accordance with for occasional variations and not for continuous overrunning or underrunning unless otherwise required by the Engineer .
The contract unit price for asphalt mixture production includes the cost of the material and loading onto Departmentprovided trucks at the mixing plant .
The Department will pay for plant mixed asphalt pavement on the basis of the following schedule .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Item No .
Item Unit .
Type SP Wearing Course Mixture ton .
Type SP NonWearing Course Mixture ton .
Type SP Course Mixture in mm thick square yard .
Type SP Course Mixture square yard .
Type SP Bituminous Mixture for Specified Purpose ton .
Type SP Bituminous Mixture Production ton Aggregate size Designation . . or as appropriate see .. A ..
Wearing or Non Wearing as appropriate .
Traffic level in accordance with Table Traffic Levels .
AC binder grade designation Table .
Lift thickness shown on the plans .
PERMEABLE ASPHALT STABILIZED STRESS RELIEF COURSE PASSRC AND PERMEABLE ASPHALT STABILIZED BASE PASB .
DESCRIPTION PASSRC is typically constructed on the in place concrete or bituminous surface to act as a separation layer and move water rapidly from beneath the unbonded concrete overlay .
PASB is typically constructed on a prepared base under a new concrete or bituminous surface to quickly drain surface infiltrated water accumulating under the pavement. . MATERIALS A Aggregate .
Use MnDOT .. B Asphalt Binder Use MnDOT .A PG S C. Mixture Design C. Sample Submittal At least days prior to the beginning of mixture production submit representative samples of aggregate and the asphalt binder to perform the PASSRC or PASB mix design in District Materials Lab where the project is located .
Submit aggregates that require magnesium sulfate soundness at least days prior to the start of asphalt production .
C. Aggregate .
Submittal .
Submit to the District Materials Engineer an lb sample of aggregate retained on the sieve and lb of aggregate passing the sieve .
The Contractor will obtain and store an equal size sample until the Mixture Design Report MDR is issued . .
Intent to Sample .
Provide the agency with hour advance notification . .
Testing .
Test for the quality of each source class type and size of virgin and nonasphaltic salvage aggregate source will be done for the mix design .
C. Asphalt Binder .
Submittal .
Submit quart samples of the same PG grade as required and also from the same supplier as production will come from .
C. Mixture Provide the proposed Job Mix Blend for each combination of aggregates to be used in the mixture .
Include the following information .
Composite gradation .
Based on the proportions of each material determine the composite gradation in percent of total aggregates . .
Individual gradation .
Determine the gradation for each individual component . .
Source .
Document the aggregate source pit number and a description of all materials. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Mixture Design Report MDR The Engineer will issue an MDR when the mixture design is successfully completed .
The MDR will include the Job Mix Formula JMF requirements for gradation and asphalt cement content .
Paving without an MDR is not allowed .
D. Mixture Quality Management .
D. Sampling and Testing Production sampling and testing rates for startup and production are shown in the Schedule of Materials Control MCS .
Take aggregate quality samples as directed by the Engineer .
Sample the following items in accordance with the MCS .
Gradation. . Coarse Aggregate Angularity .
Asphalt Content spot check D. Documentation Include the following production test rests and mixture on the Department approved Test Summary sheet. . Gradation .
Sieves listed in .. B . Coarse aggregate angularity .
Percent asphalt binder content spot check . .
Aggregate proportions in use at the time of sampling .
Tons where sampled .
Cumulative tons . .
Tons represented by test .
Signature Line for Agency and Contractor Representative. . MnDOT verification sample test result .
D. JMF Limits The mixture production targets and JMF limits as shown in Table are listed on the MDR .
Field results may deviate from the JMF target however JMF limits as show below are used as the specification limits for acceptance .
Table JMF Limits Item JMF Limits Gradation Gradation Broadband Asphalt Binder Content . . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A .
Handling and Placement. . Mixing and Compaction Temperature .
Use binder supplier recommended temperatures .
Unless authorized by the Engineer do not produce the mixture no more than F above the recommended maximum mixing temperature .
The Department will not pay for or allow placement of any mixture produced at more than F above the recommended maximum mixing temperature. . Rutting of Existing Surface .
Equipment used to deliver or place the mixture can not rut the inplace aggregate base filter layer or subgrade or tear or displace the geotextile if used .
Any ruts formed must be repaired and leveled to satisfaction of the engineer at no cost to the agency prior to placing the mixture so that water draining through the mixture will not pond and create soft spots in the basesubgrade .
B .
Surface Preparation .
Remove loose or deteriorated surfacing and clean the surface by power sweeping and air blasting .
Removal of deteriorated areas from joints cracks bituminous patched areas etc .
may require air blasting the use of a small milling machine or handwork as directed by the Engineer .
Air blasting must performed with at least psi equipment .
C. Maintenance .
The contractor is responsible to maintain the integrity of the PASSRC or PASB until the concrete or bituminous pavement is placed on it .
Any deficiencies in thickness smoothness or density need to be corrected . .
Contamination .
Keep the PASSRC and PASB and associated drains free of soils or other contaminates .
Contaminated material shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer at no cost to the Department. . Drainage .
Maintain drainage so water is not allowed to pond in the PASSRC or PASB. . Construction Equipment .
Concrete hauling units either loaded or empty are permitted on the PASSRC .
Only the paver rollers and bituminous haul trucks are only allowed to drive on the PASB .
The bituminous haul .
Minnesota Standard Specifications trucks can only drive on the PASB immediately in front of the paver to unload and then leave the PASB as soon as the bituminous is unloaded. . Density .
PASSRC and PASB need to be dense and stable after construction so it will not rut when the overlying pavement is placed. . Damage .
The contractor will repair the PASB or PASSRC promptly by the Contractor as directed by the engineer at no expense to the Agency .
D. BLANK E. BLANK F. BLANK G. Pavement Density . .
Method .
Use MnDOT .. D. Ordinary Compaction Method .
Temperature .
The contractor is advised that it may be necessary to permit the permeable asphalt layer to cool sufficiently before compaction rolling to prevent rutting and shoving .
In no case will compaction be allowed at less than F. . Water .
Water may not be used to accelerate the cooling process. . Rollers .
Selfpropelled steel wheeled compacting equipment must weigh at least ton .
Rollers must be steel wheeled both front and back and capable of reversing without backlash and equipped with spray attachments for moistening both rollers .
Vibratory compaction will NOT be allowed .
When the mixture placed exceeds tons per hour at least two rollers must be used .
Adequacy of compaction to provide stability will be judged by the Engineer .
Over rolling to the extent that aggregate particles degrade is not permitted .
H. Verification Testing .
Verification testing will be performed on the Quality Assurance samples for gradation and coarse aggregate angularity .
The department will monitor asphalt binder content spotcheck per day .
Allowable differences tolerances between contractor and MnDOT test results are specified below in Table .
Substitute the Agency results for acceptance when the tolerance is exceeded .
Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results Item Allowable Difference Coarse Aggregate Angularity fractured faces P Gradation sieve passing No .
and larger No .
No . .
I Failing Materials Gradation Coarse Aggregate Angularity and Extracted Asphalt Binder Content The determination of price adjustments for failing materials will be based on the specification limits outlined in Table as shown below for that specific test .
Reduced payment as shown in the table below will be applied to all tonnage represented by the individual test results that do not meet the limits .
The Contractor can not continue to produce failing mixture .
A continual basis is defined as all lots in a days production failing to meet specification requirements for gradation crushing or binder content or more than of the lots on two or more consecutive days which fail to meet specification requirements for gradation crushing or binder content .
Table Reduced Payment Schedule Item Pay Factor Gradation Coarse aggregate crushing Asphalt binder content Apply the lowest pay factor when using multiple reductions on a single test .
No price reduction for asphalt content in excess of allowable tolerance provided there is no visual observation of asphalt drain down. . Minnesota Standard Specifications J. Thickness and Smoothness Requirements. . Elevation .
The finished surface of permeable asphalt layer at any point of measurement must not vary be more than inch from the prescribed elevation for that point as determined from the grades staked by the Engineer and the cross section in the Plan. . Thickness .
Within inch of the compacted depth shown on the typical section in the plan. . Deficient .
The contractor will correct any areas which are deficient by more than inch by scarifying adding mixture compacting shaping and finishing in accordance with these specifications or directed by the Engineer. . Tolerances .
Normal specification tolerances apply for bituminous and concrete . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Measurement for PASB and PASSRC will be in accordance with the following .
Bituminous mixture and bituminous material for mixture will be paid for separately .
Measurement will be made by the weight of bituminous mixture for the permeable asphalt layer .
Payment will be made at the Contract bid price per ton .
Payment for the accepted bituminous mixture will be payment in full for all costs of constructing the permeable asphalt layer including the costs of mixture production aggregate incorporation placement and compaction .
Cost for Bituminous material is specifically excluded .
Measurement will be made by the weight of bituminous material incorporated into the permeable asphalt layer .
Payment will be made at the Contract bid price per ton .
Payment for Bituminous material based on the acceptance of the permeable asphalt layer will be payment in full for bituminous material any additives and the incorporation of the bituminous material into the mixture . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for the accepted quantity of permeable asphalt layer at the Contract unit price of measure will be compensation in full for all costs of furnishing and applying all materials required in this specification .
The unit price includes all labor materials and equipment necessary to complete the work .
Payment for geotextile when required for widening designs will be considered incidental .
Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Mixture for Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Stress Relief Course ton .
Bituminous Mixture for Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Base ton .
Bituminous Material for Mixture ton STONE MATRIX ASPHALT SMA .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing a Stone Matrix Asphalt Wearing Course Mixture SMA placed on a prepared surface in accordance with these specifications .
Construct the SMA to the lines grades thicknesses and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the Engineer .
Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Designation Code SMWEEH .
MATERIALS A Aggregates Use only virgin aggregates .
A .
Aggregate Requirements Provide mineral aggregate meeting the requirements of Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands and Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Aggregate Requirements Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands passing of total washed gradation Sieve Size inch Passing ¾ ½ .. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Aggregate Requirements Aggregate Blend Property Requirements Coarse Aggregate Angularity MnDOT one facetwo face wear Fine Aggregate Angularity Use manufactured sand Coarse Aggregate Absorption MnDOT Voids in Coarse Aggregate VCADRC MnDot AASHTO T VCAmixVCADRC Flat and Elongated Particles max by weight MnDOT ratio Clay Content MnDOT Total Spall in fraction retained on the sieve MnDOT .
Maximum Spall Content in Total Sample MnDOT .
Maximum Percent Lumps in fraction retained on the sieve .
Class B Carbonate Restrictions Maximum Maximum A .
Los Angeles Ratter The Los Angeles Rattler loss on the coarse aggregate fraction material retained on the sieve can not exceed percent for any individual source used within the mix MnDOT .
A. Magnesium Sulfate loss on coarse aggregate fraction for each source .
C A .
Mineral Filler AASHTO M B Additives An additive is any material added to an asphalt mixture or material such as mineral filler asphalt additives antistrip stabilizers and similar products that do not have a specific pay item .
When the Contract requires additives compensation is included with the pay items for the appropriate mixture .
If directed to incorporate additives the compensation will be as Extra Work at the unit price specified in the proposal .
No compensation will be made for additives incorporated at the Contractors option .
Do not incorporate additives into the mixture without approval of the Engineer .
Add antifoaming agents to asphalt cement at the manufacturers recommended dosage rate .
C SMA Asphalt Stabilizer AASHTO Use a cellulose fiber asphalt stabilizer additive to control draindown in the SMA mixture .
Feed the stabilizing additive through a separate system that proportions the required amount of stabilizer in uniform distribution at a dosage rate within .. percent by weight of the total mix .
The system must have lowlevel and noflow indicators and a printout of the feed rate in lbsmin .
Additionally the stabilizer supply line must include a section of transparent pipe for observing consistency of flow or feed .
D Asphalt Binder Material Use PG V meeting the requirements of AASHTO MP .
E Mixture Design E. General Design Design the mixture in conformance with AASHTO R Standard Practice for Designing Stone Matrix Asphalt .
Additional information on SMA mix design is found in Appendix B of the National Asphalt Pavement Association information Series Designing and Constructing SMA Mixtures StateofthePractice .
Use MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method Corelok to determine mixture bulk specific gravity .
E. Aggregate At least calendar days before beginning production submit to the District Materials Laboratory a minimum of lbs for aggregate quality testing .
At least calendar days prior to production submit to the District Materials Laboratory lbs of each aggregate that require magnesium sulfate soundness testing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications At least working days prior to the start of asphalt production submit a minimum of lbs .
of the coarse aggregate fraction from the selected design blend JMF .
This fraction will be tested for the voids in coarse aggregate VCAdrc MnDOT AASHTO T. E. Mixture Sample At least working days before the start of asphalt production submit the proposed Job Mix Formula JMF in writing and signed by a Level II Quality Management mix designer for each combination of aggregates to be used in the mixture .
Include test data to demonstrate conformance to mixture properties as specified in Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Aggregate Gradation Broadband Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Aggregate Requirements and Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Requirements .
Use forms approved by the Department for the submission .
Submit the design as a Laboratory Mix Design Option .
Submit an uncompacted mixture sample plus briquettes in conformance with the JMF compacted at the optimum asphalt content and required compactive effort for laboratory examination and evaluation .
Provide a mixture sample size and the number of compacted briquettes and in accordance with the following Table Stone Mastic Asphalt Mixture Sample Requirements Item Gyratory Design Uncompacted mixture sample size lb Number of compacted briquettes Coarse Aggregate Fraction lb F. Tensile Strength Ratio At least days before actual production submit sample to the District Materials Laboratory for verification of moisture sensitivity retained tensile strength ratio TSR .
The Engineer may test material submitted for TSR verification for maximum specific gravity Gmm compliance in addition to TSR results .
The Engineer will reject the submitted mix design if the tested material fails to meet the Gmm tolerance .
If the Engineer rejects a mix design resubmit a new mix design as described above .
The Contractor may use one of the following options to verify that the TSR meets the requirements in Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Requirements .
F .. a Option A Batch material at the design proportions including optimum asphalt .
Split the sample before curing and allow samples to cool to room temperature approximately F. Submit lb of mixture to the District Materials Laboratory for curing and test verification .
Use a cure time of h minutes at F cure time for both groups and follow procedures Laboratory Manual Method .
F .. b Option B Batch and cure in accordance with Option A .
Compact and submit briquettes and uncompacted mixture in accordance with Table Option B Mixture Requirements .
Table Option B Mixture Requirements Item Gyratory Design Uncompacted mixture sample size g Number of compacted briquettes Compacted briquette air void content . . in specimens .
For both options cure for h min at F meeting the requirements in the MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method .
G Mixture Requirements The Department will base initial mixture evaluation on the trial mix tests in accordance with Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Requirements and Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Minimum Asphalt Content. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Requirements Gyrations for Ndesign Air Voids Wear .
FinesEffective Asphalt .. Tensile Strength Ratio min VMA .
VFA Wear Draindown based on a hour reading at the anticipated production temperature .
Stabilizer by weight of total mix . . VCA Ratio VCAMIXVCADRC Minimum Asphalt Requirement by weight of mix See Table G. Minimum Asphalt Content Asphalt content is established based on the combined aggregate bulk specific gravity Gsb .
Use Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Minimum Asphalt Content to determine the minimum asphalt content .
Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Minimum Asphalt Content Combined Aggregate Bulk Specific Gravity Minimum Asphalt Content Percent . . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . .. . G. Documentation Include the following documentation and test results for each JMF submitted for review .
Names of the individuals responsible for the QC of the mixture during production Low project number of the contract on which the mixture will be used The following temperature ranges as supplied by the asphalt binder supplier .
Laboratory mixing and compaction .
Plant discharge and .
Field compaction .
The percentage in units of percent except the No .
sieve in units of .
percent of aggregate passing each of the specified sieves for each aggregate to be incorporated into the mixture .
Source descriptions of the following .
Location of material .
Description of materials .
Aggregate pit or quarry number and .
Proportion amount of each material in the mixture in percent of total aggregate .
Composite gradation based on and above .
Bulk and apparent specific gravities and water absorption by weight of dry aggregate .
Both coarse and fine aggregate for each product used in the mixture .
Use MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method and .
The tolerance allowed between the Contractors and the Departments specific gravities are Gsb individual .
and and Gsb combined .. Test results from the composite aggregate blend at the proposed JMF proportions showing compliance with Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Aggregate Requirements .
Coarse Aggregate Angularity .
For the trial blends determine the unit weight of aggregates lbft voids in the Coarse AggregateDry Rodded Condition VCADRC according to AASHTO T. The VCA ratio VCAmixVCADRC shall be less than .
i.e .
VCAmix VCADRC. . Flat and Elongated determined at ratio .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Asphalt binder percentage in units of .
percent based on the total mass of the mixture and the PG grade .
Each trial mixture design includes the following .
Using the selected design gradation prepare mixes at the three binder contents in increments of .
percent with at least one point above and one point below the optimum asphalt binder percentage . .
Conduct draindown test AASHTO T on loose mix . .
Maximum specific gravity for each asphalt binder content calculated based on the average of the effective specific gravities measured by using at least two maximum specific gravity tests at the asphalt contents above and below the expected optimum asphalt binder content. . Test results on at least two specimens at each asphalt binder content for the individual and average bulk specific gravities density and heights . .
Percent air voids of the mixture at each asphalt binder content. . VMA for each asphalt binder content . .
Fines to Effective Asphalt FA ratio calculated to the nearest .
percent . .
Evidence that the completed mixture will conform to the specified VCA ratio of less than ..
Percent and manufacturers data for type of stabilizer used .
G. Mixture Design Report The Department will issue an initial Mixture Design Report MDR consisting of the JMF after review of the submitted design .
The review will include the Departments test results submitted aggregate and mixture .
A preliminary MDR will provide the JMF limits to begin production of a test strip .
G. Initial SMA Test Strip Verification Do not begin fullscale production of the SMA mixture until it is shown in a test strip that the mixture can be produced placed and compacted to the requirements of this specification .
Limit the test strip to tons with a minimum requirement of tons placed at the specified thickness and width indicated in the contract .
During construction of the test strip take a minimum of mixture samples to determine mixture properties as shown in the Production StartUp Testing Rate table shown above .
Take one sample within the first tons of mixture produced and the other randomly within the remaining mixture produced .
After both samples are obtained cease production of the SMA until mixture properties are tested and evaluated by both the Contractor and the Department .
Resume production when The Contractors and the Departments test results are within the allowable testing tolerances shown in Table and Each of the Contractors test results are within the JMF limits as indicated on the Mixture Design Report and The average of the two Contractor test results meets the requirements shown in the table for SMA mixture requirements and The average of two cores from the roadway meets the minimum density requirement as specified in this provision .
One core shall be taken at random in the area representative of where the first mixture sample was obtained .
The other core shall be taken at random in the area representative of the second mixture sample .
If the material in the test strip does not meet the requirements listed above another test strip will be required .
With the approval of the Engineer the test strip may be placed within the project limits .
A final MDR will be issued once the test strip meets specification requirements .
H Mixture Quality Management H. Quality Control Perform Quality Control QC as part of the production process .
QC is the process control of the operations related to mixture production and determining the quality of the mixture being produced .
The QC sample is the Contractors sample taken and tested during production and used to control the production process .
Provide and maintain a QC program for stone matrix asphalt pavement production including mix design process control inspection sampling and testing and adjustments in the process related to the production of the stone matrix asphalt pavement .
H. Plant Certification Provide the following to obtain certification Completed and submitted request form application for plant inspection .
Site map showing stockpile locations .
Signed asphalt plant inspection report showing the plant and testing facility passed as documented by Asphalt Plant Inspection Report TP TP .
The inspection report must also include documentation showing plant and laboratory equipment has been calibrated and is being maintained to the tolerance shown in the Bituminous Manual and sections and of the MnDOT Laboratory Manual .
A Departmentsigned Mixture Design Report MDR before mixture production. . Minnesota Standard Specifications H. Quality Assurance The Engineer will perform Quality Assurance QA as part of the acceptance process .
QA is the process of monitoring and evaluating various aspects of the Contractors testing as described below .
The QA sample is the Departments companion sample to the Contractors QC sample .
QA testing is performed to accept the work .
The Engineer will perform the following Conduct QA and verification sampling and testing Observe the QC sampling and tests Monitor the required QC summary sheets and control charts Verify calibration of QC laboratory testing equipment Communicate Department test results to the Contractors personnel on a daily basis and Ensure Independent Assurance IA sampling and testing requirements are met .
H. Verification Sample The Department will test a verification sample to assure compliance of the Contractors QC program .
The Department will provide the Contractor a verification companion which is defined as a companion sample to the verification sample MnDOT uses .
Take all verification samples from the truck box at the plant site .
Test and use this verification companion sample as part of the QC program .
Use the verification companion sample to replace the next scheduled QC sample .
The Department recommends sampling enough material to accommodate retesting in case the samples fail .
Perform verification testing on at least one set of production tests daily to verify the requirements of Table Stone Matrix Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Pavement Mixture Aggregate Requirements and Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Mixture Requirements .
Compare the verification companion sample to the verification sample for compliance with allowable tolerances in Table .
The Department will consider the verification process complete if the Contractors verification companion meets the tolerances in Table .
If the tolerances between the Contractors verification companion and the Departments verification sample do not meet the requirements of Table the Department will retest the material .
If the retests fail to meet tolerances the Department will substitute the Departments verification test results for the Contractors results in the QC program and use those results for acceptance .
Table Allowable Differences between Contractor and Department Test Results Item Allowable Difference Mixture bulk specific gravity Gmb .
Mixture maximum specific gravity Gmm .
VMA .
Coarse Aggregate Angularity fractured faces P Asphalt binder content Ignition Oven .
Gradation sieve passing ¾ in ½ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No . .
I Contractor Quality Control Provide QC technicians certified as a Level I Bituminous Quality Management QM Tester meeting the requirements of the MnDOT Technical Certification Program for QC testing and Level II Bituminous QM Mix Designer to make process adjustments .
Provide at least one person per paving operation certified as a Level II Bituminous Street Inspector .
Provide a laboratory with equipment and supplies for Contractor quality control testing and maintain with the following Uptodate equipment calibrations and a copy of the calibration records with each piece of equipment Telephone Fax and copy machine however the Engineer may waive the requirement to have a fax machine if internet and email are available Internet and Email Computer Printer and Microsoft Excel version or newer .
Laboratory equipment need to meet the requirements listed in Section of the Bituminous Manual Laboratory Manual and these specifications including having extraction capabilities .
Before beginning production the laboratory equipment needs to be calibrated and operational. . Minnesota Standard Specifications J Sampling and Testing Take QCQA samples from the truck box at the plant site .
Sample randomly and in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control and this provision .
QCQA samples are to be quartered from a larger sample of mixture .
The procedure for truck box sampling is on the Bituminous Office website .
Store compacted QC mixture specimens and loose QC and Departments QA mixture companion samples for calendar days .
Label these split companion samples with companion numbers .
Determine random numbers and locations using the Bituminous Manual Section .
Table A or ASTM D Section .
K StartUp and Production Test Rates K. Start Up Testing Rates At the start of production for the first ton of mix perform testing at the following frequencies Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Production StartUp Testing Rates Production Test Testing Rates Lab Manual Method Bulk Specific Gravity test per tons MnDOT Corelok Maximum Specific Gravity test per tons MnDOT Air Voids calculated test per tons MnDOT Asphalt Content test per tons MnDOT VMA Calculated test per tons AASHTO R SP Gradation test per tons MnDOT Fines to Effective AC calculation test per tons Fine Aggregate Angularity MnDOT Coarse Aggregate Angularity test per tons MnDOT VCA Ratio calculation test per tons AASHTO R T Draindown test per tons AASHTO T No FAA requirement however fine aggregate shall be crushed .
K. Production Test Rates After producing the first ton of each mix type test at the following frequencies Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Production Testing Rates Production Test SamplingTesting Rates Lab Manual Method Bulk Specific Gravity test per tons MnDOT Corelok Maximum Specific Gravity test per tons MnDOT Air Voids calculated test per tons MnDOT Asphalt Content test per tons MnDOT VMA calculated test per tons AASHTO R SP Gradation test per tons MnDOT Fines to Effective AC calculated test per tons AASHTO R SP Coarse Aggregate Angularity testsday for a minimum of days then per day if CAA is met .
If CAA of requirement sampleday but test week .
MnDOT Fine Aggregate Angularity FAA MnDOT TSR As directed by the Engineer MnDOT Aggregate SpG Absorption As directed by the Engineer MnDOT Mixture Moisture Content As directed by Engineer MnDOT Asphalt Binder Sample st load then per gal sample size qt .
MnDOT .
Draindown test per day AASHTO T VCA Ratio calculated test per tons AASHTO R No FAA requirement however fine aggregate shall be crushed .
L Documentation Maintain documentation including test summary sheets and control charts on an ongoing basis .
File reports records and diaries developed during the work as directed by the Engineer .
These documents become the property of the Department .
Number test results in accordance with the MDR and record on forms approved and provided by the Department .
Include the following production test results and mixture information on the Department approved test summary sheet .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Percent passing on all sieves in accordance with Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Pavement Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands .
Coarse aggregate crushing face Maximum specific gravity Gmm .
Bulk specific gravity Gmb Percent total asphalt binder content .
Calculated production air voids Va Aggregate proportions in use at the time of sampling Individual aggregate Gsb both minus and combined Tons where sampled Tons represented by a test and cumulative tons produced Signature Line for MnDOT and Contractor Representative Mixture Moisture Content and MnDOT verification sample test result .
VCA ratio .
Draindown value in percent VMA Fines to effective asphalt ratio FE Amount of stabilizer Submit copies of failing test results to the Engineer on a daily basis .
Provide the Engineer with asphalt manifests or bill of ladings BOL on a daily basis .
Provide a daily plant diary including a description of QC actions taken .
Include changes or adjustments on the test summary sheets .
Provide an automated weigh scale and computer generated weigh ticket .
Ensure the ticket indicates the following information Project number Mix designation including binder grade Mixture Design Report number Truck identification and tare Net mass and Date and time of loading .
Furnish an electronic printout long form recordation from an automated plant blending control system at minute intervals when the plant is producing mixture .
The Engineer may waive this requirement if the plant does not have the capability to produce the automated blending control information however the Contractor must then perform daily spotchecks to determine percent new asphalt added .
Include the following information on the plant control printout for Drum Plants Both the virgin and recycle belt feed rates tonshr Feeder bin proportions Total asphalt cement in the mixture Virgin asphalt cement added Mixture Temperature F Mixture code Date and time stamp and Current tons of mixture produced and daily cumulative tons of mixture produced at time of printout .
Provide a daily electronic printout of the plant calibration SPAN numbers for each bin and meter. . Minnesota Standard Specifications M JMF Limits Table Stone Matrix Asphalt JMF Limits N Item JMF Limits Production air voids .
Asphalt Binder Content Percent .
VMA .
Sieve Passing No .
No .
No . .
The mixture production targets and JMF limits are listed on the Mixture Design Report .
JMF limits are used as the criteria for acceptance of materials based on individual single test results .
Gradation JMF limits are not allowed outside the broadband requirements in Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands .
M. Moving Average Calculation Calculate a moving average as the average of the last four test results .
Continue the calculation without interruption except begin new summary sheets and charts annually for winter carryover projects and if an asphalt plant is resetup in the same site after it has been moved out .
M. JMF Bands JMF Bands are the area between the target as identified on the Mixture Design Report and the JMF limits .
N JMF Adjustment Begin mixture production with materials within percent of the design proportions and other mixture parameters within the JMF limits in accordance with Table Stone Matrix Asphalt JMF Limits for gradation asphalt content and aggregate proportions meeting the requirements of the reviewed Mixture Design Report .
Use all aggregate proportions meeting the requirements of the Mixture Design Report unless the aggregate proportion is percent .
O JMF Request for Adjustment Make a request to the Bituminous Engineer or District Materials Engineer for a JMF adjustment to the mix design if the QC test results indicate a necessary change to achieve the specified properties .
Do not use aggregates or materials not part of the original mix design to make adjustments unless otherwise approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the District Materials Engineer or the Department Bituminous Engineer .
A Certified Level II Bituminous QM Mix Designer will review the requested change for the Department .
If the request meets the design requirements in Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Pavement Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Pavement Mixture Aggregate Requirements and Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Pavement Mixture Requirements the Department will issue a revised Mixture Design Report .
Use an interactive communication process with the Engineer before making JMF adjustments .
Make JMF adjustments only within the mixture specification gradation design broadbands in accordance with Table Stone Matrix Asphalt Pavement Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands .
Submit a new JMF if redesigning the mixture .
The department will not allow consecutive requests for a JMF adjustment without production data .
P Failing Materials Gradation Coarse Aggregate Angularity Air Voids VMA and Percent Asphalt Binder Material acceptance is based on individual and moving average test results .
Use isolated test results for acceptance of air voids and VMA at the start of mixture production .
The Department will consider individual test results greater than two times the JMF bands as failing .
The Department will fail moving average test results exceeding the JMF limits .
Stop production and make adjustments if the moving average values exceed the JMF limits .
Restart production after performing the adjustments and notifying the Engineer .
Resume testing at the accelerated rates and for the tests listed in Table Production StartUp Testing Rates for the next ton of mixture produced .
Continue calculating the moving average after the stop in production .
The Department will consider mixture produced where the moving average of four exceeds the JMF limits as unsatisfactory in accordance with .. G .. d Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids .. G .. e Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp Adjusted AFT .. G .. f Moving Average Failure Production Air Voids and .. G .. g Moving Average Failure Percent Asphalt Binder Content Gradation and Adj .
AFT. . Minnesota Standard Specifications P. Isolated Failures at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids At the startup of mixture production use the first three isolated test results for production air voids before establishing a moving average of four .
Calculate isolated production air voids using the maximum mixture specific gravity and the corresponding bulk specific gravity from that single test .
After testing four samples and establishing a moving average of four the Department will base acceptance on individual and moving average production air voids .
The Department will not accept the material if any of the first three isolated test results for production air voids exceeds twice the JMF bands from the target listed on the Mixture Design Report at the start of production .
The Department will reduce payment for unacceptable material in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results .
The Department will calculate the quantity of unacceptable material on the tonnage placed from the sample point of the failing test to the sample point when the isolated test result is back within twice the JMF bands .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of production the Department will calculate the tonnage subject to reduced payment as described above including the tonnage from the start of production .
If isolated air voids are less than .
percent or greater than .
percent the Engineer will either reduce the payment or order the material removed and replaced at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to test inplace mixture to better define the removal and replacement limits .
The Engineer may require the Contractor to test inplace mixture placed before the failing test result .
If the Engineer reduces the payment the Department will pay for the material at percent of the contract unit price .
P. Individual Failure Gradation Percent Asphalt Binder Production Air Voids and VMA Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results Item Pay Factor Gradation VMA Coarse aggregate crushing Asphalt binder content Production air voids individual and isolated Apply the lowest pay factor when using multiple reductions on a single test .
Calculate individual air voids using the moving average maximum specific gravity and the bulk specific gravity from that single test .
Calculate the isolated air voids from the maximum specific gravity and the bulk specific gravity from that single test .
The Engineer will only use isolated void test results for acceptance for the first three tests after mixture production startup .
P. Individual Failure at Mixture StartUp VMA At the startup of mixture production before a moving average of four can be established the first three individual test results for VMA will be used for acceptance .
After samples have been tested and a moving average of four can be established acceptance will be based on individual and moving average VMA .
If at the start of production any of the first three individual VMA test results exceeds twice the JMF bands from the target listed on the Mixture Design Report the material is considered unsatisfactory or unacceptable .
Reduced payment as outlined in Table shall apply to all tonnage placed from the sample point of the failing test until the sample point when the test results are back within twice the JMF limits .
When the failure occurs at the first test after the start of production the tonnage subjected to reduce payment shall be calculated as described above and shall include the tonnage from the start of production .
P. Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp Production Air Voids If a moving average failure occurs within any of the first three moving average results after mixture startup tests the Department will accept the mixture if the individual air void corresponding to the moving average failure meets the JMF limits .
The Department will not accept material if the individual air void fails to meet the JMF limit .
The Department will reduce payment for unacceptable material unless the Engineer determines that the isolated air void corresponding to the individual air void meets the JMF limit .
The Department will pay for unacceptable material at percent of the relevant contract unit price .
The Department will calculate the quantity of material subject to reduce payment as the tons placed from the sample point of the failing moving average result and corresponding individual air void beyond the JMF limit to the sampling point when the individual test result is back within the JMF limit .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subjected to reduced payment .
P. Moving Average Failure at Mixture StartUp VMA When a moving average failure occurs within any of the first moving average results after mixture startup tests the mixture will be considered acceptable if the individual VMA corresponding to the moving average failure is within the JMF limits .
If the individual VMA is not within the JMF limit the mixture will be considered unacceptable and the Engineer will decide whether the mixture is subject to removal and replacement or reduced payment .
If the mixture is to be removed and replaced the Contractor at his expense will perform the work .
Reduced payment will be percent of the Contract bid price .
Tonnage subjected to replacement or reduced payment shall be calculated as the tons placed from the sample point of the failing moving average .
Minnesota Standard Specifications result and corresponding individual VMA beyond the JMF limit to the sampling point when the individual test result is back within the JMF limit .
P. Moving Average Failure Production Air Voids A moving average production air void failure occurs when the individual production air void moving average of four exceeds the JMF limit .
The Department will consider the mixture unacceptable and subject to reduced payment .
The Department will pay for unacceptable mixture at percent of the contract unit price .
The Department will calculate the quantity of mixture subject to reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of all individual test results beyond the JMF limits which contributed to the moving average value that exceeded the JMF limit to the sampling point where the individual test result meets the JMF limits .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include the tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subject to reduced payment .
Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Moving Average Test Results Item Pay Factor Gradation Coarse and fine aggregate crushing NA individual failures only VMA Asphalt binder content Production air voids Lowest Pay Factor applies when there are multiple reductions on a single test .
Test result is back within the JMF limit .
P. Moving Average Failure Percent Asphalt Binder Content VMA and Gradation For mixture properties including asphalt binder content VMA and gradation where the moving average of four exceeds the JMF limits the mixture is considered unacceptable and the Engineer will decide whether the mixture is subject to removal and replacement or reduced payment .
If the mixture is to be removed and replaced the Contractor at his expense will perform the work .
Reduced payment percent of the Contract bid price is shown in Table .
Tonnage subjected to replacement or reduced payment is calculated as the tons placed from the sample point of all individual test results beyond the JMF limits which contributed to the moving average value that exceeded the JMF limit to the sampling point when the individual test result is back within the JMF limits .
When the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production tonnage subjected to reduced payment shall include the tonnage from the start of production that day .
P. Coarse Aggregate Crushing Failure If any CAA test results do not meet the requirements specified in Table the Department may reduce payment for the placed material in accordance with Table Reduced Payment Schedule for Individual Test Results .
The Department will calculate the quantity of material subject to reduced payment as the tons placed from the sample point of the failing test until the sampling point where the test result meets the specifications .
If the failure occurs at the first test after the start of daily production the Department will include the tonnage from the start of production that day with the tonnage subjected to reduced payment. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions A. Asphalt Release Agents Do not use petroleum distillates to prevent adhesion of asphalt mixtures to equipment .
An asphalt release agent must meet the criteria for Effect on Asphalt as described in the most recent Asphalt Release Agent on file in MnDOTs Office of Environmental Services .
Drain excess release agents from tuck boxes prior to loading .
A .
Edge Drop Off When construction is under traffic the requirements of .. D will apply .
A .
Surge and Storage Bins Store the asphalt mixture for no more than h at storage facilities that prevent segregation of the mix and drainage of asphalt from the mix .
Maintain the mixture at within F of the temperature when discharged from the silo or mixer and prevent excessive cooling or overheating .
A .
Weather Limitations and Paving Date Do not perform work within the roadway in the spring until removal of seasonal load restrictions on roads in the vicinity unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Do not place SMA when weather or roadbed conditions or moisture conditions of the roadway surface are judged unfavorable by the Engineer .
Place SMA mixtures only when the ambient air temperatures are at least F. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A. Mixing and Discharge of Materials Notify the Engineer of the recommended mixing temperatures as provided from the asphalt supplier .
Unless authorized by the Engineer do not produce the mixture no more than F above the recommended maximum mixing temperature .
Use the automated plant control printout to monitor discharge temperature .
The Department will not pay for or allow placement of any mixture produced at more than F above the recommended maximum mixing temperature .
A. Asphalt Binder Sampling Valve Obtain asphalt binder samples from a sampling valve located between the pump and the drum .
Sample each type of asphalt binder used in mixture production after tons of mixture has been produced then sample at a rate of one per gal .
A minimum of gallon of binder must be drawn and wasted from the sampling valve before the actual sample is drawn .
Provide a qt sized sample .
Take samples meeting the requirements of the Bituminous Manual ..
The Inspector will monitor the sampling the Contractor performs .
Record sample information on an Asphalt Sample Identification Card .
Submit the sample to the Central Materials Laboratory .
Contact the Department Chemical Laboratory Director for disposition of failing asphalt binder samples .
B Distributor Provide a distributor capable of uniformly applying material up to ft wide and equipped with the following An accurate volume measuring device with tachometer Pressure gauges Thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents Poweroperated pump and Full circulation spray bars with lateral and vertical adjustments .
C Tack Coat Apply a uniform asphalt tack coat to the clean and dry existing asphalt or concrete surface and to the surface of each course or lift constructed except for the final course or lift in accordance with .
Coat the contact surfaces of all fixed structures and the edge of the inplace mixture in all courses at transverse joints and in the wearing course at longitudinal joints .
A uniform application will not have streaks corn rows bare spots puddles or other irregular patterns .
Allow emulsified asphalt tack coats to break as indicated by a color change from brown to black before placing subsequent lifts .
Take tack samples from the asphalt distributor according to rates provided in the Material Control Schedule .
The Inspector will monitor the sampling the Contractor performs .
D Rollers D SteelWheeled Rollers Use selfpropelled steel wheeled compacting equipment must weigh at least ton .
D Pneumatic Tired Rollers Selfpropelled pneumatic tired compacting equipment is only allowed when approved by the Engineer .
E Compaction After spreading each course compact in accordance with the maximum density method as described below unless the ordinary compaction method is otherwise specified in the special provisions .
Do not allow rollers to stand on the uncompacted mixture or newly rolled pavement with a surface temperature greater than F. To maintain a true surface correct the following by removing and replacing the material in the defective areas as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department Variations such as depressions or high areas which may develop during rolling operations and Lean fat or segregated areas .
E. Maximum Density Compact the pavement to at least the minimum required maximum density values in accordance with Table Required Minimum SMA Lot Density .
Table Required Minimum SMA Lot Density All SMA Mixtures Gmm .
E .. a Density Determination Core Bulk Density Calculate each individual lots maximum density by averaging the results of the cores within the lot expressed as the percentage of the maximum specific gravity .
Use Laboratory Test Method Corelok to determine core density. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E .. b Timeline Complete compaction within h of mixture placement and before obtaining core samples .
Only use pneumatic tired or static steel rollers for compaction performed between h and h after mixture placement .
Do not reroll compacted mixtures with deficient densities .
E .. c Stop Production If all the lots in a days production or greater than percent of the lots on multiple days fail to meet the minimum density requirement stop production and determine the source of the problem .
Discuss with the Engineer what corrective action will be taken to bring the work into compliance with specified minimum required density .
E .. d Lot Determination Table Lot Determination Daily Production ton Lots If producing no greater than ton of mix establish the first lot when the total weight is greater than ton .
Add one lot for each additional tons or part thereof .
E .. e Mat Density Cores Obtain four cores in each lot .
Take two cores from random locations as directed by the Engineer .
Take the third and fourth cores the companion cores within ft longitudinally from the first two cores .
Submit the companion cores to the Engineer immediately after coring and sawing .
If the random core location falls on a longitudinal joint cut the core with the outer edge of the core barrel ft away laterally from the edge of the top of the mat .
Do not take cores for compacted mat density within ft of any longitudinal joint .
The Contractor is responsible for maintaining traffic coring patching the core holes and sawing the cores to the paved lift thickness before density testing .
The Engineer may require additional density lots to isolate areas affected by equipment malfunction heavy rain or other factors affecting normal compaction operations .
E .. f Contractor Core Testing Take and test cores at least in in diameter at locations determined and marked by the Engineer .
Mark samples with the lot number and core number or letter .
Transport the cores to the laboratory daily taking care to prevent damage to them .
Schedule the approximate time of testing during normal project work hours to allow the Engineer to observe the test and to record the corelok testing of the cores .
Determine the density by the end of the next working day after compaction .
Measure each core three times for thickness before saw cutting .
Report the average lift thickness on the core sheet .
If placing multiple layers in a single day saw and separate cores for each layer test and report by the end of the next working day .
Place and compact mix into the coring hole to restore the surface within h after coring or the Department will fine the Contractor per working day per lot until restored .
E .. g Companion Core Testing The Department will select at least one of the two companion cores per lot to test for verification .
E .. h Tolerance Comparison E .. h Tolerance Comparison Individual Compare the individual core bulk specific gravities obtained by the Contractor and by the Department .
If the bulk specific gravity between the Contractor and the Department cores differ by more than .
use the Departments bulk specific gravity .
E .. h Tolerance Comparison Days Shrinking Tolerance For a second comparison of the cores that pass the individual tolerance criteria compare the average of the Contractors bulk specific gravities with the average of the Departments bulk specific gravities .
Determine the tolerance by dividing .
by the square root of the number of samples compared .
Use all the Departments results for the days paving if the cores do not fall within the determined tolerance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E .. i Recoring The Engineer may allow the Contractor to recore a sample if the sample was damaged in the coring process or damaged in transit to the laboratory through no fault of the Contractor .
E .. j Payment Schedule Determine payment for density in accordance with Table .
Table Payment Schedule for Maximum Density Percent of Maximum Specific Gravity Percent Payment Above .
. . . . .. Less than .
remove and replace F Surface Requirements After compaction the finished surface of each lift shall be reasonably free of segregated open and torn sections and shall be smooth and true to the grade and cross section shown on the plans with the following tolerances Table Surface Requirements CourseLocation Description Tolerance Wear Tolerance of final lifts from the edge of a foot straightedge laid parallel to or at right angles to the centerline .
¼ in Transverse jointsconstruction joints Tolerance from the edge of a foot straightedge centered longitudinally across the transverse joint .
Correction by diamond grinding required unless the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a deduct of .
¼ in ft. pavement section excluded from IRI and ALR testing in Table .
Tolerance from the edge of a foot straightedge placed parallel to or at right angles to centerline .
Does not include measurement at terminal header bridge deck and approach panels .
Corrective Work required unless both the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a deduct of .
¼ in Transverse Slope Tolerance for surface of each lift exclusive of final shoulder wear .
Not to vary by more than .
from plans .
Distance from edge of each lift and established centerline .
No less than the plan distance or more than inches greater than the plan distance .
The edge alignment of the wearing lift on tangent sections and on curve sections of degrees or less cant deviate from the established alignment by more than inch mm in any foot section .
See Description Final wear adjacent to concrete pavements .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to concrete pavements must be slightly higher but not to exceed than the concrete surface .
See Description Final wear adjacent to fixed structures .
After compaction the final lift wear adjacent to gutters manholes pavement headers or other fixed structures must be slightly higher but not to exceed than the surface of the structure .
See Description Finished surface of each lift .
Must be free of segregated and open and torn sections and deleterious material .
See Description Finished Surface No flushing or fat spots See Description Cut or saw and then remove and replace material placed outside the described limitations at no additional cost to the Department .
If the Engineer determines the material can remain in place outside the limits the Department will pay for the material at a reduced cost of per sq .
yd .
The Department will consider any single occurrence of material outside the limitations to have a minimum dimension of at least sq .
yd in any dimension .
The requirements of .. F are in addition to Pavement Surface Smoothness if specified in the Contract .
When is required in Special Provisions but no pavement smoothness equation is specified evaluate using equation HMAB. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Lift Thickness After compaction the thickness of the SMA will be within a tolerance of ¼ in of the thickness shown on the plans .
The Engineer may require removal and replacement of any part of any lift that is constructed to less than the minimum required thickness at no additional cost to the Department .
Measure cores taken for density determination for thickness also .
Measure each core three times for thickness before sawing .
Report the average of these three measurements .
Document each lots average core thickness and submit to the Engineer .
If the average of the two Contractor cores exceed the specified tolerance an additional two cores may be taken in the lot in question .
The Engineer will use the average of all core thickness measurements per day per lift to determine daily compliance with thickness specifications .
On that portion of any lift constructed to more than the maximum permissible thickness the materials used in the excess mixture above that required to construct that portion of the lift to the plan thickness plus ¼ in may be excluded from the pay quantities or at the discretion of the Engineer and at the Contractors expense may be required to be removed and replaced . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT When paying for material by weight the Engineer will measure separately asphalt mixture of each type by weight based on the total quantity of material hauled from the mixing plant .
The Engineer will not make deductions for the asphalt materials . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for asphalt mixture used in each course includes the cost of constructing the asphalt surfacing and providing and incorporating asphalt binder mineral filler and asphalt stabilizer .
The Department will pay for additives required by the contract at the relevant contract unit price for the mixture .
The Department will pay for additives incorporated as directed by the Engineer as extra work in accordance with .
Extra Work .
If the plans do not show a contract pay item for shoulder surfacing and other special construction the Department will include payment for the quantities of material used for these purposes in the payment for the wearing course materials .
Complete yield checks and monitor thickness determinations to construct the work as shown on the plans .
Use the tolerances for lift thickness in accordance with Table Surface Requirements and surface smoothness requirements in accordance with for occasional variations and not for continuous overrunning or underrunning unless otherwise required by the Engineer .
The Department will pay for plant mixed SMA on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Type SM Wearing Course Mixture ton Aggregate size Designation .
Traffic level AC binder grade designation H COLDINPLACE RECYCLED CIR BITUMINOUS AND COLD CENTRAL PLANT RECYCLING CCPR BITUMINOUS The subsections below are designated so an A subsection refers to both CIR and CCPR B subsection refers to CIR and C subsection refers to CCPR as illustrated here .X Topic A Topic Both CIR and CCPR B Topic CIR C Topic CCPR .
DESCRIPTION AND DEFINITIONS This specification is applicable for Department mix design only .
A. Bituminous Material for Mixture is the liquid bituminous material added to RAP to produce the CIRCCPR Mixture .
B .
Cold InPlace Recycled CIR Bituminous Mixture is the uncompacted mixture of RAP Bituminous Material for Mixture and other additives .
Construct a Cold InPlace Recycled CIR Bituminous layer by Milling the existing bituminous to produce a Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP .
Crushing screening and mixing the RAP with a Bituminous Material for Mixture. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Placing and compacting to produce a CIR layer .
C. Cold Central Plant Recycled CCPR Bituminous Mixture is the uncompacted mixture of RAP Bituminous Material for Mixture and other additives .
A Cold Central Plant Recycling CCPR Bituminous layer is constructed by Milling if required in the Contract the existing bituminous to produce a Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP note that CCPR may also be produced from previously milled HMA .
Crushing screening and mixing the RAP with a Bituminous Material for Mixture and haul product to placement destination .
Placing and compacting to produce a CCPR layer. . MATERIALS A .
Design Parameters A CIRCCPR mix design is recommended to determine the method Foaming or Emulsion bituminous grade and amount of additives needed to construct CIRCCPR .
The mix design criteria for CIRCCPR is located in the Grading and Base Manual section .. A .
Design Requirements Department Provide mix design requirements .
Using Form GB or similar in the Contract .
Contractor Meet the following Design Parameters listed on the mix design .
A. Gradation The gradation requirement for RAP is passing the ¼ inch sieve and passing the ½ inch sieve .
A. Bituminous Material For Mixture Meet the requirements of Bituminous Material .
Use the type and grade of bituminous material for mixture liquid bituminous material designated in the mix design on form GB .
A .
Cement Use cement conforming to Portland Cement if required at the rate in the mix design .
A .
Additional Rock Use additional aggregates if required on the mix design .
A .
Water Use mixing water that meets Water for Concrete and Mortar. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A .
General All forms and the Grading and Base Manual are available on the Grading and Base Website .
Correct and retest all failing areas .
Before beginning operations remove vegetation and topsoil adjacent to the surface .
Repair structures damaged by Contractor operations neglect or negligence .
Provide water in order to obtain optimum moisture content .
CIR or place CCPR when .
The atmospheric temperature is F and rising when using emulsions or F and rising when foaming asphalt . .
It is not foggy or rainy . .
Freezing temperatures are not predicted within hours after placement .
Atmospheric temperature and predicted weather requirements are determined by the Engineer .
A .
Equipment For foamed asphalt applications the equipment must .
Accurately foam bituminous material and uniformly add specified water . .
Provide samples of the foamed bituminous material through a sampling nozzle. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Milling Use a selfpropelled milling machine with the following characteristics Must have a minimum foot ski or multi point measuring device for milling control .
Equipped with automatic depth and crossslope controls Ability to maintain a constant cutting depth within inch of plan depth in one pass .
Mill the existing pavement to the plan depth and width .
Process paving fabric encountered during milling operations to meet the following At least must have an area less than square inches and None of the pieces may have a dimension greater than inches in any direction .
A. CrushingSizing Unit Use a crushingsizing unit with the following characteristics Ability to crush and size all RAP to the gradation requirement of .. A .
Equipped with a closed loop system that returns oversized materials to the crusher A. Mixing Unit Use a pug mill mixing unit with the ability to thoroughly mix the RAP while injecting the Bituminous Material for Mixture and automatically metering it to within .
percent .
A. Paver Use a paver equipped with a foot ski meeting the requirements of .. B .. a Paver .
A. Bituminous Material for Mixture Supply Tankers If foaming is required equip the tankers with a visible thermometer that measures the temperature of the liquid Bituminous Material for Mixture in the bottom third of the supply tank .
A. Rollers A .. a Steel Wheeled Rollers Compact with a steel wheeled rollers meeting the requirements of .. B .. e equipped with a water spray system .
A .. b Pneumatic Tired Roller Compact with a pneumatic tired rollers with a minimum weight of tons meeting the requirements of .. B .. e. A. Bituminous Material for Mixture Parameters Incorporate the bituminous Material for mixture at the rate designated on the mix design .
However after consultation with the Contractor the Engineer may direct the Contractor to vary the application rate of Bituminous Material for Mixture compared to the mix design for areas of pulverized bituminous which the Engineer believes are either too rich or too dry .
Maintain bituminous material for foaming within F of the optimum temperature recommended by the mix design note that bituminous must also meet expansion ratio and halflife foaming tests .
If the mix design does not provide a recommendation maintain the foamed asphalt temperature between F and F. A. Mixing Mix the crushed RAP Bituminous Material for Mixture and cement into a homogenous mixture .
Adjust the water application rate based on mixture consistency coating and dispersion of the recycled materials .
A .
Placement Do not heat the paver screed .
Spread the CIR material in one continuous pass to the plan width in one lift .
Ensure that the mix does not segregate .
Pave before emulsion breaks .
A. Compaction General .
Correct at no additional cost to the Department bumps and dips in the profile greater than inch in feet. . Do not allow rollers or other construction equipment to remain stationary on CIRCCPR. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Do not permit traffic including construction traffic on the CIRCCPR layer for at least two hours after final rolling or emulsion breaks if applicable whatever is longer. . Use visual observations of check cracking and shoving to prevent overrolling . .
Compact using the criteria in .. A .. a Control Strip . .
Within hours of CIRCCPR recompact areas represented by density measurements below of the target density determined from the Control Strip roll until density is achieved .
Note Do not overroll to the point where checking of the surface occurs also note that some areas may not achieve density due to field conditions .
A .. a Control Strip Use a control strip to establish a rolling pattern .
The control strip should represent a homogenous roadway section and have the following characteristics Minimum area of square yards and Remain inplace and become a part of the completed work .
Use the following to establish a rolling pattern after initial breakdown is complete .
Randomly select three test points in the control strip and use a nuclear density device ASTM D in backscatter mode to determine a wet density at each point after each finish steel roller pass . .
Ensure that that the nuclear gauge rests on a flat surface .
The density at each point is defined as the average of two readings offset degrees. . Continue compacting until additional roller coverage does not produce an appreciable increase in density .
Provide documentation of the growth curve and maximum target density to the Engineer .
Use the target density for the QCQA process . .
Roll the remainder of that course in accordance with the pattern developed in the control strip for that roller . .
Discontinue and reevaluate the rolling operation pattern and timing if surface cracking or checking occurs .
Use this rolling pattern until a new control strip is performed .
Establish a new rolling pattern by performing a new control strip when there are changes in the CIRCCPR mixture that cause the original control strip to no longer be representative changes may include Inplace materials variation including sections with varying thickness construction history etc .
If vehicles leave indents in the compacted surface .
Changes in RAP gradation of Target Density is not achieved on two consecutive QC readings .
Changes in the application rate of Bituminous Material for Mixture outside of the mix design tolerance .
A .
Contractor Quality Control Testing Tests and Rates QC Perform Contractor QC testing and submit all required forms if required in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Submit results to the Engineer electronically within hours of the completion of the tests .
Submit to the Engineer the following items a preliminary Grading and Base Report GB required before work commences a final Grading and Base Report GB required within two weeks of completion of project and a weekly summary report of tests completed and retests of failing materials GB required the first working day of the following week .
Correlate the nuclear gauges dry measurement density by direct moisture measurement microwave oven or equivalent .
A .
Department Quality Assurance QA Perform testing per the Schedule of Materials Control .
A .
Profile Curing and Surface Requirements Maintain the CIR layer in a smooth compacted condition free of ruts distortions potholes loose aggregate and to the profile and cross section until the placement of the next layer .
Remove all loose aggregate on the surface immediately prior to placing the next layer .
Repair ruts potholes washboarding and other distortions .
A. Fog Seal and Bituminous Requirements Apply a CSSh bituminous fog seal per Bituminous Fog Seal at a rate of .
to .
gallons per square yard immediately prior to placing the asphalt pavement. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If required of the Contract place the next layer of material HMA seal coat etc. . No sooner than three calendar days and no later than calendar days after the CIRCCPR at any location has been injected and compacted note that the day requirement may be extended with concurrence of the Engineer if large rainfall events hinder the curing of the CIR .
When the CIRCCPR surface does not deflect under construction equipment and meets quality compaction per .. F. .
When the CIRCCPR is capable of meeting the required strength to place and compact the next layer and the moisture content of the CIRCCPR does not cause a failure to the next material placement and .
When the moisture content of the CIRCCPR is low enough to not migrate into and damage the new surface .
A .
Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. B .
Equipment Additional Requirement for CIR Use selfpropelled equipment with the ability to mill crush screen size and mix the RAP along with the required recycling agents to produce a uniform homogeneous product .
B .
Milling Additional Requirement for CIR Use a selfpropelled milling machine with the following characteristics Minimum milling width of .
feet .
B. Mixing Unit Additional Requirement for CIR Meter bituminous material for mixture by weight of RAP .
B. Vane Feeder If mineral stabilizing agent is required use a computerized vane feeder capable of uniformly spreading it on the road surface prior to recycling .
B .
Spreading Cement Spread cement using a computerized vane feeder in a manner that minimizes dusting i.e .
do not spread when the wind is strong enough to coat traffic andor the environment .
Control the cement content to within .
poundssy of the design target .
Start mixing operations no longer than ½ hour after cement .
C. Equipment Additional Requirement for CCPR Use equipment with the ability to crush screen size and mix the RAP along with the required recycling agents to produce a uniform homogeneous product .
C. Placement Additional Requirement for CCPR Place material in even lifts no greater than inches in thickness . .
MEASUREMENT Measure the CIRCCPR layer by the square yard .
Measure the bituminous material for mixture by the ton .
Measure the bituminous material for fog seal by the gallon .
Measure cement by the ton .
Measure additional aggregates by the ton .
PAYMENT A .
The Department will pay for the correction of insitu areas that are unstable through no fault of the Contractors operations if directed by the Engineer per .
Extra Work. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The contract unit price for the CIRCCPR includes the cost of milling production testing placement occasional variations in bituminous pavement thickness compacting removing vegetation and topsoil adjacent to the surface water and required and necessary maintenance including cleaning the surface .
Payment for any required additional additives required in the Contract is incidental .
Payment for the CIRCCPR layer will be made on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
. . Cement Aggregate Base Class ___ Bituminous Material For Mixture ton ton ton . . Bituminous Material for Fog Seal CIR CCPR Bituminous gallon square yard PAVEMENT SURFACE SMOOTHNESS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of measuring the smoothness of the final concrete or bituminous surface .
A Definitions The Department defines Smoothness as the Mean Roughness Index MRI value per .
mi segment .
The Department defines Areas of Localized Roughness ALR as areas greater than or equal to the limiting criteria for a continuous MRI calculation with a ft interval as calculated using the FHWAs Profile Viewing and Analysis ProVAL software. . MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS A Inertial Profiler IP Provide a Department certified calibrated and documented IP meeting the requirements of ASTM E Class and procedures maintained by the MnDOT Pavement Engineering Section .
Refer to the procedures maintained by the MnDOT Pavement Engineering Section or to the MnDOT Smoothness website for the required settings for individual certified IPs .
Provide an IP capable of producing a profilogram and exporting raw profile data in an unfiltered electronic Engineering Research Division ERD file format .
Produce ERD filenames in the YYMMDDTNDLBE.ERD standardized format in accordance with Table Table Standardized Naming Convention for ERD Files Abbreviation Definition YY Twodigit year MM Month include leading zeros DD Day of month include leading zeros T Route type I MN US CSAH etc .
N Route number no leading zeros and auxiliary ID if applicable D Primary route direction I or D L Lane number for driving lane increasing by one for each lane to the left for other lanes such as accelerationdeceleration lanes ramps loops B Beginning station E End station B Profile Analysis Software Use ProVAL software to conduct a profile analysis to determine Smoothness and ALR .
Report MRI values in units of in per mi to one digit right of the decimal in accordance with conventional rounding procedures .
C Operator Certification Provide an operator trained in the operation of the particular IP in accordance with .. A Inertial Profiler and knowledgeable in the use of the required profile analysis software in accordance with .. B Profile Analysis Software .
Ensure profiler operators pass a proficiency test and possess a current certification issued by the Department .
The Contractor may access a list of certified operators on the MnDOT Smoothness website .
Provide documentation of operator certification to the Engineer .
D Submittals .
Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Before Profiling Provide the Engineer with current valid documentation issued by the Department indicating both the IP and the operator certification .
D. Day of Profiling Submit a printout containing the IPs settings each segments left and right wheel path International Roughness Index IRI values and the signature of the operator to the Engineer on the same day of the profiling .
Submit electronic files in ERD format representing the raw data from each pass on the same day of the profiling .
If the Contractor fails to submit actual data to the Engineer on the day of profiling the Department will require the Contractor to reprofile the measured segments .
D. Upon Completion of Pavement Placement Within calendar days of the placement of all mainline pavement and before beginning corrective work submit a paper ProVAL summary report for each lane indicating the results of the Smoothness Assurance analyses .
Use the ERD filenames in accordance with .. A Inertial Profiler to create ProVAL summary reports .
If the summary reports indicate no ALR submit a final Profile Summary worksheet in accordance with .. D. After Corrective Work .
D. Before Corrective Work If the summary reports indicate any ALR submit a written corrective work plan to the Engineer in accordance with .. E Corrective Work .
Include the beginning and ending points of locations planned for correction in the corrective work plan .
Do not begin corrective work before the Engineer approves the plan .
If the Engineer elects to assess a monetary deduction for ALR in accordance with Table instead of requiring corrective work submit a final Profile Summary worksheet in accordance with .. D. After Corrective Work .
D. After Corrective Work After reprofiling submit a paper summary ProVAL report for each lane indicating the results of updated Smoothness Assurance analyses to the Engineer .
Submit the appropriate MnDOT Profile Summary worksheet available on the MnDOT Smoothness website .
The worksheet should match the type of construction and the letting year of the project. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Using an IP measure the final pavement surface for MRI unless otherwise excluded in Table .
Unless otherwise approved by the Engineer perform all profiling in the presence of the Engineer .
Schedule profiling with the Engineer .
Reprofile any pavement profiled in the absence of the Engineer as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will use a ft straightedge to evaluate areas excluded from surface testing with the IP in accordance with Table .
A Pavement Surface Testing Remove objects and foreign material from the pavement surface before performing the pavement surface evaluation .
Provide traffic control required for testing and performing corrective work on the final pavement surface .
Run the IP in the direction of traffic .
Measure profiles in the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
Test and evaluate each lane separately .
The Engineer will determine the length in miles of each mainline traffic lane .
Operate the IP at the optimum speed as recommended by the manufacturer .
Separate each lane into segments .
mi in length .
Evaluate the remainder segment less than .
mi in each lane as an independent segment .
The Engineer will prorate pay adjustments for length .
Make each pass continuously regardless of length and end passes before exclusions in accordance with Table Areas Excluded from Smoothness and ALR Evaluation .
Begin each subsequent pass ft before and including construction headers and endofday work joints .
For percent improvement projects measure Smoothness before the beginning of construction and after the completion of construction .
Use the same stationing for the final profiling as the stationing used for the initial profiling to allow for a direct comparison of Smoothness when calculating the percent improvement .
Measure the Smoothness Before Paving and the Smoothness After Paving values with the same IP. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will use a ft straightedge to measure for surface deviations in accordance with Concrete Pavement and Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement .
B Exclusions Table indicates areas that are excluded from Smoothness evaluation but still require measurement with an IP and are subject to evaluation for ALR and the ft straightedge .
Table indicates areas that are excluded from surface testing with the IP but are subject to evaluation with the ft straightedge .
Table Areas Excluded from Smoothness Evaluation For All Pavements Paving in areas with a posted vehicle speed less than or equal to mph Ramps and loops Acceleration and deceleration lanes less than or equal to ft in length Projects less than ft in length For Bituminous Pavements Single lift overlays placed directly on concrete For Concrete Pavements Intersections constructed under traffic begin and end exclusion ft from the intersection radius Doweled shoulders greater than or equal to ft in width Table Areas Excluded from Smoothness and ALR Evaluation For All Pavements Paving in areas with a posted vehicle speed less than or equal to mph Paving in areas with a cautionary vehicle speed less than or equal to mph Turn lanes crossovers ft on either side of obstructions in lane that obstruction is located Side streets side connections ft before stop signs at an intersection ft before yield signs at a roundabout Bridge decks and approach panels ft from bridge decks and approach panels ft from terminal headers tying into existing pavement For Bituminous Pavements Paved shoulders Intersections where mainline profiles are merged or blended into the cross street profile begin and end exclusion ft from the intersection radius For Concrete Pavements Doweled shoulders less than ft in width Undoweled shoulders Headers adjacent to colored concrete C Calculations C. Smoothness Obtain Smoothness values in an individual lane using the ProVAL Smoothness Assurance analysis with the mm filter .
For percent improvement projects use the Smoothness Before Paving and Smoothness After Paving values to calculate the percent ride improvement .
C. Areas of Localized Roughness Identify ALR using the ProVAL Smoothness Assurance analysis calculating MRI with a continuous short interval of ft with the mm filter .
D Pay Adjustments .
Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Smoothness Evaluate Smoothness requirements using the equations and criteria in accordance with the following tables Table for bituminous pavements Table for concrete pavements and Table for percent improvement projects .
The Engineer will base pay adjustments on the segment Smoothness value or percent improvement value for percent improvement projects measured at the completion of surface pavement unless corrective work is required by the ProVAL summary report results .
If a segment is less than ft in length and Table Table or Table requires corrective work the Engineer will waive the corrective work requirement for the segment and instead assess a prorated disincentive .
The Department will still subject the segment to ALR analysis in accordance with Table .
For segments requiring corrective work reprofile the entire .
mi segment after performing corrective work as directed by the Engineer and enter the reprofiled Smoothness values into the final Profile Summary worksheet .
D .. a Bituminous Pavements Table contains pay adjustments for bituminous pavements .
See Section Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement of the Special Provisions for the ride equation requirements .
Table Smoothness Pay Adjustments and Corrective Work for Bituminous Pavements Equation Smoothness inmi Pay Adjustment .
mi HMAA . . . . . . Smoothness .
Corrective Work to .
inmi HMAB . . . . . . Smoothness .
Corrective Work to .
inmi HMAC . . . . . . x Smoothness .
Corrective Work to .
inmi For bituminous projects the Engineer will not pay any positive Total Pay Adjustments if greater than percent of all mainline density lots for the project fail to meet the minimum density requirements in accordance with Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement .
D .. b Concrete Pavements For concrete pavements the Engineer will use equation PCCA. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Smoothness Pay Adjustments and Corrective Work for Concrete Pavements Equation Smoothness inmi Pay Adjustment .
mi PCCA . . . . . . Smoothness .
Corrective Work to .
inmi If the Contractor adds water to the pavement surface without approval by the Engineer the Engineer will not pay any positive Pay Adjustments for .
mile segments where the water was added and the Engineer may reject the pavement in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
D .. c Percent Improvement Projects The Engineer will base pay adjustments on the segment percent improvement values .
The Engineer will calculate the percent improvement in accordance with the following equation Before Paving Smoothness Smoothness After Paving Smoothness Before Paving I Determine the Smoothness Before Paving value before patching or other repair .
Determine the Smoothness After Paving value after the completion of paving and any corrective work .
Table Smoothness Pay Adjustments and Corrective Work for Percent Improvement Projects Equation Percent Improvement I Pay Adjustment .
mi PI .
. . to .
. .
I . Corrective Work to I of at least .
For bituminous percent improvement projects the Engineer will not pay any positive Total Pay Adjustments if greater than percent of all mainline density lots for the project fail to meet minimum density requirements in accordance with Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement .
Correct segments with a percentage improvement of less than .
percent at no additional cost to the Department as required by the Engineer .
D. Areas of Localized Roughness The Engineer will evaluate ALR in accordance with Table ALR Monetary Deductions and Corrective Work Requirements. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table ALR Monetary Deductions and Corrective Work Requirements Equation ft Continuous MRI inmi Corrective Work or Monetary Deduction per linear .
ft HMAA or HMAB and a posted vehicle speed mph .
Acceptable .
to .
Corrective Work unless both the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a monetary deduct of . . Corrective Work unless both the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a monetary deduct of .
PCCA and a posted vehicle speed mph .
Acceptable .
to .
Corrective Work unless both the Engineer and the Contractor agree to a monetary deduct of . . Corrective Work HMAC PI ramps .
loops concrete intersections constructed under traffic or any paving with a posted vehicle speed mph .
Acceptable . .
The Engineer will consider areas of ALR acceptable if the reprofiled segment contains no ALR .
The Department will reduce payment for ALR remaining after reprofiling as determined by the Engineer and in accordance with Table ALR Monetary Deductions and Corrective Work Requirements .
E Corrective Work Notify the Engineer at least hr before beginning corrective work .
Do not begin corrective work before the Engineer approves the methods and procedures in writing .
Perform corrective work using a surface diamond grinding device consisting of multiple diamond blades unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Fogseal diamond ground bituminous surfaces as required by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
Repair and replace joint sealant damaged by diamond grinding on concrete pavement as directed by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor may correct bituminous pavements by overlaying the area or replacing the area by milling and inlaying as approved by the Engineer .
If milling and inlaying or overlaying perform work in accordance with Pavement Surface Smoothness over the entire length of the correction .
If milling and inlaying or overlaying use a transverse saw cut to begin and end the surface correction .
Perform corrective work across the entire lane width .
Maintain the pavement cross slope through corrective areas .
Perform coring to determine if diamond grinding corrective work results in thin pavements as directed by the Engineer .
Provide additional coring for thickness verification at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department may reduce the payment for thin pavement sections after diamond grinding .
Handle residue and excess water resulting from diamond grinding in accordance with Air Land and Water Pollution .
Perform surface corrections before placing permanent pavement markings .
Replace permanent pavement markings damaged or destroyed by corrective work at no additional cost to the Department. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Reprofile segments containing corrected areas with the same certified IP in accordance with .. A Inertial Profiler within calendar days of the completion of corrective work required by the Engineer .
F Retesting Perform retesting as directed by the Engineer and within days of the original profiling .
If the retested Smoothness values differ from the original Smoothness values by greater than percent the Engineer will use the retested values as the basis for acceptance and pay adjustments .
If the retested values differ from the original values by greater than percent the Department will not pay for the cost of retesting .
If the retested Smoothness values differ by less than or equal to percent of the original Smoothness values the Engineer will use the original values .
If the Engineer verifies the accuracy of the original results the Department will pay for retesting as directed by the Engineer except for retesting required after corrective work at .
per lane mi retested or .
whichever provides the greater amount . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT BLANK .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will include the cost of the IP testing and traffic control in the relevant contract unit price in accordance with Concrete Pavement and Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Bridges and Structures CONCRETE BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing portions of a bridge made of concrete except for concrete piling special wearing courses and precast concrete members and .
The Department defines bridge deck slab as the complete structural slab and wearing course constructed monolithically .
The Department defines bridge structural slab as only the structural unit upon which will be constructed a separately cast wearing course .
The Department defines bridge slab as either bridge deck slab or bridge structural slab. . MATERIALS A Concrete Provide concrete mix designations as shown on the plans for the specific item of work .
B Reinforcement Bars C Steel Fabric D Spiral Reinforcement E Basic Requirement for Paint F Preformed Joint Filler G Concrete Joint Sealer Hot Poured Type H Concrete Joint Sealer Preformed Type .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Refer to Steel Bridge Construction Concrete Wearing Course for Bridges Structure Excavations and Backfills Piling Structural Metals and Metal Reinforcement for constructing bridges .
B Falsework and Forms Use forms for concrete except portions of footings that extend into solid rock .
Do not cast concrete against the side of an earth excavation instead of forming .
If the special provisions allow driving the sheets along the neat line of a footing the Contractor may use cofferdam sheets as forms for footings .
B .
Material Requirements with Allowable Stresses or Loads B .. a Falsework Piling Calculate safe pilebearing capacities in accordance with Piling .
B .. b Structural Shapes and Fabricated Assemblies Reduce the safe load capacity for material or fabricated assembly that has a loss of section due to corrosion damage or previous fabrication .
Do not splice shapes used as beams at points of maximum bending stress .
All splices shall develop yield on the gross section and fracture on the net section .
Design trusses other fabricated sections and steel beams meeting the requirements of the AASHTO Guide Design Specifications for Bridge Temporary Works and the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges .
The Contractor may increase the allowable stresses in the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges by no greater than onethird .
Design and use form ties and other steel devices planned for casting into concrete so that the major part or the entire device remains permanently in the concrete .
If using a device that passes through a concrete surface exposed to view in the completed structure use a device removable to a depth of at least inch from the concrete face without spalling or damaging the concrete. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .. c Lumber Provide lumber free of defects that may adversely affect its strength or the appearance of exposed concrete lines and surfaces such as crooks twists warps and variations in dimensions .
Surface the side of lumber pieces that will contact concrete .
If not using form lining surface or dress and match abutting edges to prevent mortar leakage .
Working stresses for lumber shall not exceed the maximum stresses specified in the Bridge Construction Manual Falsework and Forms section .
Provide sheathing lumber either with or without form lining at least inch nominal thick and no greater than inches wide for exposed concrete surfaces .
If a single piece of lumber will completely cover a concrete surface and the lumber is not cupped or warped the Contractor may use wider lumber .
For curved surfaces with a radius of less than ft the Contractor may use sheathing thinner than inch nominal as approved by the Engineer .
B .. d Plywood Sheathing Provide plywood for form sheathing meeting the following requirements and characteristics Consisting of at least five plies Nominal thickness of at least ¾ inch Plyform exterior grade with sanded or overlaid surfaces specially manufactured for use as form sheathing and Strength requirements as specified in the Bridge Construction Manual Falsework and Forms section .
The Contractor may use the plywood without backing if it meets the above requirements .
For curved surfaces with a radius of less than ft and for slab sections between girders or beams the Contractor may provide plywood sheathing thinner than ¾ inch nominal as approved by the Engineer .
B .. e Form Lining If the contract requires form lining use plywood sheathing with a smooth surfaced material that will produce a concrete surface substantially as smooth and uniform as that obtained using sanded or overlaid plywood sheathing in good condition with no warps or damaged areas .
Use the same kind of form lining material throughout an exposed concrete face .
Place the form lining to produce a smooth contact surface that is free of defects .
Provide smooth form lining free of defects that cause irregularities that the specified concrete finishing operations in .. F Finish of Concrete can not remove .
Provide form lining material with a uniform thickness and edges that form mortar tight joints .
Ensure that bolt nail or rivet heads and weld deposits are flush with the form lining face in contact with concrete .
If using form lining sheets or sections use material that minimizes the number of joints .
B .. f Forms for Circular Columns Use forms that can withstand design concrete pressures without distortion .
Use forms to produce a concrete surface free of visible ridges and depressions .
If form lining is shown on the plans the Contractor may use fiber molds .
When using form brands not previously used provide the Engineer with the manufacturers data .
B .. g Chamfer Strips Provide chamfer strips smooth on all sides and uniform in cross section dimensions without rounded corners .
If using wood strips provide wood strips made of straight grain soft wood .
Size chamfer strips as shown on the plans and in accordance with .. B .
Form Construction .
B .
Design of Falsework and Forms Submit detailed plans for falsework and forms to the Engineer .
Provide falsework members designed to safely carry the following forces Dead load of the falsework members only Dead load of the green concrete computed at lb per cu .
ft A vertical live load of lb per sq .
ft applied on the upper concrete surface Dead load of the forms and other falsework members supported by the members and Equipment loads and material stockpile loads anticipated for use during construction .
Provide forms designed to safely carry the following forces Dead load of the forms only The dead load of green concrete computed at lb per cu .
ft A vertical live load of lb per sq .
ft applied on the upper concrete surface .
All equipment loads and material stockpile loads anticipated for use during construction .
Consider the specified live load as the minimum .
Adjust for concentrated loads that may produce higher live loads on a member than the minimums specified. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide falsework and forms designed in accordance with the following as specified in the Bridge Construction Manual Falsework and Forms section Concrete pressures Standard formulas Allowable stresses Deflections and Deviations of alignment .
Provide credible information regarding the performance of the proposed falsework and forms under concrete load construction for any type of construction not included in the Bridge Construction Manual Falsework and Forms section as requested by the Engineer .
Before using devices or fabrications that the Engineer determines the Department does not have sufficient performance information on conduct full scale field or laboratory testing of falsework and forms at no additional cost to the Department as directed by the Engineer .
B .
Form Lining Requirements Nail form lining backed by sheathing to prevent bulging .
Fasten plywood at least ¾ inch thick to its supports to ensure stiffness and close contact between the plywood and supports .
Tightly butt edges of plywood sheets and form panels without offset to form a mortar tight joint .
The Engineer will allow the Contractor to patch or seal joints that will not seal with cold water putty expandable foam or an equivalent approved by the Engineer .
Place joints in form lining sections or between adjacent form panels following the same horizontal line .
Place horizontal joints on all columns of a unit to the same level .
Align joints in form lining vertically and horizontally .
On forms for concrete faces exposed to view drill holes for form bolts through sheathing or form lining without splintering the face of the form in contact with the concrete .
If using both sides of sheathing avoid splintering on both faces .
Use form lining in accordance with .. B .. e Form Lining for formed surfaces .
The Department will not require use of form lining for buried surfaces or surfaces hidden from view in the completed structure except as shown on the plans .
If using recessed rustication strips to divide a concrete surface into panels as shown on the plans set rustications to cover the joints in the form lining .
Concrete panels with a rubbed surface finish or a special surface finish do not require form lining joints to be covered by rustication strips .
B. Falsework Requirements Support falsework on piling on ledge rock on parts of the structure or on temporary footings .
Do not weld on stresscarrying steel members of the bridge superstructure except as specified in Steel Bridge Construction .
Drive falsework piling to a bearing capacity and penetration that will adequately support the superimposed loads without settlement as shown in the falsework plans .
Use temporary footings to support falsework in accordance with the following Submit geotechnical borings testing analysis and calculations including soil bearing capacity anticipated settlement and sliding resistance for proposed footings showing that detrimental settlement will not occur under maximum construction loads and conditions anticipated at the site .
Protect footings from undermining freezing or being overspread with water .
Use when approved by the Engineer otherwise support with pilings .
Cut off falsework piling in a bent to provide uniform bearing for the pile cap .
Securely fasten caps to the pile heads or posts .
Securely brace each falsework bent with timber of adequate size as shown on the falsework plans .
Securely brace the bents to adjacent bents .
Provide falsework for superstructures in widths greater than the overall width of the superstructure to brace side forms to the falsework .
On bridges with separate roadways support the form and falsework supports for each roadway slab with beams or girders under that roadway. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Locate primary supports for concrete slab spans and the bottom slab for concrete box girders no greater than ft from the construction joints in the slabs .
Provide falsework for slab overhangs for steel beam spans capable of resisting torsional stresses .
Use knee bracing cross bracing struts ties or other methods approved by the Engineer to prevent pronounced deflections caused by stresses .
Bracing is particularly critical when slab overhangs are greater than the beam depth .
B .
Removal of Falsework Do not release falsework supporting concrete structures and concrete members until the completion of the curing period in accordance with .. G Concrete Curing and Protection plus calendar day of drying out time .
Release falsework supporting post tensioned structures after stressing the post tensioning tendons as described in the specifications and shown on the plans .
Do not place loads on concrete members until completion of curing and after the release of falsework unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Determine adequate strength for the complete structure using the last concrete cast affected by the release of falsework .
Loosen supporting falsework to allow the concrete to uniformly and gradually take the stresses due to its own weight .
Begin releasing the falsework at or near the center of a span for the full width of the span .
Simultaneously release falsework toward both ends of the span unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
On continuous span concrete superstructures with or without cantilevers and hinges release falsework simultaneously and uniformly in all spans unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Remove falsework piles located within the roadbed to an elevation of at least ft below the subgrade adjacent to the pile .
Remove falsework piles located in a stream or lake bed and within the limits of low water to the elevation matching the surface of the stream or lake bed .
In established navigation channels remove falsework to an elevation of at least ft below the surface of the channel bottom .
Remove all other piles to an elevation of at least ft below ground elevation .
Remove falsework supports used for the top slab of concrete box girder spans and steel box girder spans .
Unless otherwise approved by the Engineer remove temporary footings unless the top surfaces of the footings are at least ft below the grading grade or at least ft under other ground surfaces .
Backfill and compact open excavations resulting from the removal of falsework in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills at no additional cost to the Department .
B .
Form Construction Provide forms meeting the following requirements and characteristics Designed and constructed to safely resist the pressure of fluid concrete under vibration and of other loads incidental to the construction operations Constructed and erected mortar tight so that the finished concrete conforms to the dimensions and contours shown on the plans and so that undulations and waves on exposed finished concrete surfaces do not exceed the maximum shown in the Bridge Construction Manual Falsework and Form section Set true to the designated lines shown on the plans and Rigidly maintained until the concrete has sufficiently hardened to allow removal of forms per .. B .
Removal of Forms .
For vertical construction joints in a concrete unit with a rubbed surface finish locate joints in form sections to allow the removal of the major part of the forms to allow the initial rubbed surface finish on the cast portion .
Construct vertical forms that will permit removal independent from overhead falsework .
Place sheathing lumber horizontally unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Construct splices in wales so the wale remains effective continuously for its entire length .
Stagger splices in each member of a double wale at least one stud space .
The Contractor may leave openings in the forms to clean out extraneous matter or to facilitate the placement of concrete if the Engineer approves the number and location of openings .
Construct closures for openings to ensure a tight fit flush with the adjoining surfaces .
Unless the plans show otherwise use chamfer strips with ¾ inch sides to form chamfered corners where exposed intersecting concrete surfaces meet at angles no greater than degrees .
The Department will not require chamfered corners at .
Minnesota Standard Specifications the corners of beam stools under decks with mortar tight joints .
If the contract does not require joint edging use similar moldings with ½ inch sides at all joints exposed to view .
Fasten moldings at intervals no greater than inch .
Set chamfer strips at the tops of pier caps supported on falsework in a manner that will allow adjustment to true bridge seat elevation after the placement of the bulk of the cap concrete .
The Contractor may provide forms for keyways at construction joints in concrete constructed with nominal lumber dimensions and with side bevels no greater than .
Provide forms for open joints capable of removal without damaging the joint after the removal of the form .
If the contract requires a construction joint between the bridge slab and barriers curbs or medians set the forms for subsequent placement after placement of the bridge slab in all spans that could cause a deflection in the span the superimposed concrete is cast on .
Before setting grade elevations for curbs sidewalks medians and railings free the concrete box girder spans and concrete slab spans from temporary supports .
Do not drive nails into the hardened concrete to fasten forms for roadway faces of curbs sidewalks and medians .
Use braces and struts to maintain proper line and batter for roadway curb face sidewalk and median forms if these are cast separately from the slab .
Do not use internal spreaders .
Remove bolts and pins set or drilled into the slab for the form work to a depth of at least ½ inches below the slab surface without spalling or damaging the concrete .
Fill the holes flush with nonshrink grout listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
If constructing a bridge with a horizontal curve as shown on the plans construct the forms for edges of slab curbs copings medians and railings to that degree of curvature within a tolerance of ⅛ inch in ft. B .
Treatment of Forms Before placing reinforcement treat the contact faces of forms with a form coating material in accordance with Form Coating Material .
Apply the form coating at the rate recommended by the manufacturer .
Protect form lining treated before erection from accumulations of dust and dirt .
Use water to flush faces of forms that contact concrete immediately before placement of concrete .
B .
Removal of Forms Do not remove forms until provisions are in place for continuous curing in accordance with .. G Concrete Curing and Protection .
Remove forms and form ties carefully to prevent spalling or marring of the concrete surface and to avoid breaking off concrete corners .
The Contractor may remove forms for the roadway face of curbs sidewalks and medians when the concrete can retain its shape and if weather conditions allow the start of the specified concrete finish per .. F .. d Curb Sidewalk and Median Finish immediately after removing the forms .
Remove column and wall forms before releasing the falsework supports from concrete supported by the column or wall .
Do not remove forms for rustication fluting strips and drain recesses at the same time as the face forms .
Leave rustication fluting strips and drain recesses forms in place until it is possible to remove these items without spalling chipping or marring of concrete corners or edges .
Remove forms for the webs of concrete box girder spans and provide the web concrete with an ordinary surface finish before setting the forms for the top slab in place at that location .
Remove interior forms in concrete box girder spans .
Remove deck forms on the interior of steel box girder spans .
Clear loose material from the inside of the concrete box girders and steel box girders and sweep the box clean .
B. ReUse of Forms The Contractor may reuse forms and form liners if they are sufficiently rigid so that the undulation of the concrete surface does not exceed inch when checked with a . ft straightedge or template .
If the form lining between supports show conspicuous permanent set remove the form lining and correct before reuse. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Plug or cover open holes in sheathing .
Plug open holes in form lining flush with the lining .
Repair blemishes on the form lining surface to a smooth and even surface .
Clean adhering concrete and extraneous matter from form surfaces in contact with concrete before reuse .
C Placement of Concrete General Requirements Complete the placement of forms falsework bracing and reinforcement bars for the entire concrete cast and have concrete placement and finishing equipment and curing material on site before placing the concrete .
Notify the Engineer at least h in advance of the casting of concrete to allow the Engineer to inspect forms reinforcement bars materials and equipment .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer inspects and approves the work .
Perform mixing placing and finishing of concrete under adequate lighting conditions .
Transport and place concrete without segregating the batch materials .
Place concrete in or near its final position without displacing the reinforcement while completely enveloping the reinforcement in the concrete .
Keep equipment for transporting placing and finishing concrete free of foreign matter and coatings of hardened concrete .
Waste the water used for cleaning equipment outside of the forms as approved by the Engineer .
Clean forms and reinforcement bars and remove debris inside the forms before placing concrete .
Place concrete under water only when used for a cofferdam seal and as shown on the special provisions or as approved by the Engineer .
When placing concrete on or against earth and porous rock foundations moisten the surfaces before placing concrete .
Footings cast in solid rock will not require side forms .
Place concrete between required or permissible joints as shown on the plans in a continuous operation .
If a breakdown in the concrete placement operation occurs and the concrete placed to that point sets so that revibration is not possible cover the surface of the concrete with an approved bonding agent or mortar as directed by the Engineer before placing fresh concrete against it .
Place concrete at a rate that does not exceed fluid pressure for which forms were designed .
Stop casting operations at signs of overstress or excessive deflection .
Except for seals deposit and compact concrete in continuous horizontal layers no greater than ft thick .
In columns and thin walls the Contractor may increase the thickness by no greater than ft. Place and compact concrete before the concrete in the preceding layer takes its initial set .
Place layers of concrete within h of placing the next layer of concrete at the same point unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Do not drop concrete from a height greater than ft unless confined in a vertical down spout or other approved type of pipe or unless the Engineer approves another placement method .
Use as many down spouts as needed to place concrete at a horizontal level .
The Contractor may use inclined pipes belts or chutes to discharge concrete into the hopper of the downspout if the Contractor provides approved means of preventing segregation .
Place concrete buckets as close as practical to the point of deposit before discharging concrete .
Discharge concrete at a rate that does not displace reinforcement bars forms supports or any embedded items .
Do not discharge excess concrete in a pile for rehandling .
Remove laitance and foreign matter if it accumulates on the inside of the forms .
Do not mix dried or hardened concrete accumulations with fresh concrete .
As the concrete rises in the forms keep the form surfaces and reinforcement bars free of concrete spatters that may harden and become part of the mix .
Remove dried concrete and dust accumulations on the form surfaces and reinforcement bars above construction joints before placing the next concrete lift .
Do not damage the form surfaces reinforcement bar coating or the steeltoconcrete bond when removing excess concrete .
Work the coarse aggregate away from the forms .
Force the concrete under and around the reinforcement bars without displacing the bars .
If casting a wall or column greater than ft tall integrally with a beam strut or slab allow from min to min as determined by the Engineer to elapse between placement of the concrete to the level of the bottom of the beam strut or slab and placement of the concrete above this level .
For caps supported by more than one column cast columns uniformly and allow from min to min to elapse as determined by the Engineer before placing the cap. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Clean set concrete of loose material laitance and dirt before placing fresh concrete against it .
Sand or water blast superstructure concrete to clean the set concrete .
Avoid damage to coating on reinforcement bars .
Before placing the fresh concrete draw the forms for the fresh concrete tight against the set concrete .
Keep the contact surfaces of the set concrete wet until depositing the fresh concrete .
If the Engineer determines that shock waves from pile driving blasting or other operations will damage the concrete complete these operations before placing concrete or suspend these operations until the concrete gains adequate strength per .. G Concrete Curing and Protection .
Do not support runways for concrete transportation by the forms unless approved by the Engineer .
Remove the span falsework and obtain an acceptable bridge slab cure before placing concrete barriers unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
D Compaction of Concrete Compact concrete except for cofferdam seals using mechanical vibration applied internally .
Operate vibrators at a frequency of at least impulses per min .
Compact each batch of concrete immediately after placement .
Apply vibrators at points no farther apart than twice the radius of the vibrators visibly effective range .
Manipulate the vibrators to work the concrete around reinforcement and imbedded fixtures and into the corners and angles of the forms .
Use spading to supplement vibration to produce smooth surfaces and dense concrete along form surfaces and in corners and locations unreachable by vibrators .
Apply vibration at the point of deposit of freshly deposited concrete .
Vibrate long enough to compact the concrete but not so long as to cause segregation and localized areas of grout .
Insert and withdraw vibrators in a vertical orientation .
Do not apply vibration to or apply vibration directly on reinforcement bars to sections of concrete that has hardened to the degree that the concrete ceases to be plastic under vibration .
Do not use vibrators to make concrete flow in the forms this action will cause segregation .
Use nonmetallic vibrator head for compaction of concrete around epoxycoated components per .. C. Special Requirements for Coated Bars .
E Joint Construction Perform joint construction as shown on the plans and in accordance with the following E. Transverse Construction Joints Make grooves or saw cuts ⅜ inch wide by inch deep in accordance with the following unless otherwise shown in the plans or directed by the Engineer At transverse construction joints in the bridge slab unless otherwise directed by the Engineer To the full width of the roadway between gutter lines and Directly over the construction joint before placement of curb forms .
E. Weakened Plane Joints Use a grooving tool or a removable insert when casting the slab to extend and form a weakened plane under sidewalks and at other slab locations where a saw cut is not possible .
Place the insert or groove to cut the fresh concrete on a straight line to a depth of in .
When using an insert coat with oil or grease before placement .
Withdraw the insert when the concrete has set enough to retain the groove shape with the insert removed .
Locate the weakened plane to fall vertically below the sidewalk curb or median joint at that location .
On skewed bridges with exterior girders or beams under curbs sidewalks or medians that are normal to the longitudinal axis of the bridge extend the weakened plane using a removable insert .
Place the insert as a continuation of the line to be cut extending to the centerline of the exterior girders or beams .
Outward from the centerline of the exterior girders or beams place the weakened plane common to the joint placed in the curb sidewalk or median .
Form a vertical ½ inch Vshape in the edge of the slab at the end of the weakened plane at that location .
E. Open or Filled Joints Form the distance between faces of open joints with removable inserts headers or templates to provide the opening shown on the plans for the temperature range prevailing at the time of concrete placement .
Refer to the tabulation shown on the plans or shop drawings for the required openings at various temperatures .
The temperatures listed represent the temperature anticipated when the slab is cast .
Joints may widen due to concrete shrinkage. . Minnesota Standard Specifications After placing the bridge slab adjacent to an elastomeric seal expansion joint and after curing and drying the concrete the Engineer will measure the constructed joint openings .
The Engineer may reject openings that deviate from the size shown on the plans by greater than inch as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Department will also consider offsets at joints between segments as unacceptable work .
The Contractor may use preformed joint filler to form vertical joints .
When using cork joint filler to form a vertical joint anchor with copper nails ½ inches long at inch centers .
Where the contract requires chamfered corners at joints created by using preformed material trim the preformed filler back to the inside of the vee formed by the chamfer strip .
E. Expansion Joint Devices Provide assemble and install bridge slab expansion joint devices as shown on the plans and in accordance with .. K Expansion Joint Devices .
F Finish of Concrete F. General Surface finish concrete that is properly set and only during weather conditions or with weather protection approved by the Engineer .
F. Formed Surfaces F .. a Ordinary Surface Finish Provide ordinary surface finish on formed surfaces of concrete structures .
If applying special surface finishes to conventionally formed concrete surfaces sand or water blast the surface before ordinary surface finishing to break the surface film and to remove laitance form release agent dirt and other foreign matter that might adversely affect adhesion of special surface finishes .
Immediately after removing the forms examine the concrete surfaces for defects .
Remove and repair concrete with porosity honey comb or segregated materials as approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will approve the time method and materials used to make concrete repairs .
Repair small areas with mortar as specified for surface cavities .
The Engineer may require formed surfaces to repair large areas .
The repairs may require a bonding agent mechanical bonds or both .
Cure repair work as approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer may reject concrete sections with extensive irreparable defects as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Remove fins and projections from exposed surfaces and from surfaces that will be waterproofed .
Clean saturate with water and fill with mortar all surface cavities produced by form ties .
Clean saturate with water and fill with mortar all surface cavities on exposed surfaces with a diameter of at least ⅜ inch .
The Department defines exposed surfaces as surfaces exposed to view in the completed structure above low water and above the final ground line .
At unexposed surface locations or areas where the Engineer determines repairs will not affect the appearance of the completed structure clean and fill cavities caused by removing falsework brackets form ties or hanger rods with a silicone caulk listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List for Moisture Cured Polymeric Joint Sealer .
Use mortar consisting of three parts standard Portland cement six parts mortar sand and water to fill surface cavities .
Use enough water to produce a mortar consistency as dry as possible to use effectively .
Mix the mortar h before use .
Provide a latex or acrylicbased bonding agent listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List for special surface finish .
Mix the bonding agent into the mortar used for ordinary surface finishing on areas that will receive a special surface finish .
Add the bonding agent to the mixing water at a ratio of one part bonding agent to three parts water .
Fill the cavities with mortar .
Compact the cavities in place point and trim flush with the concrete surface .
On exposed surfaces remove mortar stains or streaks outside the area of the filled cavity .
After completing the concrete work remove visible streaks stains and blemishes from the surface if the special provisions do not show additional surface finishing on an exposed surface .
Perform additional surface finishing on an exposed surface for which the contract that requires only ordinary surface finish when adjoining form lining sheets present sharply contrasting colors or textures .
Provide sack rubbed surface finish as a corrective measure if the surface appearance remains sharply contrasting after the completion of the ordinary surface finish .
If applying the ordinary surface finish before the completion of the curing period minimize interruption to the curing when performing the finishing .
F .. b Sack Rubbed Surface Finish In areas with numerous surface voids on an exposed surface the Contractor may use sack rubbed finish to fill the smaller voids in lieu of the method described under ordinary surface finish .
Fill form tie holes and other cavities of at least ⅜ inch in accordance with .. F .. a Ordinary Surface Finish. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Grind or sandblast the concrete surface to remove blemishes discolorations and thin mortar films covering surface voids .
After the completion of the structure and when further construction will not produce blemishes and discolorations on the surface perform the following operations Saturate the surface with water and beginning at the top use a rubber float to apply a mortar mixture to fill the voids .
Mix the mortar using the following requirements .
One part standard Portland cement .
One part mortar sand and .
Contains sufficient water to produce a moderately thick paste that will remain in place when applied .
Rewet the concrete surface if it dries before applying the mortar paste .
After the mortar sets in the voids but before it completely dries rub the floated surface using a burlap sack filled with a dry mix of mortar to remove mortar in excess of what was needed to fill the voids .
The Engineer will approve equally effective means of removing the excess mortar .
Produce a completed surface meeting the following requirements and characteristics .
Free of blemishes discolorations and surface voids .
Uniform in texture and appearance except for the difference in texture between filled voids and the remainder of the surface .
Correct surfaces not meeting the requirements of this section as approved by the Engineer .
F .. c Special Surface Finish Provide a special surface finish for bridges and surfaces required by the contract to produce a smooth surface uniform in texture and appearance .
Use a Departmentapproved system listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List for Special Surface Finish System to apply a special surface finishing consisting of commercially packaged mortar bonding agent and percent acrylic paint .
Blend the mortar bonding agent and water in the proportions recommended by the manufacturer .
Provide percent acrylic paint in accordance with Exterior Masonry Acrylic Emulsion Paint and blend at a rate of gal per lb of dry mortar mix .
Produce a mixture suitable for spray application to vertical concrete surfaces at the specified coverage rate below .
Mix and remix materials as recommended by the manufacturer .
Apply two coats of the mixture by spraying as recommended by the manufacturer using a total coverage rate of sq .
ft per gal of material .
Use the first coat to cover the entire surface taking care not to cause runs sags or excessive buildup .
The Contractor may begin special surface finishing operations including any topcoat applications at an ambient air temperature of at least F and rising .
Suspend special surface finishing operations if the ambient air temperature falls to F and is dropping .
Begin surface finishing operations only when it is possible to perform the work continuously from beginning to completion on any one bridge element .
Perform surface finishing so that after drying the final surface is uniform in color and texture without evidence of laps or breaks in continuity .
Perform corrective work on unsatisfactorily finished areas coated with special surface finishing or topcoat as directed by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
F .. d Curb Sidewalk and Median Finish Provide a surface finish on formed surfaces of medians delineator curbs and the roadway face of curbs and sidewalks in accordance with the following Begin ordinary surface finish operations immediately after removing the forms and work continuously to completion .
As the ordinary surface finish progresses rub the surface with a cork float or fine carborundum stone to produce a paste on the surface and to expose and fill depressions and surface cavities .
Float the paste to a smooth surface free of coarse texture swirls and ridges .
Before the surface sets brush the surface lightly with a fine bristled brush to remove cement films and produce a uniform surface with a fine grained and sanded texture and Complete the surface finishing of the formed surface within h after concrete placement .
F .. e Barrier Finish Do not allow horizontal or vertical irregularities greater than ¼ in in any ft length of finished concrete barrier .
The Engineer may reject surfaces and edges not meeting this tolerance as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Remove and replace unacceptable work as directed by the Engineer .
Remove and replace extensive .
Minnesota Standard Specifications areas greater than percent of barrier length with deviations greater than ½ in .
If the Engineer does not direct the Contractor to remove and replace unacceptable work the Contractor may leave the work in place with the following price adjustments For deviations from inch to ½ inch the Department will pay for concrete barrier at percent of the contract unit price and For minor areas less than or equal to percent of barrier length with deviations greater than ½ inches the Department will pay for concrete barrier at percent of the contract unit price .
F. Unformed Surfaces F .. a Miscellaneous Unformed Surfaces Finish unformed upper horizontal and inclined surfaces except for the surface of bridge slabs and the surface at horizontal construction joints in accordance with the following Do not use steel trowels and steel shod floats .
Use wood or wood shod templates and strikeoffs .
Use hand floats and darbies with wood canvas rubber or cork contact surfaces .
Use metal edgers that do not form offsets greater than in in the concrete surface .
Do not create waves in the concrete surface when edging .
In lieu of using an edger the Contractor may form rounded corners using a cove strip that does not create an offset greater than inch with adjacent concrete surfaces .
Place excess concrete in the forms and compact by internal vibration .
After a min delay strike off and screed the surface with a template forcing the coarse aggregate below the finished surface leaving the surface slightly above finished elevation to allow for settlement during curing .
Repeat the screeding and strikeoff operation to obtain the elevation shown on the plans and contour except for edging .
Waste laitance and excess mortar outside of the forms .
After the final strike off and screeding hand float the surface to correct irregularities and seal surface tears .
Immediately after the water sheen leaves the surface rework the surface to a uniform texture using a float .
Tool rounded corners and edges to final radius forcing the coarse aggregate beneath the finished radius .
Float to remove trails left by the edging tools .
Apply final texture and finish to the surface in accordance with the following Brush or broom bridge curbs and sidewalks and the floor slabs ramps landings and stair treads for pedestrian bridges and tunnels in a transverse direction using a fairly stiff bristled brush or broom to produce a surface finish meeting the following requirements and characteristics .
Visibly serrated .
Not slippery when wet and .
Uniform throughout in texture and appearance .
Brush the cement film from the surface to provide a uniform fine grained sanded texture using a fine bristled brush .
Ensure the finished surface does not vary by greater than ⅛ inch from a ft straightedge laid longitudinally on the surface with transverse surfaces substantially as shown on the plans .
F .. b Bridge Slabs F .. b General Before placing concrete for a section of bridge slab and after setting the strikeoff rails or guides to correct elevation check the top reinforcement for vertical position by operating the strikeoff on the rails or guides in the presence of the Engineer .
Attach a filler strip ¼ inch thinner than the minimum concrete cover requirements to the bottom of the strikeoff during this check to detect reinforcement bars that may encroach on the required clearance .
Place the following in a continuous operation proceeding uniformly from edge to edge of the slab or from end to end of the section Each bridge slab section between joints Each bridge slab section between an end bulkhead and a joint or With no joints specified the entire slab .
If the contract does not require a specific sequence or direction for casting slab sections submit plans for the proposed casting procedures for approval .
Before starting construction obtain the Engineers approval for any change to the casting plans .
If bridge slab placement and finishing is performed at night provide a welllighted area to accomplish QCQA inspections .
Welllighted is defined as a minimum of foot candles of artificial light or natural daylight .
Use a light meter with readings in foot candles to verify the adequacy of the lighting .
If at least two spans of continuous beams or girders support a bridge slab section place concrete at a rate that concrete will remain plastic for at least onehalf a span length back of an intermediate support until placement has proceeded to a point one half of the span length ahead of that support .
Provide approved admixtures to retard concrete setting time as required to maintain plasticity. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If simple span girders support a bridge slab section or if the Contract requires sequence casting for wide continuous beam bridge decks place concrete at a forward rate of at least ft per h without producing cold joints between partially hardened concrete and the adjacent newly placed concrete .
At least calendar days prior to slab placement provide a slab placement and curing plan for each bridge to the Engineer for approval .
Include the following information in the placement and curing plan Anticipated concrete delivery rates Estimated start and finish time Material labor and equipment proposed for placing finishing and curing including placement of wet burlap soaker hose or other system to maintain the deck in a moist condition during the curing period Number of work bridges proposed for use Number of people responsible for the various tasks and Bulkheading methods and materials proposed for use if the Contractor can not maintain the proposed concrete placement rates .
Attend a preplacement meeting two to four calendar days before the slab placement to review the information and details provided in the placement and curing plan .
The following project personnel are required to attend the preplacement meeting Contractor Engineer Concrete supplier and Concrete pump supplier if requested by the Engineer .
F .. b Onsite Adjustments for Bridge Slab Concrete In addition to the requirements set forth in .. G. Field Adjustments comply with the following if any adjustments are necessary on site Only admixtures originally incorporated into the mix will be allowed with the exception that Viscosity Modifying Admixture VMA may be used to adjust slump a maximum of gal of water addition per yd of concrete including the any water necessary to dilute admixtures may be on site provided that additional water is available to add per the Certificate of Compliance and Mix the load a minimum of minutes or revolutions after any additions .
The Engineer will not allow finishing aids or evaporation retarders for use in finishing of the concrete .
F .. b StrikeOff of Bridge Slab Applies to both Bridge Deck Slab and Bridge Structural Slab Place the concrete at a rate that ensures the initial strikeoff operation is never greater than ft behind the placement operation .
Maintain the head of concrete parallel with the initially screeded surface .
Leave excess concrete carried in front of the screed on the surface when reaching the head of the concrete .
Mix with freshly deposited concrete before compacting .
Consolidate any previously consolidated concrete to remove voids including those caused by footprints or reinforcement deflection .
Strike off and screed the roadway surface after concrete placement and compaction .
When the initial strikeoff operation reveals low areas fill these areas with additional concrete before continuing .
Avoid walking in the concrete after the initial pass of the screed .
Rescreed to the crossslope and longitudinal profile as required by the contract .
Do not work smooth or disturb the concrete surface while bleed water and laitance remain on the surface .
If the use of a poweroperated strikeoff screed is specified provide mechanical screeding motion with equipment moving on flanged or grooved wheels resting on the screed rails .
If exterior beams or girders that lie under the roadway slab support the running rails the Contractor may finish the area between the rail and the gutter without the use of the poweroperated screed .
In this area use suitable guides to determine the required gutter profile and after plastic shrinkage straighten and true the area to the required profile and crossslope .
Ensure the screed carries a surplus of concrete in the front during screeding operations .
Perform the final screeding to cover as long a section as practicable without stopping .
F .. ba Bridge Structural Slabs The Department will not require screed rails for templates used for strikeoff and screeding of a bridge structural slab .
If using screed rails use screed rails in accordance with this section .
Securely tie and rigidly support top reinforcement in accordance with .. C Placing Supporting and Tying Bar Reinforcement .
Before placing the concrete demonstrate that the equipment and methods proposed for use will not damage or .
Minnesota Standard Specifications displace reinforcement bars .
Provide additional bar support additional supports for template or both upon visible deflections of reinforcement .
Provide templates fabricated by a manufacturer with at least years experience .
If using templates greater than ft long demonstrate adjustments for crown breaks as approved by the Engineer .
Evenly attach vibrators across template length and provide templates that will automatically shutoff vibration when forward motion stops .
Space template supports to prevent sag in the template .
For portions of template supports in contact with reinforcement provide template supports consisting of round tubes or rods with a smooth low friction surface .
Provide skis at least ft long with a gradual turnup nose sufficient to prevent entrapment in reinforcement .
Support transverse reinforcement bars within inches of the location where template support skis will ride .
Provide a manual or powered winch to advance the template .
Do not anchor winch cables to reinforcement bars .
The Contractor may attach the winch cable to beam shear studs or stirrups .
Spread and level concrete in front of template without causing float or overriding .
Handfloat the surface of bridge structural slabs only to close up areas of exposed aggregate .
F .. bb Bridge Deck Slabs Bridge slabs without separate concrete wearing course Use a selfpropelled poweroperated strikeoff machine to screed the roadway surface of monolithic bridge slabs .
Provide a finishing machine consisting of a cylindrical finisher mated with horizontal adjustable augers both of which are mounted on a transversely moving carriage unless otherwise approved by the State Bridge Construction Engineer .
Sidewalk surfaces to be separated by a permanent concrete barrier may be screeded with equipment conforming to F .. ba but must meet the finish tolerances for bridge deck slabs .
Use rails bulkheads or the side forms as screed guides for manual strikeoff .
Use rails as guides for poweroperated strikeoffs with provisions for vertical adjustment .
Support the screed rails for poweroperated screeds on the exterior beams girders or webs of the structure unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Obtain the Engineers approval if planning to support screed rails on the side forms or on any falsework independent of the superstructure .
Construct screed rails in a manner that will allow vertical adjustment after concrete is placed on concrete deck girders and concrete slab span bridges .
During concrete placement check elevations and vertically adjust if necessary .
A ft modified straightedge is required for Bridge Deck Slabs prior to surface texture regardless of whether diamond ground texture planing is specified for the final ride surface .
Float slab in accordance with MnDOT Bridge Construction Manual ..
If an outside webwall of a box girder is under a sidewalk or curb the Contractor may modify the sidewalk or curb reinforcement to accommodate the running rail system for the power strikeoff machine as approved by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
F .. b Final Finish Texture Draw a carpet drag longitudinally along the bridge slab before the concrete attains its initial set to obtain a final finish texture .
Adjust the carpet drag to produce a texture approved by the Engineer .
Use a carpet drag meeting the following characteristics and requirements Mounted on a work bridge A longitudinal length of ft Width equal to the concrete placed Artificial grass type Molded polyethylene pile face Blade length of from ⅝ inch to inch and Total weight of at least oz per sq .
yd .
In lieu of the carpet drag texturing the Contractor may use coarse broom texturing as approved by the Engineer .
Texture the roadway surface as approved by the Engineer to produce a final surface serrated grooved or roughened surface greater than that normally produced by conventional brooming .
Do not tear out or loosen particles of coarse aggregate during texturing .
Produce a final surface including areas near expansion joints meeting the following requirements Free of porous spots and irregularities Have the required crown Does not vary by greater than ⅜ inch on a bridge structural slab when checked with a ft straightedge placed longitudinally and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Does not vary by greater than ⅛ inch on a bridge deck slab when checked with a ft straightedge placed longitudinally .
Immediately following the carpet drag texture final roadway surfaces with a metaltine pattern unless a diamondground texture is scheduled for the surface as part of the contract .
Install the transverse texturing tining on a slight diagonal at an angle of approximately degrees to a line perpendicular to the roadway centerline produced by using a device meeting the following characteristics and requirements Equipped with steel tines from inch to inch long and from inch to ⅛ inch thick Steel tines arranged to obtain randomized grooves from ⅛ inch to inch deep and Variable spacing between tines from ⅝ inch to inch .
The Contractor may use other texturing equipment that will produce an equivalent texture as approved by the Engineer .
Do not texture within ft of curbs .
F .. b Bridge Slab Finish Under Curbs Concrete Barriers Sidewalks and Medians Float the top surface of the bridge slab under curbs concrete barriers sidewalks and narrow medians producing a rough surface with the coarse aggregate embedded in mortar .
Provide a smooth finished strip inches wide at the edge of the slab and under the roadway face of curbs concrete barriers sidewalks and narrow medians .
Choose one of the following alternates to prepare the top surface of the roadway slab directly under island type medians Sandblast or shotblast the slab surface to remove laitance .
Apply a cement bonding grout to the concrete consisting of Portland cement mixed with water forming a slurry having the consistency of paint before placing median concrete .
Place median concrete on wet bonding grout .
Drill and anchor ½ inch diameter epoxy coated reinforcement bars dowels into the slab parallel to each median gutterline .
Place the dowels ft in from the gutterlines at ft centers .
Drill the dowels at least inches into the roadway slab and projecting inches into the median concrete .
Anchor the dowels with an approved epoxy or approved nonshrink grout .
F .. b Bridge Slab Finish for Bottom Slab Concrete Box Girders Strike off the top surface of the concrete in the bottom slab of concrete box girders and finish to within a ¼ inch tolerance when checked with a ft straightedge .
The Department will not require additional finishing of this surface .
F .. b Surface Smoothness Check After completion of the curing period the Engineer will check the bridge slab surface for trueness using a ft straightedge for transverse and longitudinal checks .
The Engineer will perform at least two longitudinal checks in each traffic lane and one check at each gutter .
Sweep the surface clean of debris before the Engineer performs the checks .
Correct surfaces outside of the specified tolerance of a ft straightedge in accordance with .. F .. b Final Finish Texture as required by the Engineer .
Mill high spots .
Remove concrete in low spots designated for removal to at least in below required grade and then recast to the proper grade with an approved product .
Restore removed tine texture .
The nonconforming areas not satisfactorily corrected are subject to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Remove high spots before filling adjacent depressions .
If not placing a wearing course coat areas corrected by surface grinding with a surface sealer listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
F .. b Preparation of Bridge Seats Construct the bearing seat forms at time of form setting within a .ft accuracy of plan elevation as compensated for actual bearing heights .
After bearing seat curing and stripping of forms grind the bearing areas of bridge seats to produce a level surface that does not vary by greater than inch from the required plane for steel base plates or by greater than inch from the required plane for elastomeric bearing pads .
The required plane is defined as a level surface at Plan Elevation bounded by an area over the bearing contact dimensions plus inches outside the bearing surface .
Plan Elevation is defined as the plan bearing seat elevation as adjusted for actual bearing heights .
After grinding to a horizontal surface fieldsurvey bearing seats at center of bearing and provide an electronic copy of the X and Y coordinates and elevations to the Engineer .
Adjust bearing seat elevations when the differential between adjacent bearing seats deviates by more than inch for steel framing fabricated by full assembly as specified in Spec Structural Metals inch for all other bridges. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The differential between adjacent bearings can be determined as follows Δ Plan Elevation Beam A Survey Elevation Beam A Plan Elevation Beam B Survey Elevation Beam B At a given line of bearing or within the same substructure produce bearing seats within the following accuracy Seats may be no more than inch low from plan elevation for the lowest seat at a given substructure and Seats may be no more than inch high from plan elevation for the highest seat at a given substructure .
Tolerances above are superseded by any plan notes .
Plan elevation is defined as the plan bearing seat elevation as adjusted for actual bearing heights which have been approved by the Engineer .
Prior to adjusting any bearing seats submit the proposed method material specifications and required adjustment for each bearing seat to the Engineer .
The Engineer must accept the correction proposal in writing prior to proceeding with any bridge seat modifications .
G Concrete Curing and Protection Cure newly placed concrete by providing protection against the following Rapid loss of moisture Freezing temperatures High temperatures Abrupt temperature changes Vibration exceeding a normal or reasonable limit as specified in the Bridge Construction Manual Chapter .
Vibration Protection Shock waves and Prematurely applied loads .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until corrective action is taken and may subject the damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Perform the following for defective sections as directed by the Engineer Remove and replace Remove to a depth as directed by the Engineer and replace and Cover with an approved concrete sealeroverlay .
The Department may reduce payment for defective concrete sections in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents .
as directed by the Engineer .
Whenever weather conditions are such as to cause unusual or adverse placing and finishing conditions or equipment failures occur expedite the application of a curing method or temporarily suspend the mixing and placing operations as the conditions require .
G. Minimum Curing Period The Department defines the curing period as the time of maintaining satisfactory moisture and temperature in concrete during the period immediately following placement through the specified duration so that hydration of the cement may continue until development of the desired properties to a sufficient degree to meet the required service life .
In no case will the concrete surface show evidence of drying which includes surface color changes during the curing period .
Maintain a minimum concrete surface temperature of F or greater during the curing period .
If the concrete surface temperature drops below F during the curing period notify the Engineer and make adjustments to the curing to raise the surface temperature above F as prescribed in the curing plan .
If the concrete surface temperature drops below F during the curing period add one additional day to the minimum curing period for each day the temperature drops below F. Provide additional protection as required in accordance with .. G. Protection Against Cold Weather .
The Engineer may allow some modification of the requirement for continuous curing without interruption for the purpose of setting wall or column forms on footings but only when the Contractor protects the concrete from freezing or excessive drying during the interruption period .
Resume curing at the earliest opportunity and cure until completion of the curing period .
If using heated enclosures during the curing period vent heaters and other equipment operated within the enclosure to prevent the buildup of carbon dioxide .
When the plans show a permissible construction joint the Contractor may begin subsequent concrete placement before completion of the curing period unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Determine the minimum curing period for a given element in accordance with Table and the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications High early concrete is not allowed to accelerate strength to aid in earlier form removal The Contractor may remove forms for curbs sidewalks median barrier and barriers when the concrete can retain its shape and if weather conditions allow the start of the specified concrete finish per .. F .. d Curb Sidewalk and Median Finish immediately after removing the forms .
All other forms are required to remain in place for at least h after casting the concrete or longer if stripping the forms will damage the concrete or prevent disengaging the form ties unless otherwise noted in Table If forms are removed prior to the completion of the curing period resume curing coverage within minutes for each formed face .
The Engineer may consider revisions to the minute requirement for continuous curing based on field conditions measured evaporation rates and the submitted curing plan in accordance with .. G. Curing Plan and Cracking the forms loose the next day is acceptable so long as the concrete surface remains moist for duration of curing period .
G. Acceptable Curing Methods Cure all concrete in accordance with Table .
Use all methods necessary to comply with the minimum curing period .
Do not apply membrane curing compound to construction joints or to concrete surfaces which are planned for bonding to other concrete waterproofing applying sealants or special surface finish except as allowed in accordance with Table .
Ensure steel reinforcement anchors waterstops and similar devices are free of membrane curing compound prior to placing concrete .
Table Curing Requirements for Concrete Bridge Elements For all formed and unformed concrete Do not use for Mass Concrete Bridge Element Minimum Curing Period Minimum Period For Form Cure Minimum Strength Required to Pull Forms psi Minimum Strength to Apply Loads of Required Method Allowed to determine in place concrete strength Bridge superstructures unless otherwise specified hrs hrs ǂ Maturity or Control Cylinders Slab Span Superstructure days days See special provisions See special provisions Maturity or Control Cylinders Diaphragms and end webs not a part of box girders and cast before the bridge slab hrs hrs ǂ Maturity or Control Cylinders Pier Caps hrs hrs ǂ Maturity or Control Cylinders Retaining Walls hrs hrs Self supporting Maturity or Control Cylinders Barriers and Parapets hrs Self supporting Maturity or Control Cylinders Sections not included in superstructures unless otherwise specified hrs hrs ǂ Maturity or Control Cylinders Bridge Decks days Bridge Deck Underside days days When weather conditions require cold weather protection in accordance with .. G. Protection Against Cold Weather increase form curing to a minimum of hours .
Achieve psi prior to use as a traffic barrier .
Applied loads include but are not limited to equipment beams backfilling or successive concrete placements .
ǂThe Engineer will require verification of the minimum strength when air temperatures drop below F during the curing period or when the mix design includes greater than cement substitution .
The minimum strength requirement does not apply to bulkheads and edge of deck forms. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Acceptable Curing Methods Do not use for Mass Concrete Element Special Surface Finish Required Membrane Curing Method G .. a Curing Blanket Method G .. b Wet Curing Method G .. c Formed Cure Method G .. d Single Component S.S.F .
II Cure Method see special provisions AMS Type D Footing No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes NA Pier Cap Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No Pier Column Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes No Abutment Retaining Wall and Wingwall Front Face Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Back Face No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes NA Slipformed Barrier Parapet and End Post Roadway Face and Top of Barrier No No No Yes Yes NA Yes Outside Surface Yes No Yes Yes Yes NA Yes Formed Barrier Parapet and End Post Roadway Face and Top of Barrier No No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Outside Surface Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Pier Strut Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No CastinPlace Box Culvert No Yes No Yes Yes Yes NA Sidewalk Raised Median No Yes No Yes Yes NA NA Coping Edge of Slab Yes No No Yes Yes Yes No Structural Slab Monolithic Deck No Refer to .. G. Concrete Bridge Deck Curing and Protection The Engineer will allow the use of curing compounds meeting Type D Membrane Curing Compound provided a letter from the special surface finish manufacturer states the proposed curing compound is compatible with the special surface finish .
Remove remaining membrane curing compound that has not completely dissipated from the surface prior to applying special surface finish .
Removal will be required by means of sandblasting grinding or other approved methods .
G .. a Membrane Curing Method Use membrane curing compound meeting the requirements of PolyAlpha Methylsytrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound or Type D Membrane Curing Compound .
Use the same type of curing compound on the entire individual element .
Before application agitate the curing compound as received in the shipping container to obtain a homogenous mixture .
Protect membrane curing compounds from freezing before application .
Handle and apply the membrane curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Apply the curing compound in accordance with the following At a minimum rate of gal per sq .
ft of surface curing area Apply curing compound homogeneously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces equal to a white sheet of typing paper .
If using a Department approved curing compound with a nonwhite base color apply the compound to provide a uniform solid opaque consistency meeting the intent of the requirement in this section If the curing compound is damaged during the curing period immediately repair the damaged area by re spraying and If the Engineer determines that the initial or corrective spraying result in unsatisfactory curing the Engineer may require the Contractor to use an alternate curing method at no additional cost to the Department .
Use an airless spraying machine that complies with the following A recirculating bypass system that provides for continuous agitation of the reservoir material Separate filters for the hose and nozzle and Multiple or adjustable nozzle system that provides for variable spray patterns .
G .. b Curing Blanket Method After completion of the finishing operations and without marring the concrete cover the concrete with prewetted burlap or curing blankets .
Install in a manner that envelops the exposed concrete and prevents loss of water vapor .
Six Mil minimum white plastic sheeting over a layer of wet burlap or a wet curing blanket is a method of cure in which the loss of mixing water is minimized due to the tight nature of the cover .
Install the envelope in accordance with the following Overlap the plastic sheeting or burlap or curing blankets a minimum of inches at the seams to maintain a reasonably air tight seal .
Secure the edges of the sheeting by any means satisfactory to the Engineer to provide an airtight cover On vertical and overhead surfaces they should be held in this position by wire or rope fasteners .
They should be held in position on roadway and sidewalk slabs by holding down the burlap or blankets with sand or lumber at the joints and edges Place burlap or curing blankets in close contact with the concrete and add water as necessary to assure that the concrete surface is moist at all times and When using the curing blanket method over areas where reinforcement is exposed use one of the following methods a Place wet burlap or wet curing blankets in the exposed area drape plastic over the tops of the reinforcement and weigh down the plastic adjacent to the exposed areas or b Puncture the plastic sheeting and place it directly over the burlap or curing blankets with the reinforcement projecting through the plastic sheeting .
Do not allow the burlap or curing blankets to dry out during the curing period .
G .. c Wet Curing Method Cover the surface of the concrete with prewetted burlap as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to prevent marring the surface .
Presoak the burlap for a minimum of hours prior to placement .
Overlap the burlap a minimum of inches .
The Engineer will not allow the application of dry burlap and then sprayed down with water as an acceptable wet cure method .
Overlap spray with soaker hoses or sprinklers to keep all unformed surfaces continuously wet for the minimum curing period unless another curing method is used .
Use water for curing in accordance with Water for Concrete and Mortar .
Limit the amount of water applied to the amount that will keep the concrete wet without running sheets or streams .
If the concrete surface shows evidence of erosion by the curing water the Engineer will immediately suspend the spraying or fogging .
Remedy the conditions causing erosion or switch to another cure method that does not involve continuous wet cure .
If the national weather service forecast for the construction area predicts air temperatures to fall below F within the next hours suspend conventional wet curing and switch to another acceptable curing method .
G .. d Formed Curing Method When forms are left in direct contact with the concrete other curing methods are not required except for exposed surfaces and for cold weather protection .
Use another acceptable curing method if forms are removed prior to completion of the minimum curing period. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G. Curing Plan At least calendar days prior to any concrete placement provide a curing plan to the Engineer for acceptance in writing .
Submit a separate curing plan for the bridge deck in accordance with section .. F .. b and .. G .. A sample curing plan is available upon request .
Include the following information in the curing plan Curing Method for each element Method and frequency for verifying no surface drying is occurring Quality control persons names for ensuring cure is maintained according to curing plan Coverage rate tint color and dry film thickness for any membrane curing compounds Special surface finish manufacturer letter stating conditions for placing special surface finish over any membrane curing compounds products Method to maintain a minimum concrete surface temperature of F or greater during the curing period .
Action plan to restore surface temperature should the temperature drop below F If cold weather conditions are anticipated during the project submit a cold weather concrete protection in accordance with .. G. Protection Against Cold Weather and If it is anticipated that continuous curing will be interrupted for more than minutes include a table stating what expected weather conditions at time of form removal and applicable curing requirements are necessary to ensure a maximum evaporation rate of .lbsq fthr is not exceeded in accordance with figure and For each structural element complete the MnDOT Concrete Curing QC Form located at www.dot.state.mn.usbridgeconstruction .
Submit completed forms to the Engineer within seven calendar days of completing the structural element .
Failure to adhere to the Engineer accepted Contractors curing plan or observation of any surface drying during the curing period will result in a curing qualification period as follows For the next three concrete placements as determined by the Engineer of similar construction the forms are to remain in place for the minimum curing period and Once curing period is complete demonstrate the curing plan procedures in the presence of the Engineer prior to reinstating the curing plan on new work .
G. Protection Against Rain Protect the concrete from damage due to rain or snow .
Have available near the site of the work materials for protection of the edges and surface of the concrete .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until corrective action is taken and may subject the rain or snow damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Do not start concrete placement when it is raining or snowing .
G. Protection Against Cold Weather Protect the concrete in accordance with the Engineer accepted cold weather protection plan during the following periods October to April when working north of the th parallel and October to April when working south of the th parallel .
The Engineer will not permit the membrane curing method during the dates specified herein .
The Engineer will base anticipated concrete placement and curing temperatures on weather forecasts or on typical temperature data for the time of year at the location of the structure .
Preheat the forms inplace concrete reinforcement bars and items including the top flanges of beams to a minimum of F when the temperatures of these surface areas are below freezing before placing concrete .
Do not apply flames directly to concrete or steel .
Provide insulated forms insulation or heating and housing facilities to maintain a concrete surface temperature of between F and F during the curing period .
The Engineer may allow the concrete surface temperature of between F and F for concrete with strengths equal to or greater than psi .
Protect all exposed concrete surfaces within the heated enclosures from drying and carbonation throughout the curing period by using one of the acceptable curing methods Vent the heated enclosures to prevent the buildup of carbon dioxide or Ensure a reasonably uniform temperature throughout the enclosure .
Keep the forms insulation and housing enclosure in place until the completion of cold weather protection as defined in .. G Concrete Curing and Protection. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Gradually discontinue the use of cold weather protection so the rate of temperature reduction adjacent to the concrete surfaces does not exceed F during any h period until the surface temperature reaches the ambient air temperature .
G .. a Cold Weather Protection Plan Submit a proposed time schedule and written plans for cold weather protection of concrete to the Engineer for acceptance that provides provisions for adequately protecting the concrete during placement and curing .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer provides written acceptance of the cold weather protection plan .
G. Concrete Bridge Deck Curing and Protection G .. a Prior to Beginning Bridge Deck Concrete Placement The Engineer requires the Contractor to comply with all of the following conditions prior to allowing the Contractor to begin the bridge deck concrete placement Provide a National Weather Service www.weather.gov forecast to the Engineer three hours before the anticipated time of placement The Engineer will review the forecast with the Contractor to determine if the following conditions are met a Using Figure the predicted combination of air temperature relative humidity concrete temperature and wind velocity can not exceed an evaporation rate of .
pounds per square foot of surface area per hour b Less than chance of precipitation for the entire placement window and hours following expected completion. . Minnesota Standard Specifications FIGURE G .. b Curing Method The Contractor is fully responsible for curing methods .
Cure the concrete bridge deck in accordance with Table unless other methods are approved by the Engineer in writing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Required Curing Method Based on Final Bridge Deck Surface Bridge Deck Type Final Bridge Deck Surface Required Curing Method Bridge Structural Slab curing YHPCS YLCHPCS YS Low Slump Wearing Course Conventional wet curing after carpet drag Bridge Deck Slab curing YHPCM YLCHPCM YM Epoxy Chip Seal Wearing Course or Premixed Polymer Wearing Course Conventional wet curing after carpet drag Bridge Deck Planing Conventional wet curing after carpet drag Tined Texturing Conventional wet curing after tine texturing AMS curing Compound after wet cure period Finished Sidewalk or Trail Portion of Deck without separate pour above Conventional wet curing after applying transverse broom finish AMS curing Compound after wet cure period Prevent marring of broomed finish or tined textured surface by careful placement of wet curing .
Apply conventional wet curing to bridge slab following the concrete finishing .
Use conventional wet curing consisting of prewetted burlap covered with mil minimum white plastic sheeting in accordance with the following Place the burlap to cover percent of the deck area without visible openings Place the wet curing within min after final strikeoff of the concrete surface .
Failure to place the wet curing within min will constitute a Department monetary deduction of for every min period or any portion thereof after the initial time period until the wet curing is approved by the Engineer the Department may assess the deduction more than once Keep the slab surface continuously wet for an initial curing period of at least seven calendar days Use a work bridge to follow the finish machine and Provide an additional center rail on wide bridges if necessary .
After hours the Engineer may allow some modification of the requirement for continuous curing without interruption for the purpose of tying barrier reinforcement bars .
Restrict the interrupted area to within ft of the barrier .
Protect the concrete from freezing or excessive drying during the interruption period .
Resume curing at the earliest opportunity and cure until completion of the curing period .
Where marring of the broomed finish or tined texturing surface finish of Bridge Deck Slabs is a concern the Engineer may authorize curing as follows Apply a membrane curing compound meeting the requirements of PolyAlpha Methylsytrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound using an approved poweroperated sprayer .. G .. a Membrane Curing Method Provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage of membrane cure material on exposed concrete surfaces equal to a white sheet of paper Place the membrane cure within min of concrete placement unless otherwise directed by the Engineer Provide curing compound for moisture retention until the placement of conventional wet curing Apply conventional wet curing as soon as walking on the concrete will not produce imprints deeper than inch Keep the deck slab surface continuously wet for an initial curing period of at least seven calendar days and The Engineer will not allow placement of membrane curing compound on any concrete surface that will receive future placement of additional concrete or wearing course on that surface .
If the Contractor fails to meet these requirements the Department may reduce the contract unit price for the concrete item in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G .. c Bridge Superstructure Protection Against Cold Weather Protect the concrete against cold weather in accordance with .. G. Protection Against Cold Weather and the following Provide imbedded temperature sensors and monitoring devices for all bridge slabs .
Provide a minimum of two sensors and at least one additional sensor per sq .
ft of bridge slab .
G .. c Bridge Slabs Box Girder Bottom Slabs and Box Girder Webs Place and cure concrete in bridge slabs box girder bottom slabs and box girder webs in accordance with the following G .. c Ambient Air Temperatures below F If the Engineer anticipates air temperatures below F place concrete only after placing housing needed to heat the pour area and maintain required pour temperatures of at least F. G .. c Ambient Air Temperatures above F during Placement but below F during Curing When the air temperature is greater than F during placement but is anticipated to fall below F during curing do not place concrete until as much insulation or housing and heating are in as needed to protect the concrete from freezing .
The Contractor may install insulation and housing after completion of concrete finishing as approved in the cold weather protection plan if the insulation and housing hinders concrete placement .
G .. d Bridge Deck Slab Dry Out Period A dryout period is required for bridge deck slabs cast after October and opened to traffic prior to April of the following year .
For calendar days after removing the curing material or until April whichever comes first heat and provide housing to ensure free air circulation above the concrete surface to dry the concrete and prevent the temperature of the concrete from falling below F. G .. e Protection from premature loading Do not allow vehicles or equipment on the bridge slab until after completion of the curing period and minimum strength requirements of Table .
Reinforcement bar bundles or pallets may be placed on the bridge slab after hours provided the loading is not greater than lbs per square ft area .
After the curing period and prior to achieving deck design strength operate equipment at speeds less than mph to minimize shock waves .
Restrict mixer revolution to agitation speed while on the bridge slab .
Do not allow equipment with gross weight greater than tons on the bridge slab for box girder and slab span bridges prior to achieving deck design strength .
G .. f Bridge Deck Cold Weather Protection Plan Submit a proposed time schedule and plans for cold weather protection of the bridge deck in writing to the Engineer for acceptance that provides provisions for adequately protecting the concrete during placement and curing .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer accepts the cold weather protection plans .
H Slipforming of Bridge Barrier Instead of using conventional forming methods the Contractor may slipform concrete bridge barrier in accordance with the following requirements H. Reinforcement Bars Do not tack weld reinforcement bars .
Use additional reinforcement ties at rebar intersections to maintain the rigidity of the reinforcement bar cage .
Place reinforcement in accordance with Metal Reinforcement .
H. Concrete Mix Use S concrete mix design for slipformed barrier .
The Engineer will reject concrete with a slump greater than ¼ inch .
H. Construction Requirements Perform the following construction requirements Check the clear distance from the slipform template to the reinforcement bars in the presence of the Engineer .
During this check attach fill strips to the slipformer to detect areas of reinforcement bars that may encroach on the required concrete cover .
Perform this check for the full distance of the anticipated subsequent pour area less any areas of handformed barrier Scrub a thinned bonding grout into the deck surface and adjacent contact points immediately before slipforming barrier .
Keep the contact surfaces wet until the fresh concrete is placed on them Insert rigid plastic extrusion at control joints as per plan details before placing the curing materials If shown on the plans sawcut the top portion of the joint to the full depth within h of the concrete placement to a width of ⅜ inch .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Seal sawcut joints to a depth of at least inch with a silicone sealer listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List Conventionally form the ends of the barrier with the guardrail plate in place Conventionally form the barrier sections for a distance of at least ft on each side of areas that the slipform machine can not access Maintain the gutter line or barrier face location as shown on the plans .
The Contractor may increase the slab overhang by no greater than in and batter the outside of the barrier by no greater than inch Use either chamfer or radii strips at horizontal and vertical edges Place concrete into the work within minutes of batching when all admixtures are added at the plant at the Manufacturers recommended dosage rate listed on the Approved Products list Lightly broom in a texture on the barrier surface immediately after passage of the slipformer and Wet cure the barrier by applying conventional wet curing to the barrier immediately following the machine .
Use conventional wet curing consisting of prewetted burlap covered with separate white plastic sheeting or cover with prewetted polycoated burlap .
Place the burlap to cover percent of the barrier area without visible openings .
Place the wet curing within min after the machine completes the final strikeoff of the concrete surface .
If the Contractor fails to place the wet curing within min the Department will monetarily deduct for every min period or any portion thereof after the initial time period until the Contractor places the wet curing as approved by the Engineer .
The Department may assess the deduction more than once .
Keep the barrier surface continuously wet for an initial curing period of at least calendar days .
I Joint and Crack Sealing I .
Joint Sealing Place joint sealer material of the type as shown on the plans or special provisions in accordance with .. N Joint Sealing .
Complete concrete curing prior to installation of sealing materials .
A minimum of days drying is required prior to application of sealers .
Sawcut joints sandblast blow clean and ensure the concrete surfaces are dry at the time the sealer is installed .
Perform work as per manufacturers recommendations .
Construct preformed joints as detailed in the plans and in conformance with the following requirements .
Use bituminous felt that complies with AASHTO M modified to the extent that the load required to compress the test specimen to percent of its thickness before test be not more than psi .
Supply cork complying with Preformed Joint Fillers .
Supply polystyrene complying with the following Table Compressive Strength for Polystyrene Elements Type Compressive Strength min .
deflection Characteristics A High Density psi Closed Cell Expanded Polystyrene B Low Density psi Molded Polystyrene Test for compressive strength of polystyrene in accordance with ASTM D . Furnish evidence that the material meets these requirements if requested by the Engineer .
Seal construction joints and saw cuts in the deck curb face sidewalk and median with a concrete joint sealer listed on the ApprovedQualified List for Silicone Joint Sealants or in accordance with HotPoured Elastic Type Joint And Crack Sealer or HotPoured ExtraLow Modulus ElasticType Joint and Crack Sealer .
I .
Crack Sealing The Contractor is fully responsible for crack sealing all cracks identified by the Engineer in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Required Crack Sealing Requirements Based on Final Bridge Deck Surface Bridge Deck Type Final Bridge Deck Surface Crack Sealing Requirements Bridge structural slab YLCHPCS Low Slump Wearing Course Seal cracks in accordance with .. I .
Bridge deck slab for fulldepth decks YLCHPCM Epoxy Chip Seal Wearing Course or Premixed Polymer Wearing Course See wearing course special provision Bridge Deck Texture Planing Seal cracks in accordance with .. I .
after texture planing Tined Texturing Seal cracks in accordance with .. I .
Finished Sidewalk or Trail Portion of Deck without separate pour above Seal cracks in accordance with .. I .
Shotblast the surface in preparation for low slump wearing course .
Prior to placing the low slump wearing course the Engineer will visually inspect the bridge structural slab and will mark cracks that require sealing appearing on the top surface .
Control the application of the crack sealer such that the maximum width of crack sealant does not exceed inch .
If exceeding the permitted width of in remove excess by means of surface grinding to prevent debonding of concrete wearing course .
The Engineer requires the sealer to cure completely prior to prewetting of the deck as required for placement of a low slump concrete wearing course .
The Engineer will visually inspect the bridge deck slab including decks of pedestrian bridges and will mark cracks that require sealing appearing on the top surface of the slabs .
Seal cracks with a bridge surface and crack sealer listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Apply the sealer as recommended by the manufacturer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Structural Concrete The Engineer will separately measure each grade or mix of structural concrete based on the dimensions shown on the plans .
If measuring bridge slab concrete by area the Engineer will base the measurement on endofslab stationing and outtoout transverse dimensions of the slab .
If measuring sidewalk concrete by area the Engineer will base the measurement on the endtoend bridge dimension along the centerline of the sidewalk and the overall width of the sidewalk block .
If measuring raised median concrete by area the Engineer will base the measurement on the endtoend slab dimension and overall width of the median .
The Engineer will base the measurement of median barrier concrete on the endtoend slab dimensions .
The Engineer will measure concrete barriers or concrete bases for metal railing based on the horizontal lengths between the outside end faces of barriers or end posts .
The Engineer will not deduct for the volumes of concrete displaced by metal reinforcement structural steel sections floor drains conduits pile headers chamfer strips with side dimensions no greater than in or for variations in camber and deflections as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will not increase concrete quantity measurements for extra concrete used to secure true conformity of the elevation profile and cross section in the finished roadway slab as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will consider floor thickness as the thickness shown on the plans as the minimum thickness unless the plans show other dimensions .
The Engineer will not include concrete for keyways in quantity computations .
B Metal Reinforcement .
C Structure Excavation If the plans show separate items for one or more classes of structure excavation the Department will classify the excavation in accordance with .. B .
Types and the Engineer will measure the excavation in accordance with .. A Structure Excavation for castinplace structures. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Granular Material B .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for structural concrete of each grade mix includes the cost of constructing the bridge structure complete in place except for costs with a separate contract unit price as shown on the plans .
If the Contractor elects to pour the concrete end diaphragms with the bridge slab using the same concrete mix for the diaphragms as used for the slab the Department will pay the Contract bid price for end diaphragm concrete and will not pay for the end diaphragm concrete using the relevant contract unit price for the bridge slab concrete .
The contract pound prices for Reinforcement Bars Steel Fabric and Spiral Reinforcement includes the costs of providing fabricating delivering and placing the metal reinforcement .
The contract pound price for Reinforcement Bars Delivered includes the cost of providing fabricating and delivering the material .
The contract pound price for Reinforcement Bars Placed includes the costs of placing the material in the structure as specified .
The Department will pay for structure excavation soil bearing tests and backfill materials in accordance with .
Basis of Payment Structure Excavations and Backfills .
The Department contract unit price for the relevant concrete bridge construction contract item includes the cost of providing and placing joint sealer and crack sealer .
The Department will pay for concrete bridge construction on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Type ___ Barrier Concrete Mix No .
linear foot .
___ Median Barrier Concrete Mix No .
linear foot .
Structural Concrete Mix No .
cubic yard .
Structure Excavation Class ___ cubic yard .
Reinforcement Bars Delivered pound .
Reinforcement Bars Placed pound .
Reinforcement Bars ___ pound .
Steel Fabric ___ pound .
Spiral Reinforcement pound .
Structural Concrete Mix No .
square foot .
Bridge Slab Concrete Mix No .
square foot .
Sidewalk Concrete Mix No .
square foot .
Raised Median Concrete Mix No .
square foot STEEL BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of the erection of those portions of bridges and structures that are made of structural steel and miscellaneous metals. . MATERIALS A Structural Metals B Anchor Rods C High Strength Bolts Direct Tension Indicators and Pin Bolts D Elastomeric Bearing Pads .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General A .
Structural Steel Components of Concrete Bridges A .
Steel Piling .
Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Assembly Assemble bridge components in accordance with the match markings and erection plans using procedures outlined in the contract .
If the contract does not specify assembly procedures assemble in accordance with recognized practices .
B Handling and Storage of Materials B .
Structural Steel Store girders and beams in an upright position .
Keep materials clean dry and in a properly drained area .
Cover and shelter members that will be stored for greater than months and provide for air circulation around the members .
B .
High Strength Fasteners Fasteners include but are not limited to bolts nuts washers and DTIs .
Store fasteners in sealed waterproof containers .
Locate the containers in an enclosed structure that is protected from the elements .
Submit a fastener storage plan to the Engineer at least calendar days prior to delivery of fasteners .
In the plan identify where fasteners will be stored how fastener condition will be quality controlled and what measures will be used to prevent corrosion .
Notify the Engineer when shipments of fasteners arrive on the jobsite .
For any work shift remove from storage only the number of fasteners required for that shift .
At the end of the work day return all fasteners not installed to suitable storage .
Before installation ensure fasteners meet asmanufactured condition or requalified in accordance with Section of the RCSC Specification for Structural Joints Using HighStrength Bolts .
C Straightening Bent Materials Straighten plates angles and other shapes using methods that will not fracture or damage the metal .
Do not heat the metal unless allowed by the Engineer in conjunction with the Structural Metals Engineer .
If allowed and before performing any straightening operations submit a straightening procedure to the Engineer for review and approval by the Structural Metals Engineer .
Do not heat metal to temperatures greater than F. After heating and straightening allow the metal to slowly cool before inspecting for evidence of fracture or other damage .
Repair galvanized and metallized coating in accordance with Structural Metals .
D Falsework Design and Construction At least six weeks before starting construction of the structural steel erection falsework provide the Engineer with three copies of the detailed plans and specifications and two copies of the associated calculations for the proposed system to construct the falsework .
Design the falsework to meet the requirements of AASHTO Guide Design Specifications for Bridge Temporary Works and AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges .
Have the falsework plans and specifications prepared by a Professional Engineer checked by a second Professional Engineer for completeness and accuracy and certified by one of the aforementioned Professional Engineers licensed in the State of Minnesota .
Ensure the documents include details to allow the construction of the proposed system by reference to the plans and specifications only .
Show the design criteria on the first sheet of the plans .
Provide the following in the falsework plans as a minimum The size of loadsupporting members and transverse and longitudinal bracing Connection details for loadsupporting members Designcontrolling dimensions including the following .
Beam length and spacing .
Post location and spacing .
Overall height of falsework bents .
Vertical distance between connectors in diagonal bracing and .
Other dimensions critical to the design .
The location and method used to adjust falsework to final grade as specified in the Plan .
Do not erect the structural steel until meeting the following requirements Provide the Engineer with plans and specifications meeting the above requirements and The Professional Engineer certifying the falsework plans and specifications has inspected the falsework after erection and has provided written certification to the Engineer stating the asconstructed falsework is approved for use .
Provide timber meeting the following requirements for falsework piles or members Sound wood .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Straight and Good condition .
Provide straight steel members of adequate strength for the intended use .
Maintain the falsework in place until after permanent bolting of the field connection is complete and the Professional Engineer certifying the falsework erection approves the release of falsework supports .
Remove falsework in accordance with Concrete Bridge Construction .
Except for attachment of screed rail support pipes do not weld on primary stresscarrying members of the bridge structure to fasten appurtenances not shown on the plans or on the approved detail drawings .
The Contractor may weld screed rail support pipes to the top flange with ¼ inch longitudinal fillet welds no greater than inches long .
Do not weld in the negative moment area as shown on the plans as Area A of the top flange of primary stresscarrying members of the bridge structure .
Prepare the base metal and weld during ambient weather conditions in accordance with .. F Structural Welding .
E Preparation and Erection Refer to .. F .. b Preparation of Bridge Seats and associated special provisions for bearing seat tolerances and corrections .
Immediately before assembly remove temporary protective coatings from pins and pin holes and clean the contact surfaces at connections of foreign matter .
Clean the contact area between pins and bushings to bare metal for pin holes provided with bronze bushings before assembling .
Paint surfaces inaccessible after erection as required before fitup .
F Field FitUp F. Erection Plans Stability and Safety Erect structural steel members in a manner that will provide safety to the workers inspectors and the public at all time and without damaging the steel members .
Temporarily anchor brace and stabilize primary members such as beams and girders as erected to prevent sliding tipping buckling or other movement before placing diaphragms .
If the plans show active vehicular or railroad traffic to travel beneath beams before the complete erection of the beams and diaphragms in a span submit an erection plan to the Engineer detailing the temporary works required to brace and stabilize beams .
Have the erection plan prepared by a Professional Engineer checked by a second Professional Engineer for completeness and accuracy and certified by one of the Professional Engineers .
The erection plan will specify the required bolt tension and the numbers of bolts to install in permanent diaphragm connections and in bracing to stabilize the beam .
Use struts bracing tie cables and other devices used for temporary restraint of a size and strength capable of withstanding the stresses developed .
Erect and brace at least two adjacent beams or girders including diaphragms and fully tightened bolts in any one span before suspending operations for the day .
F. Assembly A primary member is defined as any member that carries the primary stresses of the structure .
Beams and girders are always primary members unless otherwise noted .
When the contract requires full assembly cross frames and diaphragms are then considered primary members .
Erect primary members using at least pins and snug tight erection bolts in connections to other primary members .
During erection of steel structures the timeframe for when permanent bolting may begin changes with various situations .
The structure type how it was fabricated and the means and methods utilized during erection all affect this requirement .
Fabrication utilizes either line assembly or full assembly practices to position locate and build structural bolted connections .
F .. a Permanent Bolting Line Assembly The Department defines line assembly as the method by which the structure was fabricated building the structure one girder line at a time .
It identifies that the structure has had the girder splices drilled with standard size holes in a no load condition .
It also identifies that all secondary transverse members e.g .
diaphragms are connected with oversize holes and have not been subject to preassembly .
When the contract requires line assembly do not start permanent bolting of diaphragms to lateral bracing until For simple spans two adjacent lines are installed. . Minnesota Standard Specifications For continuous spans girder lines are supported by three points of bearing and all girder field splices are completed on both lines in the adjacent spans .
Temporary shoring with elevation adjusted to asdrilled elevation is an eligible point of bearing for erection purposes .
See Figure .a below for conceptual illustration of requirements prior to permanent bolting .
Figure .a Plan view showing framing fabricated in Line Assembly and erection requirements prior to Permanent Bolting without shoring towers F .. b Permanent Bolting Full Assembly The Department defines full assembly as the method by which the structure was fabricated .
It identifies that the structure has had all holes including transverse members drilled standard size in a no load assembled condition .
Field erection practices are required to erect the steel in a manner consistent with how it was fabricated and not induce secondary stresses .
When the contract requires full assembly do not start permanent bolting of diaphragms to lateral bracing until For simple spans all girder lines have been erected For continuous spans girder lines are supported by at least three points of bearing all girders in the span are erected and all field splices are completed in the spans immediately adjacent to the span in question and See Figure .b below for conceptual illustration of requirements prior to permanent bolting without the use of shoring towers .
Figure .b Plan view showing framing fabricated in Full Assembly and erection requirements prior to Permanent Bolting without shoring towers .
Minnesota Standard Specifications F .. c Permanent Bolting With shoring towers An exception to the requirements in F .. a and F .. b is allowed where shoring towers are used without interruption to correct alignment camber grade and skew .
Shoring towers that are fully supporting the members in the noload position allow permanent bolting before all girders in the span are erected .
Field elevation of shoring tower shall be adjusted to the as drilled condition which takes into account the shop blocking elevations and any vertical tolerances used in the fabrication assembly .
For this exception permanent bolting may begin when both girder lines are supported at three permanent bearing points and field splices are completed on both lines of the adjacent span s. See Figure c below for conceptual illustration of requirements prior to permanent bolting with the use of shoring towers .
Figure .c Plan view showing framing fabricated in Full or Line Assembly and erection requirements prior to Permanent Bolting with shoring towers F .. d Ground Splices The Engineer may allow permanent bolting of field splices in beams for continuous spans on the ground before full assembly of adjacent spans provided the beams to be spliced are positioned on firmly supported blocking at ¼ points of each girder then adjusted and surveyed to confirm the alignment camber grade and skew match those established in the fabrication .
Before setting beams for ground splicing present the survey results to the engineer confirming blocking matches the fabricated condition .
Pin ground spliced beams with at least pins and snug tight bolts and present to the Engineer before permanent bolting .
Primary member splice connections that are made up on the ground before erection shall be fully tensioned and inspected in the noload condition prior to any lifting operation .
F. Pinning and Bolting For purposes of this provision bolt types are defined as follows Permanent bolts are placed prior to placing the concrete deck and fully tensioned per .. G. Connections using high strength bolts .
These bolts are used to maintain both final geometry and strength of the connection throughout the service life of the bridge .
Erection bolts are used to hold connecting members in snug tight contact and in correct position during all bolting operations in conjunction with erection pins .
These bolts should be the same diameter as the permanent bolts .
Installation bolts are used to hold the pieces of the connection prior to installing erection pins and can not be used in the permanent connection .
Permanent bolts may be used as erection bolts provided they remain in a condition matching the asmanufactured condition and have not been previously tensioned .
ASTM F Grade A bolts may be retightened in the original location once provided the bolt shows no evidence of permanent elongation and a nut can easily be spun up to the shank of the bolt .
Provide erection bolts in the same diameter as the permanent connectors .
Do not use erection pins larger than the diameter of the hole or smaller than the hole diameter minus .
inches .
Use erection washers with erection bolts .
Pins are considered effective for load transfer and geometry control and erection bolts for maintaining tight steel .
Snug tight is defined as the minimal use of an impact wrench or the full effort of an adult using an ordinary spud wrench to bring all plies of the connection together in firm contact .
The term snug tight is interchangeable with the field term of tight .
Minnesota Standard Specifications steel .
Prior to beginning permanent bolting use enough bolts tightened to a snug tight condition to bring all parts of the joint into full contact .
Use the following pinning and bolting sequence on all primary stresscarrying members for establishing the assembled connection Install a minimum number of installation bolts to hold the pieces of the connection together during pin installation .
Tension of installation bolts must not restrict alignment of the connection Install erection pins in of the total number of holes in the connection .
Balance the distribution of the pins throughout the connection .
With regard to load transfer a portion of pins may be substituted with erection bolts under the following conditions a .
The Erection Engineer who is a Minnesota registered Professional Engineer submits signed calculations to the Engineer demonstrating the connection forces during erection may be sustained by the proposed number of pins or be resisted in slip by prescribed number of tensioned erection bolts b .
All written comments to the calculations are addressed to the satisfaction of the Engineer and c. This exception does not eliminate the need for some amount of pins for the purpose of geometry control .
Install erection bolts in a minimum of of the total number of holes in the connection .
Balance the distribution of the bolts throughout the connection .
Tighten the erection bolts to a snug tight condition .
Shipping bolts and installation bolts dont count toward the erection bolt percentage requirement Where required by the Erection Engineer and authorized by the Engineer tension erection bolts necessary to sustain connection slip resistance .
When live loads are carried during erection use additional bolts and erection pins to compensate for the additional loads and Remove installation bolts installed in step .
Check bearing plates and assemblies for contact before placing the permanent connectors .
Correct deviations from full bearing between parts or between the bridge seat and the bearing plates as approved by the Engineer .
Readjust diaphragms cross frames or splice plates if required to correct deviations .
For extreme deviations the Engineer may direct recambering or other refabrication procedures .
The Contractor may use properly shaped and sized fills or shims to correct minor deviations as approved by the Engineer .
Make adjustments to erected sections prior to permanent bolting to meet the following requirements Maximum deviation from Plan horizontal alignment is inch x total length along the girder in feet between supports .
Shift the spans if required to correct for alignment skew and proper anchorage and expansion device locations and Maximum deviation from Plan camber elevation is inch inch x total length in feet from the nearest support .
Modify camber and field splice plan elevations to account for asbuilt bearing seat elevation as necessary .
The Contractor will survey the top of beams at the centerline of bearing and centerline of field splice locations .
Provide an electronic copy of the X and Y coordinates and elevations to the Engineer .
The Engineer will review the survey prior to authorizing permanent bolting .
Permanent bolting will be authorized after the Contractor meets the erection tolerances and has addressed all written comments by the Engineer .
Proceed with permanent bolting at any primary member connection as follows Install permanent connectors in open connection holes .
Tighten the permanent connectors in accordance with .. G .. c Tighten bolts systematically working from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges in a manner that will minimize relaxation of previously tightened bolts Tighten fasteners by holding the head of the bolt and turning the nut and Remove pins and any erection bolts not qualified as permanent connectors individually .
After removal of an erection pin or erection bolt replace with a permanent connector and tension before continuing .
Where DTIs are used perform quality control on permanent bolt tensioning before presenting to the Engineer for final inspection .
Perform permanent connector tensioning within days after initial installation as exposure to the elements affects their rotational capacity test characteristics .
Permanent connectors installed for more than days or if exposure has affected the rotational capacity test characteristics of the assembly the permanent connectors will need to be removed and relubricated .
New Rotational Capacity tests will need to be performed on each lot combination of relubricated bolt assemblies .
F. Pin Assemblies Before assembling pins coat pins and pinholes including pinholes with bronze bushings with a Bridge Grease as listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Draw pin nuts tight except for pin nuts with cotter keys .
Upset the exposed thread at the face of the nut by center punching to prevent back off .
If tightening pin nuts with cotter keys ensure the cotter key can be freely inserted and the pin is free to turn without binding under the Lomas nut .
F. Construction Elevations After all permanent connections have been tensioned and inspected in accordance with .. G .. d Inspection take elevations at top of beams under steel dead load only deflections .
Take elevations at five foot increments along the centerline of the beam starting at each centerline of bearing and proceeding up station .
Restart five foot increment at each centerline of bearing for continuous spans .
Allow for total dead load deflections as shown in the Plan to enable building forms to the correct grade and specified slab thickness .
Provide a copy of the elevations to the Engineer .
For long multiple span continuous bridges the Contractor may request in writing to take elevations prior to tensioning and inspection of all permanent connections .
Provide the Engineer with the following items Certified plans and specifications for the erection sequence Calculations to verify strength stability and deflections at tenth points and field section ends for each stage of the erection sequence and Designer should work with Bridge Construction Engineer to develop any additional deliverables required .
G Connections Connections including fill plates and shims must be clean and undamaged so as not to impact the design slip criteria .
Do not damage paint and maintain the appropriate thickness to meet compliance for the designed slip coefficient .
Unless the contract requires or the Engineer approves otherwise provide field connections made with high strength bolts or pin bolts .
G. Welded Connections Weld field connections in accordance with Structural Metals .
G. Connections Using High Strength Bolts G .. a General Install bolts with heads outward for the webs of fascia girders .
Install bolts with heads downward for the flanges of beams and girders spanning highways streets roadways and walkways .
G .. b Bolted Parts Ensure the slope of surfaces of bolted parts in contact with the bolt head and nut is no greater than with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
Assemble bolted parts to fit solidly together .
Do not separate bolted parts by gaskets or other interposed compressible material .
Assemble joint surfaces including those adjacent to the bolt heads nuts or washers free of the following Scale except tight mill scale Dirt Loose scale Burrs Other foreign material and Other defects preventing solid seating of the parts .
Ensure contact surfaces of frictiontype joints are free of coating materials such as oil galvanizing and rust inhibitors .
G .. c Installation G .. c Bolt Tension Clean contaminants and corrosion from the threaded portions of bolts and nuts before installing .
Lubricate and dye nuts in accordance with Fasteners .
Use the turnofnut or direct tension indicator method to tighten nuts on threaded bolts .
If using impact wrenches provide wrenches capable of performing the required tightening of each bolt in seconds .
Tighten each fastener to provide the minimum bolt tension shown in Table when all fasteners in the joint are tight .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Bolt Tension Bolt Size inch Minimum Tension Kips ¾ ⅞ ⅛ ¼ Equal to the proof load meeting the requirements of the length measurement method in ASTM F G .. c Washers Provide fasteners with a hardened washer placed under the nut or bolt head being turned during tightening .
Provide high strength bolts with a hardened washer under the bolt head and the nut if used in conjunction with full sized punched holes .
If an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope greater than with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis use a smooth beveled washer to compensate for the lack of parallelism .
G .. c Direct Tension Indicator DTI Tightening When using DTIs to provide the minimum bolt tensions in Table install the indicators including snug tight fitup as recommended by the manufacturer except for the following Insert a hardened flat washer between the DTI and fastener if bolting through a shortslotted or oversized hole in accordance with .. H .. a Line Assembly If installing a DTI under the turned element use a hardened washer to separate the turned element from the DTI meeting the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specification Provide compressible washertype indicators meeting the requirements of ASTM F and Inspect DTIs as recommended by the manufacturer except as modified in G .. d. G .. c TurnofNut Tightening The Department defines snug tight as the minimal use of an impact wrench or the full effort of an adult using an ordinary spud wrench to bring all plies of the connection together in firm contact .
Use enough bolts tightened to a snug tight condition to bring all parts of the joint into full contact .
Complete the initial operation in accordance with .. F Field Fitup .
Place bolts in the remaining holes in the connection and snug tight .
Match mark and additionally tighten nuts and bolts by the amount of nut rotation specified in this section and progress with tightening systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
Do not rotate the part not turned by the wrench .
For coarse thread heavy hexagon structural bolts and heavy hexagon semifinished nuts rotate nuts from snug tight condition in accordance with the following If both faces are normal to bolt axis with or without use of beveled washers rotate nuts ⅓ turn for bolt lengths no greater than diameters ½ turn for bolt lengths greater than diameters to diameters and ⅔ turn for bolt lengths greater than diameters to diameters .
If one face is normal and the other is sloped no greater than beveled washers not used rotate nuts ½ turn for bolt lengths no greater than diameters ⅔ turn for bolt lengths greater than diameters to diameters and turn for bolt lengths greater than diameters to diameters .
If both faces are sloped no greater than beveled washers not used rotate nuts ⅔ turn for bolt lengths no greater than diameters turn for bolt diameters from diameters to diameters and turn for bolt lengths from diameters to diameters .
Measure bolt length from the underside of head to extreme end of the bolt .
Measure nut rotation as relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
Rotate nuts within the allowable tolerance of turn over and zero rotation under the rotation specified in list items and above .
G .. d Inspection The Engineer will observe the installation and tightening of bolts to determine that the tightening procedure and bolt tightening tensions comply with the requirements in this section .
The Engineer will inspect the bolt tension in accordance with the following procedure unless otherwise specified G .. d Calibration of Inspection Wrench Provide a manual inspection wrench calibrated in accordance with the following Test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
Test assemblies per combination .
Individually place bolts of the same grade size and condition as the bolts under inspection in a calibration device i.e .
Skidmore .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Willhelm capable of indicating bolt tension .
Place a washer under the part turned in tightening each bolt .
Provide test bolts in the same length as the bolts used in the structure .
Tighten each test bolt in the calibration device to an initial condition equal to percent of the specified bolt tension and then to the minimum tension specified for its size in accordance with Table Bolt Tension .
Apply the inspecting wrench to the tightened bolt and turn the nut or head degrees or inch at inch radius in the tightening direction .
Measure the torque applied .
Average the torque as measured in the tests of bolts and use this jobinspecting torque in accordance with .. G .. d Inspection Procedure for Direct Tension Indicators DTI .
Provide the inspection wrench and the bolt tensionindicating device as specified in this section .
Allow the Engineer to witness the prescribed calibration tests .
During calibration in accordance with .. G .. d ensure the bolt and nut withstand rotation to two times the number of turns as specified in .. G .. c TurnofNut Tightening without showing visible evidence of stripping the threads or failure of the bolt or nut .
G .. d Inspection Procedure for Calibrated Wrench At the Engineer option either the Engineer or the Contractor in the Engineers presence may operate the inspecting wrench as follows Inspect the tightened bolts in the structure by applying in the tightened direction the inspecting wrench and its jobinspecting torque to a randomly selected percent of the bolts or at least bolts in each connection .
Accept connections as properly tightened if nut or bolt heads do not turn when applying the jobinspecting torque as indicated in item above .
If a nut or bolt head turns during the application of jobinspecting torque apply the jobinspecting torque to all bolts in the connection .
Retighten and reinspect nuts or bolt heads turned by the jobinspecting torque .
The Contractor may retighten the bolts in the connection and resubmit the connection for the specified inspection procedure .
G .. d Inspection Procedure for Direct Tension Indicators DTI Check the performance of the DTIs in the field before bolting .
Use the gap between the protrusions to indicate the tension in the bolt .
Furnish the Engineer with one feeler gauge per DTIs prior to commencing bolting .
Notify the Engineer after the completion of each activity Initial snugging Final tightening and Verification checks .
Provide accommodation for the Engineer to check DTIs at any time during or after completion of snugging or final tightening .
Department personnel will not be required to accompany the Contractor during tightening .
At the Engineers option either the Engineer or the Contractor in the Engineers presence may operate the tapered leaf thickness feeler gauge within the procedures below .
Use the following procedure for inspection of bolting operations with DTIs An initial visual inspection of the DTIs after the bolts are snug tight .
Remove and replace DTIs completely crushed during snugging Ensure the DTI protrusions are oriented away from the steel member surfaces After pretensioning place a feeler gauge into a randomly selected percent of the DTIs and at least DTIs in each connection to inspect the tightened bolts in the structure .
Measure the gap between the washer and the bolt head in the spaces between the protrusions using the .
inch tapered leaf thickness feeler gauge .
Inspect the DTIs as recommended by the manufacturer with the exception of a minimum of entry by the feeler gauge shall be satisfied .
Do not tighten DTIs beyond crushing of the protrusion .
The number of inspected DTIs will increase at a rate of ten times the number of failures up to inspection If the feeler gauge can be inserted into more than onehalf of the spaces between the protrusions of a DTI retighten the bolt and retest .
There is no allowance for DTIs not satisfying the inspection requirements of DTIs as recommended by the manufacturer except as modified in condition above and If the feeler gauge can not be inserted into any of the spaces between the protrusions of more than percent of DTI in an individual connection during the inspection replace the affected bolts until less than percent of all DTIs in the connection satisfy condition above .
Bolts satisfying all of the following conditions do not count towards the percent allowance The bolt is subsequently tightened in the presence of the Engineer The bolt shows no evidence of extensive elongation or fully crushing all the protrusions. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G. Connections Using Pin Bolts Install pin bolts in accordance with .. G .. a Connections Using High Strength Bolts General .. G .. b Bolted Parts and the following Provide a special tool capable of the following to drive the pin bolts Partial swaging of the collars to allow for adjustment during erection when pinning and bolting the work Producing the required tension in the bolt Swaging the collar into the annular locking grooves and Forming the collar into the size and shape recommended by the manufacturer before the pin tail breaks .
Provide a device capable of indicating the actual bolt tension to test the pin bolts before use .
Provide at least typical bolts of each size and length for tests from the supply of bolts used in the work .
Test other bolts during the bolting operation as directed by the Engineer .
Use the same installation tool used for tightening and swaging the bolts for the field connections to apply tension in the bolts during the testing procedures .
Recover the expendable pin tails from the driving tool as the pin tails break from the bolt .
Do not allow expendable pin tails from the driving tool to drop and create hazards .
Obtain the Engineers approval of the testing and installation procedures for pin bolts .
H Setting Anchor Bolts Unless the contract requires otherwise drill holes for anchor bolts to the diameter and depth shown on the plans .
Accurately set and fix the bolts with portland cement grout that completely fills the holes .
During freezing weather the Contractor may use other products as approved by the Engineer to set and fix the bolts .
Set nuts for anchor bolts as shown on the plans and provide for clearance where required .
Center punch the bolt thread at the face of the nuts to upset the thread and prevent backoff .
Use templates to accurately set anchor bolts at the proper location and elevation that are to be cast in the concrete .
I Blank J Bearing Assemblies and Hangers Plumb rocker bearings and hangers at F. Consider elongation resulting from total load deflection when setting these devices .
K Expansion Joint Devices Provide expansion joint devices by the type shown on the plans as given in the item name .
The type number identifies the required minimum movement capability in inches of the device as installed .
The maximum movement capability of the joint device as installed may range up to percent greater than the specified minimum .
Provide shop detail drawings for expansion joint devices in accordance with .. B Shop Detail Drawings .
Include detailed instructions for installation and tabulated joint openings for the various temperatures shown on the plans .
The Contractor may use joint devices with movement capability greater than percent of the specified minimum if the joint devices meet the functional requirements and the shop drawings indicate the sizes proposed .
Provide steel components of expansion devices in lengths that will facilitate installation under roadway and traffic conditions existing during placement .
Do not splice in the gland except at tee intersections requiring vulcanized splices .
Provide smooth faced welded gutter sections at the grip surface .
Galvanize structural steel surfaces of the expansion devices including anchorages after manufacture in accordance with Galvanized Structural Shapes .
Provide bolts for roadway sections of the expansion devices that meet the Type requirements in .. E Stainless Steel Bolts .
Provide bolts for curb sidewalk median and barrier cover plates that meet the Type requirements in .. E Stainless Steel Bolts or galvanize in accordance with Galvanized Hardware .
Straighten steel extrusions and roadway plates after galvanizing to a tolerance of ⅛ inch in ft .
Install expansion devices in accordance with the shop drawings and as directed by the Engineer .
Remove jointforming material from the joint opening .
Provide a watertight expansion joint installation .
Test the watertight quality of the complete expansion joint installation at all points by filling the joint opening or portions thereof with water as directed by the Engineer then observe the test for hour. . Minnesota Standard Specifications L Field Painting After completing the erection work clean and paint structural metals in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System or Inorganic ZincRich Paint System whichever is applicable . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure structural metals placed in bridges or other structures by weight length area or unit complete in place .
A Weight The Engineer will calculate the weight of all structural steel shapes structural steel plates steel sheets and steel bars based on the net finished dimensions as shown on the plans using the theoretical density of lb .
per cu .
ft .
The Engineer will not make allowances for the fabrication of girder cambers haunches and sweeps or for the machining of surfaces .
The Engineer will not make deductions for open holes and incidental bevels or chamfers .
The Engineer will increase the summation of the weights of structural steel exclusive of steel piling by .
percent to compensate for incidental metals such as the following Permanent bolts no greater than inches long Shop or field high strength bolts Field shims Weld metal deposits Extra material used to make weld procedure tests Shop galvanizing Metallizing and Overruns etc .
for which the Engineer does not make measurements .
The Engineer will calculate the weight of bolts greater than inches long and tie rods used for connecting structural steel parts including nuts and washers from the nominal weight shown in the AISC Manual of Steel Construction .
The Engineer will include this weight with the measurement of structural steel .
The Engineer will calculate the weight of nonincidental metals other than steel using the theoretical densities shown in the AISC Manual of Steel Construction using the above measurement limitations except the Engineer will not measure the weight of bolts nuts rivets washers used in the fabrication and erection and will not apply a percentage increase to the weight .
B Length B .
Metal Railing Unless otherwise shown on the plans the Engineer will measure the length based on the sum of the lengths of the various sections as shown on the plans and as measured at the base of the rail .
B .
Pipe Unless otherwise shown on the plans the Engineer will measure the length based on the sum of the lengths of all the runs measured on the centerline of the pipe and fittings .
B .
Expansion Joint Devices The Engineer will measure expansion joint devices of each type by length based on the outtoout distance along the centerline of each expansion device .
B .
Other Items The Engineer will base linear measurement of items not specifically covered herein between the limits as shown on the plans .
C Area The Engineer will measure the area based on the net finished dimensions unless otherwise shown on the plans .
The Engineer will not make deductions for open holes .
D Complete Unit The Engineer will include the component parts in the measurement of the complete assembly of a unit . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for the specific structural steel item includes the cost of temporary support and restraint in accordance with .. F Field Fitup .
The contract unit price for structural metals includes the weight of all structural metals in a single total .
The contract unit price for Furnishing Structural Steel Spec .
No .
includes the cost of providing and fabricating in accordance with Structural Metals surface preparation and shop coat painting in accordance with Organic ZincRich .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Paint System or Inorganic ZincRich Paint System unless otherwise required by the contract and delivering the materials to the project site .
The contract unit price for Erecting Structural Metals includes the cost of erecting the structural metals complete in place and if the plans do not include a contract pay item for field coat painting the cost of field coat painting .
The contract unit price for Structural Steel Spec .
No .
includes the cost of providing and fabricating in accordance with Structural Metals surface preparation and shop coat painting in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System or Inorganic ZincRich Paint System unless otherwise required by the contract delivering the materials to the project site and erecting the materials .
The contract unit price for metal railings includes the cost of coating metal posts fittings castings anchor bolts and accessories required for erection .
The contract unit price for Expansion Joint Devices Type ___ includes the cost of providing and installing the devices complete in place including curb sidewalk median barrier sections cover plates and waterproof glands .
The contract unit price for Elastomeric Bearing Pad Type ___ and Elastomeric Bearing Assembly Type ___ includes the cost of providing and installing the pads or assemblies complete in place .
The Department will pay for steel bridge construction on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Floor Drain Type ___ each .
Elastomeric Bearing Pad Type ___ each .
Elastomeric Bearing Assembly Type ___ each .
___ Bearing Assembly each .
Ornamental Metal Railing ___ linear foot .
Structural Tube Railing Design ___ linear foot .
Pipe Railing linear foot .
Plate Railing linear foot .
Expansion Joint Devices Type ___ linear foot .
Rigid Steel Conduit pound .
Metal Pipe Spec .
No .
pound .
Sheet Metal Spec .
No .
pound .
Structural Steel Spec .
No .
pound .
Furnishing Structural Steel Spec .
No .
pound .
Erecting Structural Metals pound WOOD BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing wood bridge structures or portions of bridge structures made of timber and lumber. . MATERIALS A Structural Wood Components A .
Component Grading and Symbol Designations Provide stressrated timber and lumber in accordance with Structural Wood for the grade specified .
Provide lumber for laminating meeting the following requirements Graded in accordance with Structural Wood Allowable working stress base resistance or both values as required by the contract and Meeting the requirements of ANSIAITC A .
A .
Timber Piling A .
Other Lumber B Preservative Treatment Provide wood treated with preservative in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products unless otherwise required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Adhesives Provide adhesives meeting the requirements for wetuse waterproof in accordance with ANSIAITC A . and AITC .
D Dowels Provide dowels made of hot rolled steel in accordance with LowCarbon Structural Steel and galvanized in accordance with Galvanized Structural Shapes .
E Blank F Plank for Laminated Floors Provide plank strips for laminated floors surfaced on one side to a uniform thickness no greater than inches SIS .
Unless the plans show otherwise the Department will not require surfacing to a uniform width .
Provide percent of the strips at least ft long .
Use strips at least ft long except to fill skews .
Provide strips in variable lengths to ensure joints on one stringer are no closer than each third strip .
G Blank H Railings Provide timber and lumber for railings free from blemishes that detract from the appearance of the finished work .
Surface timber and lumber for railings on four sides SS .
I Blank J Hardware Galvanize hardware including nails spikes and wood connectors after fabrication in accordance with Galvanized Hardware .
Provide bolts in accordance with .. C Bolts for Wood Construction unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Provide drift bolts with countersunk heads and chisel points lag screws and rods in accordance with LowCarbon Structural Steel for incidental items .
Provide properly proportioned plate washers to develop the full strength of the bolt .
Provide round washers with diameters and square washers with side dimensions at least .
times the diameter of the bolt and with a thickness of at least onehalf the diameter of the bolt unless otherwise shown on the plans .
The Contractor may cut washers for bolts no greater than ½ inch in diameter from medium steel plate .
Provide wood connectors of standard manufactured products in the size and type as shown on the plans. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Cutting and Framing Cut frame and bore treated wood before treatment .
Drive nails and spikes to set the heads flush with the surface of the wood .
The Engineer may reject wood pieces or members with deep or frequent hammer marks in exposed wood surfaces .
B Blank C Handling and Storage Handle transport and store wood without damaging portions that will remain in the completed structure .
Do not split or damage the surfaces and edges .
Do not puncture the treated surface of treated wood with pointed tools temporary bolts or spikes .
D Framing Accurately cut and frame lumber and timber true and exact to a close fit to construct the joints with an even bearing over the entire contact surfaces .
Do not shim the joints or construct open joints .
D. Holes in Untreated Wood Bore holes in untreated wood with diameters in accordance with the following types of hardware .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Holes in Untreated Wood Hardware Type Bore Hole Diameter Round driftbolts and dowels inch less than the diameter of the bolt or dowel Square driftbolts or dowels Equal to the least dimension of the bolt or dowel Machine bolts Same diameter as the bolt Rods inch greater than the diameter of the rod Lag screws No larger than the body of the screw at the root of the thread D. Holes in Treated Wood Bore holes in treated wood at least inch larger than the holes specified in Table .
E Field Treatment Carefully trim and coat the following in treated piles and timbers with a preservative in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products and meeting the requirements of AWPA Standard M Field cuts except pile cutoffs Daps Field bored holes and Abrasions .
Wait at least h between each application .
For pile cutoffs treat the tops of treated timber piles used in wood bridge construction with three applications in accordance with the requirements in this section .
F Piling Provide timber piling in accordance with Piling .
G Sills Finish concrete pedestals where required for the support of framed bents to ensure even load bearing transfer to sills or posts placed on the pedestals .
Extend the dowels for anchoring the sills at least inches above the tops of pedestals .
Set dowels while casting pedestals .
Provide sills with true and even bearing on piles or pedestals .
Driftbolt sills to the piles using bolts extending into the piles at least inches .
Remove earth from around the sills to provide free air circulation .
Use dowels extending at least inches into posts and sills to fasten posts to sills .
H Caps Place timber caps to obtain an even and uniform bearing over the tops of the supporting posts or piles and to provide an even alignment of their ends .
Use driftbolts extending at least inches into posts or piles to secure caps except wing pile caps .
Place the driftbolts in the center of each post or pile .
I Blank J Bracing Fasten bracing to the pile or post and cap using bolts at least ¾ inch in diameter in tandem with split or tooth ring connectors .
Use wire spikes boat spikes or spike grid connectors to bolt and spike intermediate intersections as shown on the plans .
K Stringers and Bridging Size stringers at bearings .
For stringers one panel long place with knots near the edges in the top portion of the stringers .
For stringers two panels long place with knots near the edges in the compression edges of the stringers and stagger lapped joints over the supports .
Provide outside stringers with butt joints .
Provide lapped interior stringers to take bearing over the full width of the floor beam or cap at each end .
Toenail or bolt to fasten lapped ends of stringers as required by the contract .
Accurately frame cross bridging members with bevel cut ends .
Place cross bridging members providing full bearing at each end against the sides of stringers .
Use two nails at each end to hold each cross bridging member securely .
Set the cross bridging before placing the floor .
Tightly set and nail the top ends home .
Nail the lower ends only enough to hold the bridging in place .
After placing the floor and wearing surface readjust the lower ends of cross bridging draw tight to the face of the stringers and fully nail as required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Place block or header bridging before laying the subfloor .
Fully nail the blocks at the top and only temporarily nail at the bottom .
After placing the entire floor complete nailing of the bridging .
If using bolts or lag screws to fasten block bridging as shown on the plans do not final tighten the bolts or lag screws until after placement of the entire floor .
Cut block bridging square and to the accurate length to avoid the need for shims .
If end shims are necessary use zinc or galvanized sheet steel .
Use end shims the size of the end of the block with additional width to allow nailing along one side of block .
Use galvanized roofing nails to hold shims in place .
Place cross bridging at the center of each span unless otherwise shown on the plans .
L Blank M Blank N Prefabricated Wood Panels Provide and install nail or glue laminated wood panels for use in bridge superstructures in accordance with the following N. Nail Laminated Panels Cut individual wood members for use in the panels to the proper length and drill dowel holes .
Treat members with preservative in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products .
Fabricate members into panels .
Provide panels fabricated as shown on the plans and assemble at the fabrication plant before delivery to the project .
Matchmark the panels before shipment .
Provide panel lengths with a tolerance of ⅛ inch of the dimension shown on the plans .
Install the panels to provide an overall deck width within ¼ inch of the panel dimension shown on the plans .
N. Glued Laminated Deck Panels Provide and install glued laminated deck panels as shown on the plans and meeting the requirements of this section the American National Standards for Wood Products Structural Glue Laminated Timber ANSIAITC A . and AITC .
Provide shop details to the Engineer .
Do not begin fabrication work until the approval of the shop details by the Engineer in accordance with .. B Shop Detail Drawings .
N .. a Appearance Grades Surface finish the panels meeting the requirements of AITC Industrial Appearance Grade except the Department will not require finishing the roadway surface of the panels .
Place individual planks to achieve the maximum corrugation on the roadway surface .
N .. b Dowel Holes Drill dowel holes inch greater in diameter than the dowel and ½ inch deeper than necessary to provide the planned dowel projection before the preservative treatment process .
N .. c Marking and Protection Matchmark the panels before shipment .
Do not end seal surface seal or wrap the panels .
N .. d Preservative Treatment Fabricate gluelaminated desk panels remove excess glue from all panel surfaces except on roadway surfaces before treating with preservative .
N .. e Inspection .
Provide an independent commercial inspection agencys Certificate of Compliance including the test results and an approval certification mark on each panel showing conformance with the requirements of this section .
N .. f Assembly Verify dowel projection and conformance with dimensions as shown on the plans at the project site before assembly .
O Blank P Blank Q Blank R Railings Frame railings as shown on the plans .
Ensure accurate railing alignment during erection. . Minnesota Standard Specifications S Hardware Place driftbolts in the structure with the chisel point at right angles to the grain of the unbored sections of the connected pieces .
Use plate washers for bolts at least ½ inch in diameter unless using bolt heads and nuts that provide an equivalent bearing surface and strength .
Provide wood connectors of the type shown on the plans .
Install the split ring and the shear plate in precut grooves of the dimensions as shown on the plans or as recommended by the manufacturer .
Use pressure equipment to force the toothed ring and the spike grid into the contact surfaces of the joint .
Simultaneously and uniformly imbed connectors of this type at a joint .
Install the claw plate using a combination of precut grooving and pressure equipment . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Treated or Untreated Wood The Department will separately measure treated wood and untreated wood by the unit of measure based on nominal sizes and lengths incorporated in the structure .
The Engineer will not provide allowance for waste except beveled ends .
The Department will measure panels by the number of acceptable units of each type provided and installed including panel hardware .
B Hardware The Department will measure hardware by weight if the contract includes a specific contract item for hardware .
The Department will include of the cost of nails dowels or panel hardware with other relevant contract items . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for wood bridge construction on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Glued Laminated Deck Panels Type __ each .
Prefabricated Wood Panels Type ___ each .
Hardware pound .
Untreated Wood Mbm .
Treated Wood Mbm boardfeet measure CONCRETE WEARING COURSE FOR BRIDGES .
DESCRIPTION The work consists of constructing a Portland cement concrete wearing course on a bridge structural slab or approach panel. . MATERIALS Provide a wearing course made of low slump concrete placed at least inch deep in accordance with the following A Low Slump Concrete Provide low slump concrete in accordance with Structural Concrete and as modified by the following A .
Mix Requirements Do not substitute slag cement or fly ash in the low slump concrete .
Provide No .
UA concrete mix using the maximum quantity of waterreducer meeting the requirements of the Concrete Manual .
A .
Slump Requirements Provide No .
UA concrete mix with a slump as specified in Structural Concrete .
A .
Air Content Requirements Provide No .
UA concrete mix with an air content as specified in Structural Concrete .
B Bonding Grout Provide grout consisting of Portland cement mixed with water to form a slurry with the consistency of paint to bond the new concrete to the bridge structural slab .
Coat the inplace concrete including vertical joints immediately before placing the concrete wearing course. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Provide equipment to proportion mix place and finish the concrete as approved by the Engineer .
Place the concrete wearing course on the bridge structural slab after the slab has cured for at least days unless the contract requires a longer curing period for the bridge structural slab .
Place the concrete wearing course on the approach panels after the panels have cured for at least h. Mix concrete in accordance with the Concrete Manual requirements for the equipment used .
Mix the concrete until uniform in composition and consistency .
Provide concrete at a rate allowing the finishing operations to proceed at a steady pace and completion of the final finishing in accordance with .. D Concrete Placement and Texturing .
Provide placing and finishing equipment including adequate hand tools to place and work the concrete to the correct level for strikeoff .
B Finishing Machine Use a poweroperated finishing machine approved by the Engineer and meeting the following requirements Designed for normal operating conditions that provide an elapsed time between depositing the concrete on the bridge deck and the final screeding no greater than min .
Capable of obtaining positive machine screeding of the plastic concrete Contains a screed capable of extending at least inches beyond the edge of a subsequently placed section and capable of overlapping the edge of a previously placed section at least inches Capable of forward and reverse motion under positive control and Contains screeds capable of being raised to clear the screeded surface when traveling in reverse .
Demonstrate the capability of the finishing machine to produce results in accordance with .. D Concrete Placement and Texturing under the project conditions unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Place rails on the outside of the wearing course area to support the traveling finishing machine .
Provide rail anchorages for horizontal and vertical stability .
Do not ballistically shoot rail anchorages into concrete that will not be overlaid .
After setting the rails to the grade and elevation shown on the plans and before placing the concrete check the clear distance from the bottom of the screed to the top of the prepared concrete surface in the presence of the inspector .
Attach a fill strip or other approved device to the bottom of the screed during this check to detect areas encroaching on the wearing course thickness shown on the plans .
Set sufficient screed rails to perform the clearance check in one continuous run over a distance equal to one complete days placement .
Make corrections as directed by the Engineer to obtain the thickness shown on the plans .
When necessary place longitudinal joints at the edge of traffic lanes as approved by the Engineer .
C Deck Preparation Within h before placing the concrete wearing course clean the slab surface and shotblast the entire bridge surface and approaches to be overlaid .
Shotblast to remove surface film laitance fractured concrete particles and other materials that may impede the bond of the concrete wearing course .
Remove the steel shot before placing the concrete wearing course .
Control and abate the dust generated by the blasting operation meeting the requirements of MPCA Rule ..
Submit the proposed plan for dust abatement to the Engineer at least calendar days before starting the work .
Power sweep the bridge and approach slabs before blasting .
Use the least amount of water necessary to minimize the dust from the sweeping operation .
Provide housing for the blast wheel or blasting nozzles meeting the following requirements and characteristics Contains a negative air emission control system that draws the confined air and dust into a filtered collection system Contains an exhaust system with the capacity for relieving the pressure generated within the housing by the blasting equipment and Sides and corners flexible at the bottom to allow the bottom of the housing to contact the deck surface during blasting operations .
Clean the filter collection system to ensure proper filtration .
Provide a housing and filter collection system constructed maintained and operated to eliminate avoidable dust emissions. . Minnesota Standard Specifications After blasting hand sweep or use a pickup type power sweeper equipped with adequate dust storage capacity to sweep the prepared surface .
Remove minor debris remaining after the sweeping operation by air blasting .
Provide an air supply system with an oil trap placed in the air supply line between the storage tank and the nozzle .
Shotblast sweep and clean the bridge structural slab before placing the concrete wearing course .
Allow time for the Engineer to inspect the surface during daylight hours .
After shotblasting the surface the Engineer will perform a visual inspection of the bridge deck and locate all cracks appearing on the top surface .
Furnish only one of the materials listed on the Departments ApprovedQualified Product List of Bridge Surface and Crack Sealers www.dot.state.mn.usproductsbridge .
Fill all located cracks with an approved crack sealer following the manufacturers recommendations and as otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Ensure the sealer is cured prior to preceding prewetting of the deck as required for placement of a low slump concrete wearing course .
Control the application of the crack sealer such that the maximum width of crack sealant does not exceed ¾ inch .
If exceeding the permitted width of ¾ inch remove excess by means of surface grinding to prevent debonding of concrete wearing course .
Furnishing and placing the sealer on new structural slabs as specified above will be considered to be incidental work for which no direct compensation will be made .
Payment for sealing cracks in existing bridge deck slabs getting a new low slump wearing course as provided for in the special provisions .
Within h of placing the concrete wearing course use potable water to prewet the deck surface to a saturated surface dry condition not absorbing water from or contributing water to the concrete mixture .
Maintain the saturated surface dry condition for at least h. Do not allow free water on the surface when placing the bonding agent as stated in .. B Bonding Grout .
D Concrete Placement and Texturing Place and finish concrete at a linear rate measured parallel to the centerline of the bridge of at least ft per h under normal working conditions .
Do not place concrete wearing course placement widths greater than ft unless otherwise shown in the special provisions .
Place joints in the concrete wearing course directly above the original joints constructed in the bridge structural slab and in accordance with .. E Joint Construction .
Make saw cuts as soon as the concrete can be cut without raveling the surface and expeditiously to minimize the exposure of the uncured concrete to surface drying .
Seal saw cuts with joint sealer in accordance with HotPoured Elastic Type Joint and Crack Sealer or HotPoured ExtraLow Modulus ElasticType Joint and Crack Sealer .
After consolidating screeding and floating the concrete draw a carpet drag longitudinally along the pavement before the concrete attains its initial set .
Adjust the carpet drag to produce a texture as approved by the Engineer .
Use artificial grass type carpet drag meeting the following characteristics and requirements Mounted on a work bridge A longitudinal length of ft Width equal to the concrete placed Artificial grass type Molded polyethylene pile face Blade length of from ⅝ in to inch and Total weight of at least oz per sq .
yd .
In lieu of the carpet drag texturing the Contractor may use coarse broom texturing as approved by the Engineer .
Immediately following the carpet drag texture the bridge deck slab surface with a transverse metaltine pattern produced by using a device meeting the following characteristics and requirements Equipped with steel tines from inches to inches long and from inch to ⅛ inch thick Steel tines arranged to obtain randomized grooves from ⅛ inch to inch deep and Variable spacing between tines from ⅝ in to inch .
The Contractor may use other texturing equipment that will produce an equivalent texture as approved by the Engineer .
Do not texture within ft of curbs or gutterlines .
Do not extend tining into areas within ft of a curb or gutterline .
Ensure the final surface does not vary by greater than ⅛ inch within a ft straightedge laid longitudinally on the final surface .
This surface tolerance includes areas near expansion devices and other breaks in the continuity of the wearing course. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Remove and replace the surface areas not meeting the tolerances specified above .
Alternatively grind the high spots on the surface areas not meeting the tolerances specified above as directed by the Engineer .
The Department defines uncorrected nonconforming areas as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Perform sealing operations in accordance with .. I Joint and Crack Sealing .
If the National Weather Service www.weather.gov predicts a daytime temperature of at least F for a scheduled concrete placement reschedule the placement or begin the concrete placement between midnight and a.m. Terminate placements at a.m. that are started after midnight but not completed by a.m. if the ambient air temperature is at or above F. If the air temperature is below F at a.m. the placement may continue until such time as the temperature reaches F. Do not place concrete wearing course if the air temperature falls below F or if the slab surface shows signs of frosting .
Notify the Engineer at least h in advance of scheduling a night operation .
Provide artificial lighting to ensure quality workmanship and adequate inspection .
Except if heating and housing the concrete do not place concrete for wearing courses in accordance with the following requirements Before April th After September lth north of the th parallel or After October st south of the th parallel .
The Contractor may place concrete for wearing course before April or after September or October as specified above if heating and housing the deck and performing the following Submit a plan and proposed time schedule for cold weather protection and maintenance of acceptable curing temperatures to the Engineer .
Do not begin work until the Engineer approves the cold weather protection plan and all materials identified in the plan are on site Provide the concrete with suitable housing immediately after placement allowing free air circulation above the surface and protecting the concrete against freezing rain or snow Provide preheating for the structural slab before concrete placement if necessary .
Provide insulation blankets or heating facilities to maintain the curing temperatures in item below For low slump concrete maintain the concrete surface or enclosure temperature at F or higher for the first days after concrete placement .
Do not expose the concrete to temperatures lower than F until at least calendar days after the initial day period and Do not remove the housing enclosure until fulfilling the cold weather protection needs as approved by the Engineer .
E Low Slump Concrete E. Mixer Requirements Provide mixing equipment in accordance with Structural Concrete except use a continuous mixer with metered proportioning capability .
Complete the following Provide mixing equipment in accordance with Structural Concrete except use a continuous mixer with metered proportioning capability Notify the Engineer at least five calendar days before calibration test so that the Engineer is present during the test Calibrate the mixer on site in the presence of the Engineer Provide written documentation that the continuous mixer is calibrated before using it on the job and Mix concrete at the job site .
E. Finishing Machine Requirements Provide a finishing machine meeting the following requirements and characteristics Contains at least one oscillating screed and Designed to consolidate the concrete to percent of rodded density by vibration .
Install identical vibrators or pillow blocks with eccentric cams to provide at least one vibrator or source of vibration for each ft of screed length .
If only vibrating one screed vibrate the front screed .
Ensure the bottom face of the screed is at least inches wide and contains a turnedup or rounded leading edge to minimize surface tearing .
Ensure each screed produces a pressure of at least lb per sq .
ft of screed area on the bottom face .
Provide each screed with positive control of the vertical .
Minnesota Standard Specifications position angle of tilt and shape of the crown .
Equip the finishing machine with an adjustable poweroperated paddle or auger to strike off concrete in front of the first screed .
E. Concrete Placement Scrub the bonding grout into the deck surface and adjacent contact points at a controlled rate based on field conditions to prevent drying before covering with the concrete wearing course .
Mechanically strike off the concrete slightly above final grade before consolidating and screeding to final grade .
Saw the wearing course at transverse and longitudinal joints to a straight vertical edge .
Remove trimmings before placing the adjacent wearing course .
Do not operate impact equipment in the adjacent lane during the first h after placing the concrete unless otherwise approved in writing by the Engineer .
Use thinned bonding grout to seal vertical joints with adjacent inplace concrete surfaces after finishing and texturing to assure the vertical joint is sealed .
E. Curing Requirements Coat the concrete with membrane curing compound in accordance with PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound within min after placing the concrete .
Use an airless spraying machine containing the following A recirculating bypass system that continuously agitates the reservoir material Separate hose and nozzle filters and A multiple or adjustable nozzle system to provide variable spray patterns .
Before application agitate the curing compound in the shipping containers to obtain a homogeneous mixture .
Apply the compound to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage equal to a white sheet of paper on exposed concrete surfaces .
Respray areas that appear to have a coating that is less than a white sheet of paper .
Respray membrane film damaged before the placement of the wet cure .
Apply the membrane curing within min after depositing concrete if revibrating the concrete as directed by the Engineer .
If the Contractor fails to apply membrane curing in the required time after depositing concrete the Department will consider this as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Remove and replace concrete in areas not coated with membrane curing compound within the required time at no additional cost to the Department .
As soon as the concrete can be walked on without damage place wet burlap or curing blankets in accordance with .. G Concrete Curing and Protection for a minimum of days .
Maintain burlap in a wet condition for the entire curing period .
After completion of the wearing course curing period the Engineer will perform a visual inspection of the wearing course and will locate all cracks appearing on the top surface .
Furnish only one of the materials listed on the Departments ApprovedQualified Product List of Bridge Surface and Crack Sealers .
Fill all located cracks with an approved crack sealer following the manufacturers recommendations and as otherwise directed by the Engineer prior to opening the bridge to vehicular traffic .
Furnishing and placing the sealer as specified above will be considered to be incidental work for which no direct compensation will be made Do not allow vehicular traffic on the concrete wearing course during the day curing period .
If the daily mean temperatures during the day curing period fall below F provide additional curing time before allowing traffic on the surface as required by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure the concrete wearing course by surface area based on the dimensions shown on the plans .
The Engineer will not deduct the surface area of expansion devices or other miscellaneous appurtenances . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for concrete wearing course for bridges on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Concrete Wearing Course ___ square foot PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and installing prestressed concrete beams and double Teebeams for use in bridge superstructures. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS A Concrete Provide concrete produced in a centralmix plant in accordance with Precast Concrete .
The Contractor may use Type I Type II or Type III portland cement .
Use Mix No .
W or Mix No .
W concrete for prestressed beams .
Use Mix No .
W concrete for double Teebeams .
B Reinforcement Bars C Structural Steel D HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel E SevenWire Strand for Prestressed Concrete F Structural Steel Pipe G Galvanized Structural Shapes H Galvanized Hardware I ZincRich Paint Systems J Plastic Curing Blankets .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Provide beams manufactured from a precastprestressed concrete plant certified by the PCI or by another organization approved by the State Materials Engineer and in accordance with the following Concrete Bridge Construction Structural Metals Metal Reinforcement and PCI Manual for Quality Control Precast and Prestressed Concrete .
A General The State Materials Engineer is the Engineer with authority concerning all matters of plant fabrication and inspection prior to delivery of the materials to the project .
The Engineer has authority concerning all matters of fabrication at the project site .
Submit a written notification to the Engineer immediately after placing orders for prestressed concrete beams .
Include the name and address of the supplier and the beam manufacturing location .
Notify the Materials Engineer at least calendar days beforebeginning manufacturing operations .
If the Contractor casts the beams at the bridge site notify the Engineer at least calendar days before casting to permit inspection of the forms and reinforcement .
If casting the beams at a plant away from the bridge site provide an office in accordance with .. A Basic Requirements with air conditioning and access to sanitary facilities .
The Department will not require laboratory space .
If on any day the Department inspects beam casting at a plant away from the bridge site and less than two beams are cast the Department will deduct from any monies due or becoming due to the Contractor the total cost of inspection for that day .
Ensure the Fabricators quality control office maintains documentation containing the data required by the specifications and the State Materials Engineer .
This documentation shall contain test data and measurements taken at times and locations approved by the Engineer assuring that monitoring by personnel not directly involved in production is sufficient to ensure compliance with approved procedures .
If the Materials Engineers review of fabrication work discloses that approved procedures are not being followed the Fabricator shall immediately correct the procedure .
The Materials Engineer will determine what additional testing work must be done by the Fabricator or if necessary what part of the work must be repaired or replaced if fabrication work is not properly monitored and documented by the Fabricator .
Any and all costs of required additional monitoring and testing shall be at the expense of the Contractor with no additional compensation.Provide a PCI Level II Certified Technician on site at the start of fabrication and throughout fabrication of the prestressed beams .
Provide PCI Level I Certified Technicians to perform quality control functions .
Provide a PCI Level II Certified Technician as a supervisor for the quality control staff. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Take precautions to prevent contamination of prestressing steel with oil dirt or other deleterious substances and to prevent damage that may result in weakening the prestressing steel that may result in its failure under stress .
The Materials Engineer may reject nicked or kinked prestressing steel .
Do not allow sparks or pieces of molten metal from welding or burning equipment to contact the prestressing steel .
Do not use prestressing steel as a ground for welding equipment .
Galvanize all steel inserts or devices that will be within in of the exposed surface of the finished structure .
Galvanize or coat with zincrich primer all other steel inserts or devices included in the beam .
B Forms Provide forms designed to withstand pressure from concrete vibration and impact without distortion .
Set and maintain forms mortar tight free of warp and on a rigid foundation .
Set the side form at right angles to the vertical axis of the beam and with the plane of bearing surfaces flat and true .
Set side forms during casting as shown on the plans .
Maintain side forms during casting until the concrete sets .
Provide a tight fit without offset for joints in sectional forms .
Set forms for prestressed concrete beams so the dimensions of the beam after prestress transfer will conform to the plan dimensions in accordance with .. H Tolerances .
Treat the face of the forms in contact with the concrete with form coating material in accordance with Form Coating Material before setting the form in position .
Clean the forms of accumulations of oil and other substances before use .
Provide beam end blocks as shown on the plans .
The Contractor may increase the length of the end blocks as much as in to accommodate sectional forms .
Provide end blocks of the same length for beams of the same length in any one span .
C Steel Units Place support and tie reinforcement bars for prestressed concrete beams in accordance with Metal Reinforcement .
Cover the reinforcement bars with concrete at least in thick .
Set sole plates for prestressed beams so that after prestress transfer the sole plate locations match the plan locations within the tolerance specified for the plan length of pretensioned beams .
Place the sole plates in contact with the bottom form .
Maintain position of the sole plates during placement of concrete .
Position floor drains as shown on the plans .
Fasten the floor drains to the forms to ensure that concrete placement does not alter the alignment or location .
Remove loose rust dirt oil and other foreign substances from prestressing tendons before erecting the beam side forms .
The Contractor may construct holddown devices for deflected strands so that the Contractor can remove the device for a distance of at least in from the face of the concrete and plug the hole with mortar .
Use freerolling devices holddown and hold up at all deflection points .
The device may rest on the bottom form and remain inplace .
If resting the device on the bottom form galvanize the part in contact with the form for a distance of at least in from the form .
D Placement of Concrete Cast the beams in an upright position .
Place the concrete in each beam without interruption .
Modify the casting procedure if the length of the beams and placement conditions cause a cold joint to form when continuing each lift full length before placing a subsequent lift .
Vibrate the concrete in each beam internally externally or both to produce uniformly dense concrete .
Do not displace enclosures or steel units when vibrating .
Internally vibrate in accordance with .. D Compaction of Concrete using a vibrator with a nonmetallic vibrating head no greater than ¼ in in diameter operating at a frequency of at least Hz cps .
After striking off the top surface of the beams to the required level work and hand float the surface to seal open tears in the surface and depress coarse aggregate .
Use transverse brooming to roughen the surface .
E Concrete Curing Cure according to the requirements of .
F Tensioning F. Equipment Tension prestressing tendons using hydraulic jacks or dynamometers and hydraulic jacks .
Equip each jack pump with a hydraulic pressure gauge .
Calibrate jacks gauges and pumps as a unit under conditions similar to operating conditions .
Provide a dated certified calibration curve for each combination used .
Recalibrate equipment presenting erratic results during tensioning operations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Ensure the hydraulic pressure gauges can accurately determine the actual stress on the jacks within a tolerance of percent of the total indicated stress during final elongation of the prestressing tendons .
Calibrate the dynamometer used to measure an initial tension .
Ensure the dynamometer can accurately determine the initial tension within a tolerance of percent .
F. General Procedures Conduct the tensioning procedure so that it is possible to compare the indicated stress on the tendons based on gauge pressures and the indicated stress based on the corresponding elongation of the tendons at any time during the tensioning operation .
If the two indicated stresses corrected for friction loss differ by no greater than percent stress the tendons so the lower of the two indicated stresses equals the required tension in the tendon .
Do not tension any tendon to an indicated stress greater than percent of its specified tensile strength at any time .
If the indicated stresses differ by greater than percent stop tensioning operations .
Determine the source of the discrepancy and correct it before resuming tensioning operations .
When the tensioning operation includes more than two girders with all deflection points included demonstrate proper tension at both ends .
When tensioning more than four girders with all deflection points included measure and ensure proper elongation on the interior girders that are more than one girder from an end .
Do not tension prestressing strands in the bundled position with direct contact between adjacent strands .
Maintain a clear space of at least ¼ in between adjacent strands during tensioning .
Depress tensioned strands into a bundled position with contact between adjacent strands after the completion of tensioning .
Record the gauge pressures indicated stresses and elongations and submit the record to the Materials Engineer .
The Contractor may tension strands as a group if the strands in the group are from the same manufacturer and the strands receive the same initial tension .
When tensioning consider initial strand tension no greater than lb per strand to be zero tension .
If the contract requires an initial tension greater than lb per strand use a dynamometer to measure the tension .
Add the elongation due to the initial tension to the final elongation measurement .
Tension the deflected strands so that final tension is uniform in all parts of the strand .
Provide freely turning rollers to reduce frictional forces at the deflection points .
Correct tensionelongation measurements for losses due to slippage of grips or anchorages and friction to obtain the prestress force shown on the plans .
If a temperature differential in the strands at the time of tensioning and at the time of concrete placement exceeds F consider the change in the final elongation measurements to obtain the required prestress force at the time of casting .
Base the change in elongation due to temperature on a ⅛ in per ft of strand length for each F variation in temperature .
Tension prestressing tendons when the ambient air temperature is greater than F and rising .
G Prestress Transfer Perform the prestress transfer after the control cylinders indicate that the concrete has reached a compressive strength of at least psi unless otherwise shown on the plans .
When breaking the controls cylinders use a testing machine that prints all test data including time and date directly to a printer and initial the printout .
Make the prestress transfer when the concrete is still warm and moist .
During the prestress transfer sequence keep the lateral eccentricity of the prestress to a minimum and prevent cracking in the top flange of the beams .
The Contractor may perform the prestress transfer by the gradual release of hydraulic jacks by heating exposed portions of individual strands to failure or by a combination of these two methods .
If heating the individual strands heat in accordance with the following Heat each individual strand simultaneously on the strand at no less than two locations along the casting bed .
Sequence heating each strand along the bed and with the sequence of perform the prestress transfer between individual strands in a manner that will prevent damage and Heat with a low oxygen flame played along the strand for a distance of at least in .
Control the heat to ensure that failure of the first wire in the strand does not occur for at least sec after the application of heat followed by gradual elongation and failure of the remaining wires .
Completely strip the forms from the beams before beginning prestress transfer .
H Tolerances After prestress transfer check the dimensions of the prestressed concrete beam to verify that the dimensions match what the plans show within the tolerances in the PCI Structural QC Manual MNL .
Inform the plant inspector of any measurements not within the tolerance limits. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will measure differential camber between adjacent members of the same design with the beams erected in the final position .
The Engineer or the Materials Engineer may reject members that do not meet the dimensions shown on the plans or the specified tolerances .
I Rejection The Materials Engineer may reject beams failing to meet the requirements of this section or beams showing the following after the removal of forms Honeycombing Stone pockets Sand streaks or Imperfect mixing and casting .
The Materials Engineer will not reject beams showing minor surface cavities or irregularities that do not impair the service value if repaired as approved by the Materials Engineer .
Make repairs after the Materials Engineer inspects the irregularities .
Use repair materials and methods approved by the Materials Engineer .
J Marking Handling Storage and Transportation The Department will allow beams to be moved from the casting bed to a nearby storage area after attaining the minimum compressive strength for prestress transfer .
Do not transport or install beams until the beam attains a compressive strength of at least psi as evidenced by control cylinders .
When casting offsite do not ship the beam until it has reached the full design strength shown in the plans .
Mark each beam with the casting date and piecemark .
If casting beams away from the bridge site mark each beam with the name or trademark of the manufacturer and the bridge number .
The Materials Engineer will stamp each approved beam with the official mark of the Department before shipment .
Complete repairs before the Department stamps the unit .
Do not ship beams without the Department stamp of approval .
After completing the repair work notify the Materials Engineer at least full business day before intent to ship .
The Engineer will perform a final inspection of units upon delivery .
Ensure markings remain in evidence after erection but not readily visible in the completed structure .
Keep prestressed beams in an upright position at all times .
Support prestressed beams during storage lifting and transportation at two points only .
Considering beam stresses and stability determine the support point locations in accordance with standard PCI methods .
Obtain permits as required by road authorities .
K Installation Erect prestressed concrete beams in a manner that will provide safety to the workers inspectors and the public at all times as well as reasonable assurance against damage to the prestressed members .
Prior to the placement of diaphragms temporarily anchor brace and stabilize the prestressed beams as they are erected so as to preclude sliding tipping buckling or other movement that may otherwise occur .
If active vehicular or railroad traffic will be permitted to travel beneath beams prior to complete erection of all the beams and diaphragms in a span submit an erection plan prepared by an engineer thoroughly checked by a second engineer for completeness and accuracy and certified by one of the aforementioned professional engineers licensed in the State of Minnesota which details all temporary works necessary to brace and stabilize beams .
Ensure struts bracing tie cables and other devices used for temporary restraint are of a size and strength that will ensure their adequacy .
Arrange the work schedule so that each beam will be connected to an adjacent beam and at least two adjacent girders will be erected including diaphragms and bolts fully tightened and braced and stabilized in any one span before operations are suspended for the day .
Install and permanently fasten the prestressed concrete beams as shown on the plans .
Provide intermediate diaphragms for prestressed concrete beams as shown on the plans .
Provide structural steel shapes and plates for the steel intermediate diaphragm option in accordance with Low Carbon Structural Steel or HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel .
Galvanize structural steel plates and shapes in accordance with Galvanized Structural Shapes .
Provide fasteners including washers for the intermediate steel option in accordance with Fasteners .
Provide fasteners meeting the requirements of ASTM F Grade A Type .
When used with galvanized structural steel use ASTM F Grade A Type .
Galvanize fasteners for use with galvanized structural steel in accordance with Galvanized Hardware .
Use castinplace anchorages to connect the steel intermediate diaphragms to the fascia beams .
Provide anchorages capable of providing an ultimate pullout strength of at least kips per anchorage. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide plastic or galvanized steel material to form holes in beam webs to connect bolts for steel intermediate diaphragms .
Ensure threaded rods used to attach prestressed concrete beams to castinplace concrete diaphragms are either galvanized per Galvanized Hardware or electroplated in accordance with ASTM B service condition SC .
Completely remove or cut off flush within inch of concrete surface any uncoated items such as used for static safety lines anchors lifting loops etc .
prior to casting the deck .
Provide an ordinary surface finish to the exterior faces of the precast elements in accordance with Concrete Bridge Construction .
Provide a surface finish as per the special provisions with the beams in place and in conjunction with the final finish of the remainder of the structure in accordance with Concrete Bridge Construction . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will separately measure Prestressed Concrete Beams Type ___ as individual units regardless of minor variations in Plan details between beams of the same type .
The Engineer will measure Prestressed Concrete Beams ___ by summation of the individual lengths out to out along the centerlines of beams .
The Engineer will measure intermediate diaphragms for prestressed concrete Ibeams by length based on the horizontal distance from centerline to centerline of beam along the axis of the diaphragms . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for prestressed concrete beams includes the costs of manufacturing transporting and erecting the beams in the final position and the cost of temporary bracing in accordance with .. K Installation .
The contract unit price for prestressed concrete beams includes the cost of constructing the intermediate diaphragms completeinplace and structural steel or concrete and reinforcement bars as shown on the plans .
The Department will pay for prestressed concrete beams on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Prestressed Concrete Beams Type ___ each .
Prestressed Concrete Beams ___in linear foot .
Prestressed Concrete Double TeeBeam Type ___ each .
Diaphragms for Type ___ Prestressed Beams linear foot BRIDGE APPROACH PANELS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing bridge approach panels. . MATERIALS A Concrete A .
Mix Designation Mix No .
S B Reinforcement Bars C Curing Materials C. Burlap Curing Blankets .
Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Poly Alpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound C. Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound C. Plastic Curing Blankets D Granular Materials E. Form Coating Material .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Foundation Preparations Excavate shape and compact the foundation to a firm uniform bearing surface in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
Construct bridge approach panels to the section and grade shown on the plans .
B Forms Provide forms made of nonreactive metal wood or other material capable of maintaining the concrete until the concrete can retain the molded shape .
Provide forms with a height at least equal to the approach panel thickness of the formed concrete as shown in the plans .
Support the forms on the foundation to maintain the line and grade as shown on the plans .
On curves with a radius of ft or less use flexible or curved forms of the radius as shown on the plans .
Before placing the concrete coat the contact surfaces of all forms with an approved form coating material in accordance with Form Coating Material .
Leave forms in place for at least h after placing the concrete unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
C Placing and Finishing Concrete Immediately before placing the concrete thoroughly wet the foundation and forms .
Place the concrete in a manner that will prevent segregation .
Consolidate the concrete to fill voids using internal vibration .
Strike off the concrete to the grade shown on the plans and float the surface smooth .
Provide the same surface texture as the bridge deck and construct in accordance with Concrete Bridge Construction or Concrete Wearing Course for Bridges .
Finish edges with a ⅜ in radius edging tool .
D Joint Construction Place joints as shown on the plans .
E Metal Reinforcement Provide and place metal reinforcement as shown on the plans and in accordance with Metal Reinforcement .
F Workmanship and Finish Ensure completed concrete work is uniform in surface contour and texture and conforms to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
Finish the flow line surface of gutters as necessary to eliminate low spots and avoid entrapment of water .
The Engineer will use a ft straight edge to measure surface tolerance .
The Department considers vertical deviations in the surface greater than in .
and line deviations greater than ½ in .
from the required location as unacceptable work .
Remove and replace unacceptable work as directed by the Engineer .
If the Engineer does not direct the removal and replacement of the unacceptable work the Contractor may leave the work inplace and the Engineer will adjust the unacceptable work at a monetary adjustment of up to percent of the contract unit price .
G Concrete Curing and Protection After completing final finishing operations cure all exposed concrete surfaces .
Use one of the following curing methods Place the membrane curing compound conforming to PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound or Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound within min of concrete placement or once the bleed water has dissipated unless the Engineer directs otherwise in accordance with .. G .. a Membrane Curing Method .
Place the membrane curing compound on the edges within min after permanent removal of the forms or curing blanket unless the contract requires otherwise. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Place plastic curing blankets or completely saturated burlap curing blankets in accordance with .. G .. b Blanket Curing Method as soon as practical without marring the surface .
Failure to comply with these provisions will result in the Engineer applying a monetary deduction in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the contract does not contain a separate contract unit price for Structural Concrete the Department will apply a monetary deduction of .
per cu .
yd or percent of the Contractorprovided invoice amount for the concrete in question whichever is less .
Whenever weather conditions are such as to cause unusual or adverse placing and finishing conditions expedite the application of a curing method or temporarily suspend the mixing and placing operations as the conditions require .
If necessary to remove the coverings to saw joints or perform other required work and if the Engineer approves remove the covering for the minimum time required to complete that work .
G. Curing Methods G .. a Membrane Curing Method Before application agitate the curing compound as received in the shipping container to obtain a homogenous mixture .
Protect membrane curing compounds from freezing before application .
Handle and apply the membrane curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Apply the curing compound with an approved airless spraying machine in accordance with the following .
At a rate of gal per sq .
ft of surface curing area . .
Apply homogeneously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces equal to a white sheet of typing paper at the time of application .
Some MnDOT approved curing compounds may have a base color i.e .
yellow that can not comply with the above requirement .
In this case provide a uniform solid opaque consistency meeting the intent of the above requirement . .
If the curing compound is damaged during the curing period immediately repair the damaged area by re spraying .
The Engineer will approve the airless spraying machine for use if it is equipped with the following .
A recirculating bypass system that provides for continuous agitation of the reservoir material .
Separate filters for the hose and nozzle and .
Multiple or adjustable nozzle system that provides for variable spray patterns .
If the Engineer determines that the initial or corrective spraying results in unsatisfactory curing the Engineer may require the Contractor to use the blanket curing method at no additional cost to the Department .
G .. b Blanket Curing Method After completion of the finishing operations and without marring the concrete cover the concrete with curing blankets .
Install in a manner that envelops the exposed concrete and prevents loss of water vapor .
After the concrete has cured apply membrane curing compound to the concrete surfaces that will remain exposed in the completed work .
G. Protection Against Rain Protect the concrete from damage due to rain .
Have available near the site of the work materials for protection of the edges and surface of concrete .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the raindamaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G. Protection Against Cold Weather If the national weather service forecast for the construction area predicts air temperatures of F or less within the next h and the Contractor wishes to place concrete submit a cold weather protection plan in accordance with .. G .. a Cold Weather Protection Plan .
Protect the concrete from damage including freezing due to cold weather .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G .. a Cold Weather Protection Plan Submit a written cold weather protection plan to the Engineer for approval .
The plan shall include a proposed time schedule for concrete placement and curing and plans for adequately protecting the concrete during placement and curing .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer approves the Contractors cold weather protection plan. . Minnesota Standard Specifications H Backfill Construction and Opening Bridge Approach Panels to Traffic Cast the control specimens in accordance with .. G. Test Methods and Specimens .
Cure the control specimens in the same manner and under the same conditions as the bridge approach panel represented .
The Engineer will test the control specimens in accordance with .. G. Test Methods and Specimens .
Protect newly placed concrete from damage by adjacent vibratory or backfilling operations for a minimum of h. Resume vibratory and backfilling operations after the concrete has reached a minimum compressive strength of psi or a flexural strength of psi .
The Contractor may use handoperated concrete consolidation equipment and walk behind vibratory plate compactors h after placing the concrete and other equipment as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
The Contractor may also use rollers in static mode and fine grading machines .
As soon as possible after the curing is complete and without subjecting the concrete work to damaging stresses perform the backfill or embankment construction to the elevations shown on the plans .
If the contract does require a specific backfill material use suitable grading materials from the excavations in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
Place and compact the backfill material in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
Dispose of surplus excavated materials in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
Do not open a bridge approach panel to general public traffic or operate paving or other heavy equipment on it for days or until the concrete has reached a minimum flexural strength of psi or minimum compressive strength of psi whichever occurs first .
Perform operations on new bridge approach panels as approved by the Engineer and in accordance with the following When moving on and off the bridge approach panel construct a ramp to prevent damage to the pavement slab .
Protect the concrete surface and joints from damage due to heavy loads or equipment in accordance with Restrictions on Movement and Storage of Heavy Loads and Equipment .
Sweep the bridge approach panel surface free of debris prior to placing the protective material or tracked equipment onto the slab .
Operate equipment on the bridge approach panel without causing damage .
Do not operate the equipment wheels or tracks within in of the bridge approach panel edge .
When hauling aggregate and other materials across newly constructed joints keep the surface free of debris by sweeping or other method as approved by the Engineer to prevent spalling of the joints .
If damage results from any of these operations the Engineer will suspend all operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and the Engineer approves of a new method .
The Engineer may subject damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
I E Expansion Joint Seal Select E expansion joint material from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Install E expansion joint material in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and as shown on the plans . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT If the contract contains a contract item or contract items for the construction of bridge approach panels the Engineer will measure their construction as completeinplace items .
The Engineer will measure the total area of all panels of the same basic design .
If the contract does not contain this contract item the Engineer will measure their construction under the relevant contract items provided for pavement construction .
The Engineer will measure the length of expansion joints along the joint line as shown on the plans . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The cost of the following is included in the contract unit price for Bridge Approach Panels Providing and placing concrete steel drainage system and polyethylene sheeting Constructing the integrant curb terminal headers and concrete sills Protecting and curing the concrete and Other incidental work not specifically included for payment under other contract items .
The cost of constructing the joints complete inplace as shown on the plans including the providing and placing of all materials such as filler and sealer material is included in the contract unit price for Expansion Joints Design E. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Item No .
Item Unit .
Expansion Joints Design E linear foot .
Bridge Approach Panels square yard MINOR CONCRETE STRUCTURES .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing concrete structures of miscellaneous types and varied designs with or without metal reinforcement and including box culverts retaining walls culvert headwalls open flumes and other castinplace items. . MATERIALS A Concrete Provide mix designations as shown on the plans .
B Reinforcement Bars C Steel Fabric D Preformed Joint Fillers E Geotextile Filter .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Construct minor concrete structures in accordance with .
Concrete Bridge Construction Construction Requirements and the following A General The Department considers the structure locations shown in the plans as approximate only .
The Engineer will establish the exact locations in the field .
Each structure shall conform to the planned design but the Engineer may change the dimensions to fit onsite conditions .
Do not order materials until the Engineer establishes the exact locations and dimensions .
Construct box culverts in accordance with the standard box culvert plans pertaining to construction joints reinforcement bar splicing and computation of quantities except as modified by the following Stagger transverse construction joints at least ft in relation to any other joint that would result in a plane of weakness through the culvert structure Where long culverts result in lengths of reinforcement bars that are impractical for use but are less than ft long the Department will allow additional splices at no additional cost to the Department and The Engineer will calculate pay quantities for concrete and reinforcement bars using the formulas as shown on the box culvert plans .
The Engineer will adjust the formula quantities to account for additional materials due to design modifications made by the Engineer or to provide for a completed structure in accordance with the plans and special provisions .
Dispose of excavated materials not needed for backfilling excavations in accordance with .. D Excavating Operations at no additional cost to the Department .
B Falsework and Forms Use form lining on vertical faces exposed to view in the completed work .
If required by the special provisions provide detailed falsework or forming plans .
C Concrete Curing and Protection Provide curing protection for concrete structures in accordance with .. G Concrete Curing and Protection .
D Geotextile Filter Provide and install geotextile as shown on the plans . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure structural concrete using the dimensions as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will separately measure each grade or mix of concrete .
The Engineer will not make allowances for quantities in excess of the minimum dimensions shown on the plans and will not make deductions for volumes displaced by metal reinforcement chamfer strips or other incidentals. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will measure metal reinforcement in accordance with .. A Reinforcement Bars .
If the Contractor provides additional splices in the reinforcement bars the Engineer will not include the additional bar for these splices in the pay quantity .
If the contract requires separate items for structure excavation or granular backfill material the Engineer will measure quantities in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills only for structures with estimated quantities as shown on the plans . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for each grade or mix of structural concrete includes the costs of constructing the structures complete and in place .
The Department will pay separately for metal reinforcement structure excavation and backfill materials if the contract contains specific unit prices for these items .
The contract unit price for concrete structures of each design or type includes the costs of constructing the structures complete and in place .
If the contract contains a unit price for a surface area the Department will pay separately for concrete in accordance with .
Structural Concrete Basis of Payment .
The contract unit prices for other applicable contract items include the cost of providing and installing geotextile fabric .
The Department will pay separately for structure excavation and special backfill materials only when the contract contains unit prices for volume and the plans show an estimated quantity for specific structures .
The Department will not provide separate payment for structure excavation and special backfill materials if the contract contains unit prices for structures by individual unit .
The Department will pay for concrete structures on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Concrete Structure Design ___ Each .
Concrete Type of Structure ___ Each .
Concrete Type of Structure square yard .
Structural Concrete Mix No .
cubic yard .
Structure Excavation Class ___ cubic yard .
Granular Backfill ___ cubic yard .
Aggregate Backfill ___ cubic yard .
Reinforcement Bars ___ pound Specify the basis of measure LV or CV after the item name .
See .. B Granular Materials .
PRECAST CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of installing precast concrete box culverts. . MATERIALS A Concrete B Reinforcement Bars C Steel Fabric D Granular Materials E Geotextile Type F Precast Concrete Box Culverts .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Construct precast concrete box culverts in accordance with Minor Concrete Structures Structure Excavations and Backfills and Reinforced Concrete Pipe and the following A Foundations Prepare foundations in accordance with .. C Foundation Preparations except provide granular bedding in accordance with .. F Granular Bedding and at least inches thick .
Use a template to shape the bedding to a flat base .
Use a mechanical hand compactor to compact the bedding adjacent to the bottom corner radii. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Laying Precast Concrete Box Culvert Lay precast concrete box culvert sections with the groove end of each section upgrade .
Tightly join the sections .
Use concrete pipe ties meeting the requirements of MnDOT Standard Plate to tie individual sections together .
Seal the joint on all four sides of the box culvert with an approved product as listed on the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products website under Preformed Mastics per the manufacturers instructions .
Place a strip of geotextile type material at least inches wide centered over the top and sides of the joint .
Use a minimum inch lap between cut sections of the fabric .
Clean the concrete to remove dirt by using a brush before applying the adhesive and fabric .
Securely bond the fabric to the culvert by applying adhesive to the culvert or fabric for the full perimeter of the installed fabric .
Prevent displacement of the geotextile material during backfilling operations .
Join the box sections so that when laid on the granular bedding they form a smooth uniform line of sections .
Do not adjust the grade by exerting force on the box section with excavating equipment or by lifting and dropping the box section .
If the box section is not on the correct grade unjoin the sections correct the grade and rejoin the sections .
Prevent construction equipment loads greater than the loads used in the design to be transferred to the box section before during or after fill placement either directly or through the fill .
Use precast concrete plugs to plug lifting holes in the top surface .
If lifting holes are located in the sidewall completely fill the holes with mortar meeting Masonry Mortar or cover the hole with bolts nuts and washers meeting Galvanized Structural Shapes and large enough to completely cover both ends .
After plugging seal and cover lifting holes with an approved product as listed on the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products website under Mastic or mortar . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Culvert Excavation If the contract contains separate pay items for culvert excavation the Engineer will classify and measure excavation for concrete box culverts in accordance with .. A Structure Excavation .
B Precast Concrete Box Culverts The Engineer will measure precast concrete box culverts by length .
The Engineer will determine the length by adding the nominal laying lengths of the individual sections incorporated into each structure .
The Engineer will take separate measurements for each contract pay item size .
The Engineer will measure transition sections between two different box culvert sizes as the larger or more costly size except for special sections designated for measurement as each .
C End Sections and Other Appurtenant Items The Engineer will separately measure end sections and other appurtenant items such as flap gates and other specially identified units having contract pay units described as each by the number of complete units of each type and size incorporated into the box culvert structures .
The Engineer will measure castinplace concrete work other than end sections and culvert extensions in accordance with Minor Concrete Structures .
D Granular Materials The Engineer will not separately measure granular bedding for concrete box culverts .
If the contract includes contract pay items for special backfill or bedding the Engineer will measure special backfill or bedding for precast concrete box culverts in accordance with .. B Granular Materials . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for Precast Concrete Box Culvert and Precast Concrete Box Culvert End Section will include the cost of providing and installing culverts and end sections excavations lintel beams dropwall foundation preparation granular bedding material and backfill unless the contract includes separate contract pay items for the work .
The Department will include the cost of castinplace concrete work for extending an existing box culvert with the adjacent precast box culvert .
The Department will include the cost of the inch granular bedding for precast concrete box culverts with the relevant contract pay items for precast concrete box culverts .
The Department will pay for precast concrete box culverts on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
___ x ___ Precast Concrete Box Culvert End Section each .
___ x ___ Precast Concrete Box Culvert linear foot Minnesota Standard Specifications STRUCTURE RENOVATION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of widening rebuilding or restoring structures including removal as shown on the plans and in the special provisions. . MATERIALS Except as otherwise specified provide materials in accordance with Division III. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General A .
Traffic Provisions Provide traffic provisions as shown in the special provisions .
Unless the contract requires otherwise provide flaggers and erect and maintain temporary curbs rails extra warning lights special signs and other protective devices as required by the Engineer and in accordance with Traffic Control Devices at no additional cost to the Department .
If the contract requires construct temporary sidewalks for pedestrian use entirely outside of the vehicular traffic lanes .
Construct temporary sidewalks for pedestrians at least ft wide and with ft high protective screening and handrails as shown on the plans .
A .
Explosives Do not use explosives to remove any portion of a structure being widened or reconstructed .
The Contractor may use explosives to remove material not directly connected to the remaining structure as approved in writing by the Engineer and in accordance with Use of Explosives .
A .
Field Measurements Consider the dimensions of the old structure as shown on the plans as approximate .
Before making shop detail drawings and before manufacturing take measurements of the old structure to ensure proper joining of the old and new work .
Provide the measurements to the Engineer .
Show field measurements on the shop detail drawings .
B Removal and Disposal Requirements Remove and dispose of materials encountered in the renovation of existing structures in accordance with Removal of Existing Bridges and meeting the requirements of the web based Building and Bridge Demolition Manual and the following Stabilize peeling lead paint by coating with a paint listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List to prevent the peeling paint from flaking during demolition or scrape and contain the peeling paint .
If painting apply mil of paint .
If applying paint on a bridge over water attach a diaper apron or other containment method if necessary to prevent drips of paint from contaminating the water .
Remove old concrete or stone masonry within the limits shown on the plans and without damaging the remaining structure .
Make saw cuts at least inch deep on faces exposed to view to produce a straight line between new and old concrete .
Cut keyways into the concrete that remains in place without damaging the remainder of the structure as shown on the plans .
Do not impair the supporting capacity of the foundation soil and do not damage the remaining structure if removing piling located within the new footing area .
If old piles interfere with the planned spacing of new piles drive the old piling to determine bearing capacity and suitability for use in the new construction as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise required by the contract the Department will pay for extra pile driving as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
C Concrete Construction Perform concrete construction in accordance with Concrete Bridge Construction and the following Place and secure bolt anchors and other fasteners as specified in the special provisions and in accordance with the manufacturers installation recommendations If no surface finishing of old concrete is shown on the plans provide a surface finish for at least ft of the adjoining portion of the old concrete to blend the finish of the new with the old work and Unless otherwise shown on the plans drill holes and install bolt anchorages to the size and depth in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
D Reinforcement Steel Place reinforcement steel in accordance with Metal Reinforcement and the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Unless otherwise shown on the plans or the special provisions do not cut reinforcement bars that extend through the cut line closer than diameters to the cut line and If any reinforcement bar loses more than percent of its section due to damage from the removal of old concrete install an approved bolt anchor or clamp capable of developing the strength of the damaged bar at no additional cost to the Department and as directed by the Engineer .
E Structural Steel Construction Provide structural steel manufactured in accordance with Structural Metals .
Erect structural steel in accordance with Steel Bridge Construction and the following If practicable subpunch holes for field connections between new and old steel in the shop .
Ream the holes to proper size in the field after assembly .
If making the holes for these connections in the field clamp the parts together and drill the holes using the holes in the old steel as a template .
Do not use a flamecutting torch to make the holes Clean rust scale and foreign matter from the tops of existing steel stringers and floor beams in contact with new timber or concrete and coat with primer in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System or as directed by the Engineer .
Allow the paint to dry for at least h. Clean foreign matter from the contact surfaces of old steel and coat with the designated primer paint in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System before permanently connecting to the new steel .
F Masonry Construction Construct masonry as shown on the plans .
Make connections to old stone masonry at the old mortar joints .
Step the joints to old stone masonry as directed by the Engineer .
Clean mortar and loose or fractured material from old stone masonry at the joint before placing the new masonry .
Immediately before placing new concrete or stone masonry wet the surface of the old masonry .
G Timber Construction Perform timber construction in accordance with Timber Bridge Construction and the following Use new nails spikes and hardware throughout the work Before placing either new or old timber on the structure clean the contact surfaces of the timber and Apply at least two coats of copper naphthenate or another compatible preservative material meeting the requirements of AWPA M to contact surfaces except treat new treated timber and designated old structure parts with oil paint .
Allow each application of preservative to dry for at least h before applying the next coat . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Structure Removals The Engineer will measure structure removals by lump sum .
B Item Removals The Engineer will measure removal of specified items by the unit of measure for the contract item as shown on the plans and in accordance with the following B .
Lump Sum The Engineer will measure item removals by lump sum including the entire item as required by the contract or as approved by the Engineer .
B .
Mass The Engineer will measure removal of structural steel by weight in accordance with .. A Weight .
B .
Length The Engineer will measure the length of item removals longitudinally along the center of the unit and within the limits shown on the plans or approved by the Engineer .
B .
Area The Engineer will measure item removal by area on the basis of actual width and length measurements and within the limits shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
B .
Volume The Engineer will measure item removal by volume except for timber on the basis of actual dimensions of the unit as removed .
The Engineer will measure timber based on nominal sizes and actual lengths. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Each The Engineer will measure item removal by each complete item removed for the required work .
C Anchorages The Engineer will separately measure Anchorages of each type shown on the plans by the number of units complete in place .
D Placing Used Materials The Engineer will separately measure the placement of used materials by the unit of measure for the contract item as shown on the plans and in accordance with place used items . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for deck removal includes the cost of cleaning and painting all steel formerly in contract with the deck where paint is not tightly adhered and sound unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Sound paint is defined as primer meeting Organic ZincRich Paint System DFT requirements that remains tightly adhered after scraping with a dull putty knife .
The Department will pay for structure renovation on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Structure Removals lump sum .
Place Used lump sum .
Remove lump sum .
Remove each .
Place Used each .
Anchorages Type___ each .
Remove linear foot .
Place Used linear foot .
Remove cubic yard .
Place Used pound .
Remove pound .
Remove square foot .
Place Used Mbm Specify item name boardfeet measure REMOVAL OF EXISTING BRIDGES .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of removing and disposing of existing bridges. . MATERIALS Use explosives for the removal of existing bridges in accordance with Use of Explosives and as approved by the Engineer. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General The Department will not require salvage of material during bridge removal unless otherwise shown on the plans or as required by the special provisions .
Remove material not required for salvage for the Department using methods that will not damage salvaged members .
Place salvaged material in stockpiles at locations as directed by the Engineer .
If the Contract requires delivery of salvaged material to a storage yard or other designated location place salvaged material on dunnage or sound wooden pallets .
Dispose of material not required for salvage in accordance with .. C Removal Operations and .. D Disposal of Materials and Debris .
Completely remove all portions of existing bridge to bottom of footing or to an elevation shown in the contract .
Fill pits or trenches resulting from the removal operations with material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material as approved by the Engineer .
Place backfill above water level in layers no greater than ft thick .
Compact each layer in accordance with the methods in .. F. Quality Compaction .
If removing a bridge from a location not on the site of the new structure excavate and dispose of the embankments adjoining the abutments as directed by the Engineer and in accordance with the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications To slopes conforming to the natural ground surface or To a VH slope beginning at the intersection of the front face of the abutment and continuing until intersecting with the natural ground surface .
Do not constrict the stream channel except as required by the contract or as approved by the Engineer .
If removing part of an existing concrete pavement remove the pavement to an existing joint or cut the pavement on a straight line at right angles to the centerline of the road .
If cutting use a saw to cut the top surface at least inch deep without damaging the pavement remaining in place .
During excavation prevent undermining or disturbing the foundation material under pavement remaining in place .
B Structural Steel Dismantle salvaged structural steel in sections individual members or parts as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Unless otherwise required by the contract remove structural steel in the reverse sequence of the original erection .
Remove structural steel without damaging any structural members .
Only cut field driven rivets .
Use pilot nuts to draw pins .
Matchmark members with valveaction opaque paint markers in accordance with a diagram provided by the Department .
Similarly mark pins pin nuts loose plates and ring fills to indicate proper location .
Securely wire or bolt loose parts to adjacent members or pack loose parts in properly identified boxes .
Coat pins pinholes and machined surfaces with a lubricant listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Remove rivets with a pneumatic chipping tool .
Do not use torches unless specifically required by the contract .
Stockpile structural steel on suitable skids .
Arrange dissimilar parts in separate piles .
Stack structural steel to avoid damage to the members .
C Timber Remove timber and lumber with minimal breakage or splitting .
Remove nails spikes fastenings and hardware from timber and lumber .
Clean timber of dirt and all other foreign matter except paint and bituminous surfacing material . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure each total bridge removal and will not separately measure salvage material types or salvage portions of work for each bridge removed . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for Removing Existing Bridge includes the cost to remove and dispose of the structure within the removal limits designated in the contract .
The Department will pay for the removal of existing bridges or material salvage on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Remove Existing Bridge lump sum .
Salvage and Haul Material Bridge lump sum STRUCTURE EXCAVATIONS AND BACKFILLS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of excavating preparing foundations placing and compacting backfill for Bridges and Structures per Definitions either castinplace or prefabricated .
This work also consists of constructing and removing cofferdams making soil bearing tests and the disposing of surplus excavated materials .
The Department considers the following as castinplace structures bridge substructures concrete box culvert extensions concrete retaining walls footings for structural plate arches sided concrete boxes concrete arches and high mast light foundations .
The Department considers the following as prefabricated structures precast concrete or prefabricated metal or thermo plastic structures including concrete box culverts pipe culverts and sewers cattle passes and subsurface drains. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS A Granular Material B Select Grading Material A. Unsuitable Materials include those materials not meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material and additional materials deemed unsuitable by the Engineer .
Provide materials for special backfill bedding drain or filter purposes as shown on the plans. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Requirements Prepare foundations to the elevations and grades shown on the plans .
Use temporary construction to place structures or substructures in open excavations under dry conditions .
A .
Site Preparations Clear and grub in accordance with Clearing and Grubbing .
Clear and grub the entire area bounded by straight lines between the structure extremities .
If constructing bridges extend clearing and grubbing operations to the rightofway between the bridge extremities .
Remove tree branches that overhang the structure and inhibit its function .
Perform preliminary embankment construction in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
A. Elevations and Dimensions The Engineer may make adjustments in writing to the approximate elevations and dimensions of footings as shown on the plans .
The Engineer may make adjustments to the approximate location and orientation of box culverts and pipe structures as shown on the plans .
A .
Temporary Construction Perform temporary construction work to avoid unnecessary hazard or disruption to the permanent work at no additional cost to the Department .
Temporary construction may include sheeting shoring bulkheads dikes channels drainage pipes sluiceways cofferdams warning signs and fencing as necessary .
Obtain the Engineers approval of detailed construction plans and methods before starting temporary construction work .
A .. a Cofferdams Construct cofferdams of sufficient size to allow pumping and provide waterways outside of the forms .
Include provisions to allow lowering the foundation elevation to ft below the level shown on the plans .
Do not place cofferdam bracing against concrete forms or the structure .
The Contractor may extend steel bracing through poured concrete located below the final ground elevation .
Do not box out braces or struts unless otherwise approved by the Engineer in writing .
Remove cofferdams located within roadbed embankments when no longer needed to at least ft below the subgrade elevation .
Remove cofferdams located in streams or lakes to the bottom of the stream or lakebed .
Remove cofferdams located in established navigation channels to an elevation at least ft below the established bottom of the channel .
Remove all other cofferdams to an elevation at least ft below grade .
A .. b Concrete Foundation Seal If the plans do not show a concrete seal the Contractor may install a concrete seal within a cofferdam if accepted by the Engineer .
Perform the concrete seal construction including necessary excavation at no additional cost to the Department .
Submit written notice to the Engineer indicating the planned seal thickness sources of materials mix design and method of concrete placement for approval by the Engineer .
Place the entire seal below the foundation elevation for the substructure shown on the plans in accordance with .. C Placement of Concrete .
A .. c Pumping While pumping from within foundation enclosures keep the foundation materials intact and do not draw water through or over fresh concrete .
The Contractor may pump during concrete placement and within h after concrete placement if using a pump separated from the work by a watertight wall or other means that prevent damage to the foundation .
Do not begin pumping to dewater a cofferdam sealed with concrete until the seal has cured in accordance with the following minimum requirements .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Three days when the temperature of the water within the cofferdam has been maintained at F or greater Four days when the temperature of water has been maintained from F to F or Five days when the temperature of the water within the cofferdam has been no greater than F during the curing period .
A .
Restoration Work Restore the surface and general features of the excavation site after completion of the work to the similar condition as before excavation to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
A .
Cold Weather Protection Place permanent or temporary backfill or other insulating material approved by the Engineer to protect foundation soils against freezing and related heaving actions after casting footings or driving foundation piles .
The Department will waive this requirement if the Contractor has only driven the test pile within the foundation at the time of freezing conditions .
If frost heaving is evident drive the test pile further when installing the rest of the foundation piles as directed by the Engineer .
B Excavating B .
General Perform structure excavation to allow the erection of forms temporary construction and compaction of backfill materials unless the contract requires or the Engineer directs otherwise .
B .
Types The Department will classify excavation types in accordance with the following Class U Material within the excavation unclassified by the material encountered or the conditions of removal .
Class E Material within the excavation except for Class R material .
Class R Ledge rock boulders detached rock or concrete pieces with a volume of at least ½ Yd .
Class W The upper limit of excavation designated by the elevation of low water as shown on the plans for waterway bridges .
The Department will consider the volume of removed structures as a separate contract pay item and will not include the volume of structure removals within the excavation limits as part of the excavation volume .
The Department will include the cost of structure removals with other relevant pay items unless otherwise required by the contract .
B. CastInPlace Structures The Engineer may reject the work if water accumulates within the excavation and detrimentally affects the structure or the stability of the backfill .
Confine excavation in streams or lake beds within caissons or cofferdams .
Repair disturbances to streams or lake beds using materials approved by the Engineer .
Complete necessary areas of excavation within sealed cofferdams before placing items such as walers struts and other framework items that may restrict the access to the excavation equipment .
B .. a Earth Excavations If placing concrete on natural soil foundation without piling as shown on the plans shape the bottom of the excavation to the dimensions and elevations shown on the plans .
Use vibratory methods to compact the foundation soils in accordance with .. F Compacting Embankments .
Replace unsuitable foundation soils with material as shown on the plans and as directed by the Engineer .
Replace materials unnecessarily removed below the foundation elevation at no additional cost to the Department .
Complete excavation before beginning pile driving operations for each unit .
After driving the piles shape the bottom of the excavation to the elevation shown on the plans .
Use granular materials meeting .. D. Granular Backfill to backfill excavations below the established elevation of the foundation at no additional cost to the Department .
B .. b Rock Excavation Do not remove Class R and Class WR materials encountered in the excavation unless the Department classifies the excavation as Class U until the Engineer measures the pay quantities for Class R and Class WR materials .
For footing foundations located in solid rock remove the rock to the elevation as shown on the plans for the entire area bounded by vertical planes through the neat lines of the footing .
If the plans do not show a footing elevation remove the rock to an elevation no higher than the established elevation for the bottom of the footing or as directed by the Engineer .
Remove rock without affecting the quality of the foundation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B. Prefabricated Structures B .. a Earth Excavations If the contract does not contain provisions for foundation preparation excavate to provide uniform support under the entire structure to allow the placement of the structure to the staked grade and line and to allow for the installation of backfill materials .
If the contract contains provisions for foundation preparation excavate to provide the foundation thickness shown on the plans and uniform structure support .
B .. b Rock Excavations Expose but do not remove Class R and Class WR materials encountered during Class E or Class WE excavation until the Engineer measures the pay quantities for Class R and Class WR materials .
Remove and replace unyielding materials such as bedrock boulders or concrete located within ft of the sides or the bottom of the structure in accordance with .. D Backfilling and Compacting Excavations and .. C Foundation Preparations .
C Foundation Preparations Prepare the structure foundations in accordance with the following except as modified by the Contract .
Provide temporary construction pumping or other means to construct the structure in a dry excavation at no additional cost to the Department .
C. CastInPlace Structures Remove disintegrated material loose material and thin strata rock from rock foundations .
Clean and fill rock seams with concrete cement mortar or grout as directed by the Engineer .
If the character of the natural foundation soil is unsuitable provide additional excavation below the planned footing elevation as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will direct the limits of the excavation and the placement of special backfill .
C. Prefabricated Structures Remove and replace unsuitable foundation materials encountered at or below the foundation elevation using suitable replacement materials as directed by the Engineer .
Install the replacement material in lifts no greater than in thick per Excavation and Embankment .
Compact granular materials used for bedding and foundation backfill in accordance with the plans and Excavation and Embankment .
D Backfilling and Compacting Excavations Backfill excavations for structure construction to the required extent shown on the plans and at the appropriate time .
Uniformly distribute suitable material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material in horizontal layers throughout the excavation area in seams of no more than inch compacted thickness .
Compact backfill in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
If the contract does not specify special backfill materials use materials meeting .. D. Granular Backfill placed within inches of the sides and inches above the top of the structure .
For the remainder of the backfill use embankment material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material .
If outside the roadbed construction use suitable material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material for the entire backfill .
Do not place backfill material on a frozen foundation or when the material may freeze during the placement or compaction work .
Step the sides of the excavation if steeper than and if potential wedging action of the backfill may be detrimental to the structure .
If the contract does not require specific maximum dimensions for the excavation the Contractor may enlarge the excavation and flatten the side slopes for convenience of backfill and compaction operations at no additional cost to the Department .
Maintain the sides of the excavation and prevent voids in the backfill when removing shoring or bracing from the excavation .
E Surplus Materials Excavated materials not used for backfill are the property of the Contractor .
Dispose of surplus materials in accordance with the disposal form submitted to and approved by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will determine quantities of excavation and embankment in accordance with Measurement of Quantities except as modified by this section .
Provide sufficient time for the Engineer to determine quantities .
A Structure Excavation The Engineer will not adjust P designated quantities unless otherwise specified in Measurement of Quantities or for excavation materials reclassified by the Engineer .
The Contractor may dispute an excavation quantity .
If the Engineer considers the dispute the Engineer will recalculate the excavation quantity for the entire structure .
If the Contractor completes the excavation before the Engineer directs a change the Engineer will not make deductions or additions for resulting changes in the excavation volume if no enlargement of the excavation is required .
The Engineer will consider additional quantities determined by recalculation as separate from the contract pay item quantities for structure excavation for bridges .
The Engineer will measure rock within the structure excavation and recalculate the volume for each excavation pay item classification considering the quantity of exposed rock measured .
The Engineer will proportionately increase or decrease excavation pay item quantities based on the measured volume of rock to maintain the planned total excavation quantity .
The Engineer will not adjust low water elevations as shown on the plans or for safety concerns working clearances or stability of soils regardless of existing conditions .
The Engineer will calculate the volume of structure excavation in accordance with the following limits except as modified for the type of structure and unless otherwise required by the contract Vertical planes that encompass the structure located ½ ft beyond the outermost limits of the structure or its projections within the excavation A top elevation that is either the natural ground surface or the designated elevation in embankment or excavation establishing the beginning of structure excavation and The bottom of the structure and its projections .
The Department will consider the volume of removed structures as a separate contract pay item and will not include the volume of structure removals within the excavation limits as part of the excavation volume .
The Department will include the cost of structure removals with other relevant pay items unless otherwise required by the contract .
If the plans include a separate contract pay item for the removal of an existing structure from the excavation limits of the new structure the Engineer will reduce the structural excavation quantity by the measured volume of the existing structure .
If the Contractor excavates material to expedite the work and the contract includes the material removal in a different contract item or indicates removal by others the Engineer will not include this material in the structure excavation quantities .
A. CastinPlace Structures For the horizontal limits of excavation for footings for castinplace structures in ledge rock the Engineer will use the footing limits as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will measure excavation for timber pile abutments and timber bents using the limits as shown on the plans .
A. Prefabricated Structures For foundation construction requiring a greater surface dimension than provided in .. A Structure Excavation the Engineer will measure the excavation using the greater dimension .
A .. a Induced Trench For excavation by the induced trench method performed in accordance with .. E Induced Trench Installation the Engineer will measure additional excavation required for loose backfill over the structure in accordance with the following Within the planned grading section Between vertical planes separated by a distance equal to the outside width of the structure and To a depth equal to the outside height of the structure .
B Granular Materials The Engineer will measure granular materials for special backfill bedding or filter purposes by loose volume or compacted volume in accordance with Measurement of Quantities and as required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
BASIS OF PAYMENT If the contract does not contain a contract item for clearing or grubbing the Department will consider clearing and grubbing to be extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will pay for preliminary embankment construction in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
The contract unit price for Foundation Preparation Pier___ includes the cost of excavation for seal construction .
If the contract does not include a contract item for the restoration work on the surface of the excavation site the Department will include this cost with other relevant contract pay items .
The Department will pay for cleaning and filling seams in rock foundations as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions unless otherwise required by the contract .
The contract unit price for the relevant structure excavation and backfill contract items include the cost of disposing of surplus excavated materials .
For castinplace structures if the plans do not include limits for the excavation of timber pile abutments and timber bents the Department will include this cost with other relevant contract items .
If the plans do not include a contract pay item for Class R and Class WR excavation the Department will pay for these materials if encountered during Class E or Class WE excavation in accordance with the following Class R at times the contract unit price of Class E and Class WR at times the contract unit price of Class WE .
Unless otherwise modified in the contract the Department will pay for the excavation for castinplace structures in accordance with the following For additional required excavation depth the Department will increase the contract unit price by percent for additional excavation to ft below excavation as shown on the plans .
For excavation required to a depth greater than ft below the planned elevation the Department will pay for this portion of the additional excavation as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions unless the Department and Contractor agree on a unit price increase not exceeding percent .
For additional excavation required by changes in the structure dimensions and the Contractor objects to the contract unit price the Department will pay for the additional excavation as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
For disputed plan quantities if the Contractor requests a recalculation of structure excavation for bridge structure and the recalculation shows an additional quantity the Department will separately pay for additional structure excavation for bridge construction at percent of the contract unit price .
The contract cubic yard price for Granular Backfill and Granular Bedding will include the cost of placing and compacting the materials .
If the plans do not include a separate contract pay item for structure excavation the Department will include this cost with the contract cubic yard price for Granular Backfill and Granular Bedding .
If the plans do not include specific contract pay items the Department will pay for granular materials used for bedding backfill or filter purposes as shown on the plans in accordance with this section and as directed by the Engineer as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will pay for structure excavation and backfill in accordance with the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Structure Excavation Class ___ cubic yard .
Granular Backfill ___ cubic yard .
Aggregate Backfill ___ cubic yard .
Granular Bedding ___ cubic yard .
Fine Aggregate Bedding ___ cubic yard .
Course Aggregate Bedding ___ cubic yard .
Conduit Aggregate Bedding ___ cubic yard .
Coarse Filter Aggregate ___ cubic yard .
Fine Filter Aggregate ___ cubic yard For all granular material items specify the basis of measure loose volume or compacted volume after the item name in accordance with .. B Granular Material. . Minnesota Standard Specifications PILING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and driving piling as required by the contract. . MATERIALS A Timber Piling B Preservative Treatment C Steel HPiles D Castinplace CIP Concrete Piles D. CIP Steel Pile Shells D. Concrete Pile Fill Mix No .
P E Reinforcement Bars .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Delivery and Inspection of Piling If the contract requires test piles provide the number and lengths of piles as shown in the contract unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer may designate that piles authorized for one unit of a structure be driven in another unit of the same structure or any unit of another structure constructed under the same contract .
If test piles are not specified in the contract provide the number and lengths of piles as shown in the contract .
Before delivery establish the quality of the material in steel Hpiles and in steel shells for castinplace concrete piles .
Submit the mill test reports and mill shipping papers in accordance with Steel Shells for Concrete Piling and Steel Piling to the Engineer .
The Contractor may request the Engineers written approval to use small quantities less than percent in a substructure unit of piling from the Contractors surplus of cutoffs and overruns .
Certify the small quantities of piling as remaining quantities of materials previously submitted with accompanying mill test reports and approved for use on other projects .
The Department will not pay for pile splices used to make up approved piles for the Contractors convenience .
Splices made for the Contractors convenience are not eligible for extra compensation in accordance with .. B Piling Delivered .
Do not drive piling before the Engineer accepts the material on the basis of mill test reports .
The Engineer will visually inspect piling at the site before driving to verify the quality of welds and to determine the piles contain no physical defects that would cause the pile to fail during driving and are capable of performing as intended .
B Handling Transportation and Storage Handle transport and store piling without damaging piles intended for use in the completed structure .
C Equipment for Driving C. Requirements for Pile Hammers Use pile driving equipment approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will use the contractorprovided Driving System Submittal C .. as the basis for approval of equipment .
Acceptance of the pile driving equipment does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility to properly install the piling .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the accepted driving system fails to perform satisfactorily during actual driving the Engineer reserves the right to revise the driving criteria andor require change of equipment .
C .. Driving System Submittal The driving system submittal must be sealed and signed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Minnesota .
Allow business days for the Departments review .
Allow an additional business days for the review of any resubmittals .
No variations in the driving system will be permitted without the Engineers written approval .
Submit a Revised Driving System Submittal if the hammers or other driving system components change from those shown in the original approved submittal .
Use the same pile hammer to drive test piles and to drive the piles authorized by the Engineer based on the results of the test pile driving .
Any variation needs to be authorized by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications For the Driving System Submittal perform drivability studies as follows for each hammer and pile type Model the proposed driving system including hammers striker plate hammer cushion helmet and pile cushions based on a wave equation analysis Include in the analysis pile length variation to account for driven length variation stickup length and other considerations appropriate to construction requirements .
As appropriate include soil parameter variations to account for geotechnical uncertainties at the project site as well as possible range of hammer energy Use an authorized computer program GRLWEAP or similar program and When a follower is used include an analysis of the driving system with the follower and an analysis of the driving system without the follower .
Include in the Driving System Submittal .
Results of the drivability analysis showing that all proposed driving systems will install piles to the specified tip elevation or nominal pile bearing resistance shown on plans .
The system should be adequate to overcome the greatest expected driving resistance or a minimum of of the factored design load and account for end of initial driving and restrike conditions as appropriate .
Driving systems must generate sufficient energy to drive the piles with compressive and tensile stresses not more than percent of the yield strength of a steel pile as driven .
The Engineer will only accept pile driving equipment as determined by the wave equation analysis capable of operating from blows per ft to blows per ft at the above conditions .
Include with relevant ranges when applicable scaled graphs depicting .
Pile compressive stress versus blows per foot. . Pile tensile stress vs. blows per foot. . Nominal driving resistance vs. blows per foot for expected typical and range of driving energy . .
Complete description of .
Soil parameters used for pile tip and skin including soil quake and damping coefficients skin friction distribution and ratio of shaft resistance to total resistance. . Assumptions made regarding the formation of soil plugs drilling through the center of open ended steel shells preaugering preboring jetting use of vibratory or other systems to advance the pile other than impact hammers and the use of closure plates shoes and other tip treatment . .
List of all hammer operation parameters assumed in the analysis including fuel settings stroke limitations and hammer efficiency .
Copies of all test results from any previous pile load tests dynamic monitoring and all driving records used in the analyses .
Completed Pile and Driving Data Form along with manufacturers specifications for pile driving system components .
Driving system components will be confirmed by the Engineer upon delivery of the hammer to the project site .
An electronic copy of the WEAP input files .
The penetration blows per foot as calculated by the MPF at the nominal pile bearing resistance required for the test piles and at of the manufacturers maximum rated energy for the proposed hammer and .
When the MnDOT Pile Formula will be used as field control the Engineer will only accept pile driving equipment capable of operating at blows per ft or less at the above conditions .
C. Pile Driving Caps Equip the top of the pile with a driving cap in the size and type as approved by the Engineer to protect the pile against damage during driving .
Use a shock block of the type and size as approved by the Engineer on the upper side of the driving cap when driving conditions warrant .
Provide drive caps and shock blocks as recommended by the pile hammer manufacturer .
C. Pile Driver Leads Provide pile driver leads meeting the following requirements and characteristics Capable of holding the pile and the pile hammer in alignment during driving operations Long enough to preclude the use of punches or chasers and Meeting the requirements of the pile hammer manufacturer .
C. Water Jets Provide jets capable of delivering water in the volume and pressure required to freely erode the material adjacent to the pile .
Provide a water source capable of maintaining at least psi of pressure at two jet nozzles ¾ in in diameter .
D Pile Driving Notify the Engineer at least h before beginning pile driving operations .
The Engineer will reestablish the working points for each substructure unit after the Contractor completes the excavation for that unit .
Stake the pile locations .
Excavate to the bottom of footing elevation as shown on the plans before driving foundation piles or test piles in any substructure .
During pile driving operations keep the water level in the excavation below the top of the pile .
Do not perform underwater pile driving unless a concrete foundation seal is required to dewater cofferdam. . Minnesota Standard Specifications For each foundation pile perform continuous pile driving operations unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Sharpen timber piles to a square point with dimensions at least in at the tip .
Provide timber piles with blunt ends for soils with SPT below counts less than as shown in plan borings or for piles having point bearing on hard stratum .
Do not use punches or chasers for pile driving if the contract requires a concrete foundation seal in a cofferdam .
If driving piles in a cofferdam provide the extra length of piling to drive the piles to the cutoff elevation at no additional cost to the Department .
Accurately locate and space the piling as shown in the bridge plans with tolerances per .. D. Foundation Piles .. D. Pile Bents and .. F. Pile Bents .
Provide pile material and appurtenances capable of withstanding driving to substantial refusal defined in accordance with .. E. Penetration and Bearing General .
The Department considers failure of piles during pile driving operations to include buckling bending kinking splitting or rupturing that will impair the strength of the pile or reduce the effectiveness of the energy delivered by the pile hammer as determined by the Engineer .
If the Engineer determines that the piling material and appurtenances can not withstand driving to substantial refusal discontinue pile driving and correct or change the pile driving operations equipment or material as approved by the Engineer .
If failure of the pile occurs after the Engineer directs the Contractor to continue driving after obtaining substantial refusal the Department will pay for the cost of the failure .
D. Jetting and Preboring The Contractor may perform water jetting if needed or as required by the contract to aid in driving displacement type piles .
Do not perform jetting in embankments or in areas where the jetting may damage the existing soils .
Before reaching a preset depth approved by the Engineer but not less than ft of the final tip elevation withdraw the jets and drive the piles with the hammer to secure the final penetration .
Control and dispose of jet water as approved by the Engineer .
Perform preboring for displacement type piles driven through embankments if the embankment depth measured below the bottom of the footing is greater than ft .
Perform preboring through the depth of the embankment .
Continue preboring through shallow dense crust at the surface of the original ground as directed by the Engineer .
Perform preboring through embankments less than ft if the material may damage the piles during driving as directed by the Engineer .
Perform preboring for displacement type piles if the material below the bottom of a footing precludes driving to a penetration of ft below the bottom of the footing without damaging the piles as directed by the Engineer .
If the pile does not penetrate greater than .
in per blow for each foot pounds of rated energy the Engineer will consider this the weight of the ram and the type and size of the piles to determine the probability of damage .
Make prebored holes of a diameter that will admit the largest crosssectional diameter of the pile without creating friction between the faces of the pile and the prebored hole .
D. Test Piles Provide test piles as required by the contract .
Drive test piles at the locations shown on the plans unless otherwise approved or directed by the Engineer .
Place full lengths of test piles in the leads and continuously drive unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor may perform sectional driving if the Engineer determines from the survey sheet or from previous pile driving in the area that the test piles can be driven in sections without the danger of setup during the splicing period .
Assist the Engineer in obtaining data examples lay pile in a safe location marking pile with blow count attach gauges as instructed for bearing for the full length of the pile driving .
Redrive the test piles as required by the Engineer and in accordance with .. D. Pile Redriving .
If the Engineer determines that steel test piles have not developed adequate bearing capacity per .. E. Penetration and Bearing General provide additional lengths and splice as directed by the Engineer .
D. Static Pile Load Tests Provide Axial Static Compressive Load Testing ASTM D M Axial Static Tension Load Testing ASTM D Lateral Static Load Testing ASTM D QuasiStatic Load Testing ASTM D OCell Load Testing or similar testing for evaluation of either axial or lateral compressive or tensile load and deformation analysis .
Coordinate test program with Construction Bridge and Materials offices Provide materials furnish labor and conduct the test program as required by the contract .
Install temporary and permanent instrumentation as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer Analyze and report data both in hardcopy format and electronic format in a timely manner Adjust test program as directed by the Engineer based on conditions encountered in the field and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications If the test program is used for construction control provide appropriate analysis and field inspectors charts as described in section K for assessment of the capacity of foundation piling .
D. Foundation Piles Guide piles during driving .
Complete pile driving with piles having the required batter or plumbness within ½ in per ft and having a final position within in of plan location within the footing area .
The Engineer may reject or reduce payment per for improperly positioned piles as determined by the Engineer .
If the Engineer determines that some piles in a unit have heaved during the driving of other piles in the unit redrive the piles as directed by the Engineer to complete the pile driving .
D. Pile Bents The Department defines pile bents as piles meeting the following characteristics and requirements Driven in single rows Capped with timber steel or concrete caps and Driven to closer tolerances than for general pile driving as described below .
Guide piles during driving .
Complete pile driving with piles having the required batter or plumbness within ¼ in per ft and having a final position within in of plan location within the bent .
The Contractor is responsible for any increase in pile cap dimensions or reinforcing caused by inaccurately placed piles .
The Engineer may reject or reduce payment for improperly positioned piles as determined by the Engineer .
For timber pile bents select piles having a uniform diameter .
D. CastinPlace Concrete Piles Equip the bottom of each pile with a driving shoe meeting the following requirements Welded watertight and Dimensions no greater than ¼ in larger than the dimensions of the periphery of the pile shell .
Provide pile points if required by the contract at specified locations or as directed by the Engineer .
Provide the pile points for castinplace concrete piles in lieu of flat driving shoes .
Equip the bottom of each shell with a commercially manufactured conical pile point of cast steel welded watertight as approved by the Engineer .
Attach the conical pile point to the pile as recommend by the manufacturer .
Inspect each pile with the Engineer after driving for depth to the driving shoe and for condition of the shell .
Notify the Engineer upon observation of impairment or damage .
The Engineer considering the bearing requirements and driving conditions will determine the acceptability of the pile .
Provide a light for a visual inspection of the full length of pile .
The Department will not require the Contractor to provide reinforcement bars unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Vibrate concrete in the portion of pile shells containing reinforcement cages .
Do not perform pile driving and other operations that will cause detrimental vibrations near concretefilled piles until the concrete has been in place for at least calendar days .
Refer to .. G Concrete Curing and Protection for vibration limits on newly placed concrete .
Do not place concrete for footings and caps until the day after concrete placement for the piles .
Protect concrete in the piles against freezing temperatures for at least calendar days after placement .
If placing concrete in piles during freezing temperatures provide percent additional cement to the concrete mix for concrete above ft below the ground line or waterline .
D. Steel H Piles Provide pile tip protection if required by the contract at the specified locations or as directed by the Engineer .
Provide Hpile tip protectors as listed on the MnDOT Approved Products website under HPile Tip Protection .
Attach the cast steel points to the piles as recommended by the manufacturer .
The Contractor may provide thick wall pipe on a performance basis and meeting the following requirements and characteristics in lieu of steel H piling as approved by the Engineer Meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade Wall thickness of at least ½ inch Tensile properties of at least psi Crosssectional area at least equal to H piling Section modulus at least equal to the weakest axis of the H piling Diameter at least equal to the H pile depth less inches and Driven open ended and filled with granular material or P concrete mix. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will consult with the Regional Bridge Construction Engineer or Metals Quality Engineer for special welding requirements .
D. Pile Redriving Redrive of test or foundation piles determines the capacity that can be obtained by including pile set up .
Set up is the timedependent increase in pile resistance .
If the contract includes a pay item for Pile Redrive perform pile redrive at the direction of the Engineer a minimum of h after initial driving unless otherwise required by the contract .
If driving conditions allow continue to drive test pile to the length shown on the plans and in accordance with .. E. Penetration and Bearing General .
Redrive additional foundation piles to verify the bearing capacity as determined and directed by the Engineer .
Do not drive other piles in the same substructure during the waiting period .
Perform redriving with a warm pile hammer .
Apply at least blows to a previously driven pile or timber mats to warm the pile hammer before using it for the redrive .
When redriving do not strike each pile with greater than blows .
When using MPF as field control mark the penetration of every blow and measure penetration using the average of the first blows in which the hammer has good energy .
Do not trim piles to the cutoff elevation shown on the plans until the Engineer has determined the need for redriving .
Do not fill CIP concrete piles in any substructure unit with concrete until the Engineer determines that the driven piles in the unit meet the required bearing resistance shown on the plans and the pile shells were trimmed to the cutoff elevation .
Weld extensions to piles authorized and subsequently driven or drive additional piles as directed by the Engineer .
E Penetration and Bearing E. General The Department calculated the nominal pile bearing resistances as shown on the plans using design loadings .
The Department will use the nominal pile bearing resistance as determined by .. E. Determination of Nominal Bearing Resistance to establish the minimum criteria for pile acceptance in which the driving resistance is not less than the required nominal bearing resistance as shown on the plans .
If necessary drive the foundation piles beyond the resistance shown on the plans until the piles reach the required penetration as shown on the plans or until the piles have been driven to the penetration determined by the Engineer and based on the test pile results .
Drive the test pile full length unless substantial refusal is encountered at a lesser penetration .
If the test pile has been driven full length and if the test pile has not attained percent of the nominal resistance for the foundation piles as shown on the plans drive the test pile further as directed by the Engineer and in accordance with .. D. Test Piles and .. A Test Piles .
Perform pile redriving as shown on the plans with the penetration and time delays in accordance with .. D. Pile Redriving .
The Engineer will consider that substantial refusal is attained in accordance with .. D Pile Driving when the penetration rate equals .
in per blow .
E. Determination of Nominal Bearing Resistance The Department bases the required nominal resistance as shown on the plans for each field control method .
Determine the driven pile nominal resistance in accordance with the following using the appropriate corresponding field control method as shown on the plans .
Unless the contract requires otherwise if more than one field control method is shown on the plans determine the method used in accordance with the following If the contract includes a Pile Analysis contract item for a substructure provide the Pile Driving Analyzer PDA for the field control or If the contract does not include a Pile Analysis for a substructure the Contractor may choose the field control method .
The Department will include the cost of the PDA with the relevant contract item for piling driven .
E. MnDOT Pile Formula MPF Used as Field Control Method Determine the nominal pile bearing resistance using the following dynamic formula for CIP concrete piles and steel H piles driven with powerdriven hammers 𝑅𝑛 𝑊𝐻 log 𝑆 Where Rn Nominal Pile Bearing Resistance in tons W Weight of the striking part of the hammer ram in pounds see note below H Height of fall in feet see note below S Average penetration in inches per blow for the last blows or blows except if the pile may be damaged by this number of blows. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The MPF is not suitable for use in pile driving conditions where the average penetration during driving S is greater than .
inches per blow less than blows per foot .
The Contractor shall immediately notify the Engineer if the specified nominal pile bearing resistance shown in the plans is obtained with an average penetration greater than .
inches per blow .
The Contractor may choose any of the following options to reduce the average penetration during driving to less than .
inches per blow and achieve the specified nominal pile bearing resistance shown in the plans Reduce the fuel setting of the hammer for the test piles and foundation piles .
Perform redrives on the test piles and of the foundation piles at a reduced fuel setting of the hammer .
Perform redrives on the foundation piles that had the highest penetration at the end of initial drive or as determined by the Engineer .
Continue driving the pile until the average penetration is less than .
inches per blow .
Use a qualified smaller hammer .
The above options will be performed at no additional cost to the Department with the exception that additional driven and delivered length will be paid for by the Department up to the estimated length shown in the plans .
Regardless of the value measured during driving the value of S used in the dynamic formula shall not be less than .
inches per blow more than blows per foot .
If the measured average penetration for the last blows is less than .
inches per blow use .
in the dynamic formula to determine the bearing resistance .
Note W x H is measured during pile driving and is also commonly referred to as the energy E hence E W x H for single acting powerdriven hammers and is measured in footpounds .
The value of W x H used in the dynamic formula shall not exceed percent of the manufacturers maximum rated energy for the hammer used .
In addition to the limits stated above apply the dynamic formula only if The hammer has a free fall The head of the pile is free from damage The penetration of the pile is at a uniform rate and There is no bounce after the blow .
If a bounce occurs deduct twice the bounce height from H to determine the value of H in the formula .
For the requirements of this section doubleacting hammers include hammers utilizing a power source for acceleration of the downstroke of the ram .
E. Pile Driving Analyzer PDA Used as Field Control Method Determine the nominal pile bearing resistance using the pile driving analyzer and the Case Pile Wave Analysis Program CAPWAP as stated below Dynamic Monitoring of Pile Driving .
Use the refined WEAP bearing graph as required in as stated below Wave Equation Analysis to determine the bearing resistances recorded on the pile driving report .
Attach a copy of the bearing graph to the pile driving report .
Calculate and record the bearing resistances for informational and comparison purposes on the report in accordance with .. E. MnDOT Pile Formula MPF Used as Field Control Method .
E .. HighStrain Dynamic Monitoring of Pile Driving E Description of Work Provide and use a Pile Driving Analyzer PDA to perform highstrain dynamic monitoring of driven piles meeting the requirements of ASTM D. Perform the dynamic pile testing on the initial driving and redriving of designated piles as shown in the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Test additional piles or designated piles at additional times as directed by the Engineer .
E Pile Preparation Prepare each pile to be tested by marking and attaching instrumentation to the piles .
During initial driving of steel shell piles attach instrumentation after the pile has been placed in the leads .
In all circumstances extra care should be exercised to protect the instrumentation from distress throughout the pile installation .
Wireless pile instrumentation may be attached to the pile if approved by the engineer prior to placing the pile in the leads provided that the instrumentation is adequately protected against damage by contact with the leads abrasion or shear from the rope chain or fabric used to pick up the pile .
During the test provide assistance as necessary e.g .
access tightening gages resetting or replacing gages or replacing cables as necessary for the successful conduct of the dynamic monitoring program .
Alert the Engineer to any unanticipated or unusual conditions including such items as severed cables loose gages or unusual pile or pile hammer performance .
E Signal Matching and Refined Wave Equation Analysis Following dynamic testing of the driven piling perform a refined wave equation analysis based on driving data obtained from the highstrain dynamic monitoring program using the Case Pile Wave Analysis Program CAPWAP or other approved signal matching software .
This work shall be performed by an engineer prequalified for work type .
as defined by the MnDOT Geotechnical Manual .
Complete the analysis on all piles dynamically tested or as directed by the Engineer .
Furnish PDA and CAPWAP electronic data and summary hardcopy outputs to the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications After the wave matching analysis is performed use the GRLWEAP or similar program and the signal matching program e.g .
CAPWAP data to produce a refined Wave Equation Analysis bearing graph and inspectors chart for the basis for pile acceptance .
Prepare similar charts if soil setup and pile restrikes are being evaluated .
Submit the refined WEAP bearing graph and Inspectors Chart for use in construction control for each substructure .
Use the bearing graph to determine the foundation piles nominal bearing resistance to be recorded on the pile driving report .
Prepare and submit a summary plot of the performance of each pile in the pile group where each pile is plotted on the Inspectors chart by its observed set and the corresponding stroke of the pile hammer .
Adjust this procedure as directed by the engineer for nondiesel hammers .
Any piles not plotting in the acceptable range will be rejected .
E Deliverables Provide the results from each dynamic test performed with the PDA and analyzed with the CAPWAP program meeting the following requirements to the Engineer within the time specified .
Results from each highstrain dynamic test performed with the PDA and analyzed with the CAPWAP program .
The results are to be transmitted in the form of the electronic raw data files and a hard copy of columnar data produced with the PDIPLOT program or similar .
The data shall consist of blow counts stresses in the pile pile capacities hammer energies and hammer strokes for each onefoot depth increment .
This information will be used by the engineer to develop the construction control criteria authorize pile length and establish minimum penetration resistance .
In addition provide expert advice regarding the analysis of the PDA and CAPWAP data . .
Bearing graphs showing blow countversuspile resistance and inspectors charts depicting strokeversusblow count to be used for confirming the Nominal Pile Bearing Resistance of the foundation piles .
The graphcharts are to be developed based on the results of the PDA CAPWAP and pile load test data where static load tests are conducted as part of the construction control .
These graphscharts are also to be documented in the report listed below .
These graphs and charts are required for each foundation group or as specified in the contract documents or as directed for the engineer .
Submit this information both in hardcopy and electronically Adobe PDF or similar. . A brief report for the piles at each substructure tested including a summary of the PDA and CAPWAP results this report will include appropriate information for the evaluation of test data from standard test piles as well as Static Load Test SLT test piles Static Load Test reaction piles and foundation piles. . Supply one or more CDs or other electronic storage media containing all data for the piles tested for each substructure .
The data shall be in the form of W PDA file PIL PDIPLOT file and CWW CAPWAP file and be properly labeled .
The contractor shall send these electronic files to the Engineer no later than three working days after dynamic pile tests have been completed at any given substructure unit. . A final project report which summarizes the findings from the PDA and the associated CAPWAP computer program the developed bearing graphs and the pile load test results. . One or more CDs or other electronic media containing all data for the complete project as an archive copy including information for all piles tested including any pile static load test data .
The data from the dynamic tests shall be in the form of W PDA file PIL PDIPLOT file files and shall be properly labeled .
Include the CAPWAP analysis results and CWW CAPWAP files .
Include all reports and electronic copies of bearing graphs and inspectors charts .
Include any preconstruction WEAP analysis data sheets and WEAP submittal information and electronic files modeling the contractors hammer system .
Include subsequent refined wave equation analysis and summary plots showing foundation pile performance with respect to the acceptance criteria .
Include electronic copies of field notes and other information pertinent to the highstrain dynamic monitoring and any related static load testing including gage locations test dates performance notes etc .
Transmit this electronic archive to the Engineer within working days after completion of the project dynamic and or static pile test program .
E. Static Load Test SLT Used as Field Control Method Determine the nominal pile bearing resistance using the results from the Static Load Test and related analysis from high strain dynamic monitoring and the Case Pile Wave Analysis Program CAPWAP in accordance with .. K Dynamic Monitoring of Pile Driving .
Use the refined WEAP bearing graph as required in .. K. Wave Equation Analysis to develop the inspectors chart as the basis for foundation pile acceptance and use the bearing graph to report the bearing resistances to be recorded on the pile driving report .
Attach a copy of the bearing graph to the pile driving report .
Calculate and record the bearing resistances for information and comparison purposes on the report in accordance with .. E. MnDOT Pile Formula MPF Used as Field Control Method .
Provide the deliverables as required in .. K .. F Pile Cutoff F. Piles Cut off timber piles at the elevation shown on the plans within a tolerance from in to ½ in .
After cutting off the timber pile leave the head of the pile with sound undamaged wood .
Cut off steel piles to within of the cutoff elevation using an approved method that preserves the shape of the pile at the elevation shown on the plans .
Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Pile Bents After aligning and bracing the pile bent cut off the tops of timber piles at the elevation shown on the plans to provide uniform bearing for the cap without using shims or fills .
Cut off steel piles using an approved method that preserves the shape of the pile at the elevation shown on the plans to allow concrete forming or framing in brace members .
G Disposal of Pile CutOffs Use pile cutoffs belonging to the Department in substructure units for piling lengths not authorized for the same structure or for other foundations within the same contract as required by the Engineer .
Stockpile remaining steel Hpile steel shell pile cutoffs and timber cutoffs designated for salvage by the Engineer on skids at a location convenient for truck loading .
Dispose of cutoffs not designated for salvage as approved by the Engineer .
H Extensions Splices and Studs Make splices for steel Hpiles and CIP steel shell piles as shown on the plans except make splices for cold rolled fluted steel shells as recommended by the manufacturer and as approved by the Engineer .
Provide pile welders meeting the qualifications of AWS D. with continuity records proving performance in the last months .
Make splices on piles driven in pile bents at points not exposed to view unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
If making splices in pile bents exposed to view as approved by the Engineer finish the splices by grinding in such a way that the ground area blends in smoothly with the contour of the CIP pipe .
Verify the complete removal of the defect by visual inspection and the wall thickness shall not be adversely affected .
If shear studs are required on the piles perform the welding in accordance with AWS D. clauses The Contractor may provide commercial drivefit splices for CIP piles on a performance basis as approved by the Engineer .
Do not use splices in the following conditions In pile benttype piers or integral and semiintegral abutments Where foundation soils are soft or unstable In foundations where uplift is anticipated concrete seals etc .
Within ft of the pile cutoff Where down drag is indicated in the pile load table or Where Pile Driving Analyzer or Static Load Test is specified in contract as field control method .
Commercial made Hpile splicers used solely for aligning two Hpile sections prior to welding them together will not be permitted .
I Blank J Coating Steel HPiles and Steel Pile Shells J .
Painted Piles Provide paint and perform painting in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System .
Provide CIP steel pile shells painted in accordance with Steel Shells for Concrete Piling .
Paint the outside of steel Hpiles and CIP steel pile shells that are not encased in concrete but extending above ground surface or water surface with epoxy zincrich primer for the entire length except for sections below splices at least ft below the final ground surface or low water elevation .
Apply the primer preferably before shipping or at least days before driving the piles .
After driving paint the piles with intermediate and finish coats on exposed portions above the water level existing at the time of paint application or above an elevation in below the final ground surface .
Paint the finish coat for piles in bridges with concrete superstructures in a color matching the Federal Standard C No .
lusterless aluminum and paint the finish coat for piles in bridges with painted steel superstructures with the topcoat color of the superstructure .
Paint the finish coat for piles in bridges with unpainted HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel steel or timber superstructures in a color matching the Federal Standard C No .
brown with a semigloss finish .
J. Galvanized Piles Provide galvanized steel Hpiles and CIP steel pile shells in accordance with Galvanized Structural Shapes .
Provide Hpiles galvanized in accordance with Steel Piling .
Provide CIP steel pile shells galvanized in accordance with Steel Shells for Concrete Piling .
Continuously coat steel Hpiles and the outside of CIP steel pile shells that are not encased in concrete .
Coat the pile from the cutoff elevation to an elevation extending a minimum of ft below the defined ground surface or the bottom of water channel with hotdipped galvanizing .
Do not hotdip galvanize within ft of a splice .
Based on test pile length if a splice is required adjust location of splice so that it is not visible after driving is completed .
Protect the galvanizing from abrasion or discoloration beginning immediately after the coating process .
The special care shall include but not be limited to .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Use of nylon slings for handling Shipping and storing on blocking with isolation from adjacent shells Carrying in lieu of dragging Use of timber blocking in leads while pile driving or Prompt washing of concrete leakage .
Design forms and falsework for the substructure in a manner not requiring clamping or welding to any portion of the piling that are exposed after the cap construction is complete .
Repair all damaged galvanized areas by the metalizing process described in AASHTO M at no additional cost to MnDOT .
Zinc rich paint is NOT an acceptable repair . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Test Piles If the plans show specific contract pay items for test piles the Engineer will measure the number of test piles provided as required by the contract and driven as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will not eliminate test piles from the contract unless all piles for the unit are eliminated or unless mutually agreed upon by the Contractor and the Engineer .
If the plans do not show a specific contract pay item for test piles the Engineer will include the measurement of test piles with the measurement for piling delivered and piling driven .
If the Engineer determines that steel Htest piles or steel shells for castinplace concrete test piles provided in the lengths required by the contract do not develop sufficient nominal pile bearing resistance or do not provide information per .. D. Test Piles for ordering foundation piles splice extensions onto test piles or deliver longer piles as required by the Engineer .
The Engineer will measure splice extensions onto test piles or longer piles as required by the Engineer when driving beyond plan test pile length in accordance with the relevant contract pay items for piling delivered and piling driven .
B Piling Delivered If test piles are not required the Engineer will measure piling delivered as shown on the plans for acceptable piling provided and delivered in the lengths and sizes of the relevant contract pay items .
If the contract requires test piles the Engineer will measure the lengths approved by the Engineer .
C Piling Driven The Engineer will measure piling driven by the length of acceptable piling below cutoff .
D Pile Load Tests The Engineer will measure pile load tests by the number of piles load tested as required by the contract and as directed by the Engineer .
E Reinforcement Bars The Engineer will measure reinforcement bars used in castinplace concrete piles by weight in accordance with Metal Reinforcement .
F Pile Redriving The Engineer will measure pile redriving by the number of piles redriven as required by the contract and as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will recalculate the estimated plan quantity to agree with the actual number of piles redriven at the project site estimated not to exceed of the total number of planned piles .
The Engineer will consider any pile redriving completed without the direction of Engineer as unauthorized work and the Department will not compensate the Contractor for that work .
G Dynamic Monitoring of Pile Driving The Engineer will measure Pile Driving Analyzer field control by the number of piles that required the pile driving analysis as required by the contract .
The Engineer will consider initial analysis and redrive analysis on an individual pile as one pile analysis .
The Engineer may increase or decrease the number of piles to be dynamically monitored .
If the contract does not require the Pile Driving Analyzer field control method the Contractor may perform the Pile Driving Analyzer field control method at the Contractors option and at no additional cost to the Department. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit prices for Test Pile include the fixed costs of piling delivered and piling driven .
If the plans do not include a contract pay item for test piles the Department will include the fixed costs of piling delivered and piling driven with the relevant contract unit price for mobilization .
A Test Piles The contract unit price for the test pile contract item of each kind and length include the cost of providing and driving test piles providing and placing driving caps concrete for castinplace concrete piles painting steel Hpiles and CIP steel shell piles and performing analysis for hammer qualification submittals .
The Department will pay for splice extensions onto test piles or longer piles as required by the Engineer when driving beyond plan test pile length with the contract pay items piling delivered and piling driven .
B Piling Delivered The Department will not pay full contract unit prices but may make partial payments based on actual cost for stock lengths of steel Hpiles and steel shells for castinplace concrete piles delivered before the Engineer authorizes final lengths based on test pile driving .
The Department will only pay contract unit prices for Piling Delivered in the lengths authorized by the Engineer .
Remove delivered unauthorized piles at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will not pay for piles or portions of piles damaged during handling .
The Department will pay for piles damaged during driving if the Engineer determines that the damage was not caused by the Contractors carelessness or negligence .
The Department will not pay for piles rejected by the Engineer due to the use of an excessively heavy hammer .
The Department will pay for splicing of steel Hpiles and CIP steel shell piles meeting the following requirements and characteristics at six times the relevant contract unit price for piling delivered if the splice is actually made and The Engineer directed the change after the Contractor cut the piles to lengths previously approved Only for any extra splices required for a particular unit if Engineer approved lengths longer than the length of the longest test pile of a specific kind as shown on the plans and The Engineer ordered cutoffs belonging to the Department to be spliced together or onto other sections except if made solely for the Contractors convenience .
For a CIP steel shell pile made entirely from Departmentowned cutoffs as required by the Engineer the Department will consider providing and attaching the end plate as an additional splice and will pay for the additional splice with the relevant contract unit price .
C Piling Driven The relevant contract unit prices for Piling Driven include the cost of preparing the piles for driving preboring jetting providing and placing the driving shoes concrete for castinplace piles cutting and trimming and coating steel Hpiles and steel shell piles .
In the event foundation conditions are found to exist at the site of a structure or a portion thereof that are quite different from those upon which the foundation design was based resulting in changes in foundation design or resulting in requirements for foundation pile lengths substantially different from those upon which the contract unit prices were established the Engineer will upon presentation of documentary evidence by the Contractor enter into a Supplemental Agreement to reimburse the Contractor for any additional pile driving expense incurred as a result of those changes .
The Department will pay for driving pile cutoffs from previously driven piles in the same contract that are the property of the Department at the following percentages of the contract unit price for piling driven Timber and Steel HPiles percent and CastinPlace Concrete Piles percent .
The Department will include the cost of splices per .. B Piling Delivered in the relevant contract unit prices for piling delivered .
D Pile Load Tests The contract each price for Pile Load Test includes the cost of providing and driving reaction piles at locations that preclude their use in the structure as foundation piles .
E Pile Redriving The contract unit price for Pile Redriving includes the cost of redriving test piles and foundation piles and providing and driving additional pile lengths as directed by the Engineer .
F Dynamic Monitoring of Pile Driving The contract each price for Pile Analysis includes the cost of dynamic testing of a pile during initial driving and redriving additional time needed in driving operations labor consultants and equipment. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will include the cost of the actual redrive with the contract each price for Pile Redriving .
The Department will not adjust the contract each price for increased or decreased contract quantities for Pile Analysis .
G Pile Points The contract each price for Pile Points includes the cost of providing and attaching the points to the piles .
H Pile Tip Protection The contract each price for Pile Tip Protection includes the cost of providing and attaching the tips to the piles .
I Pay Items The Department will pay for piling on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Untreated Timber Test Pile ___ ft long each .
Treated Timber Test Pile ___ ft long each .
CastinPlace Concrete Test Pile ___ ft long ___ each .
Steel HTest Pile ___ ft long ___ each .
Pile Load Test Type ___ each .
Pile Redriving each .
Pile Analysis each .
Pile Points ___ in each .
Pile Tip Protection ___ in each .
Untreated Timber Piling Delivered linear foot .
Untreated Timber Piling Driven linear foot .
Treated Timber Piling Delivered linear foot .
Treated Timber Piling Driven linear foot .
CastinPlace Concrete Piling Delivered ___ linear foot .
CastinPlace Concrete Piling Driven ___ linear foot .
Steel HPiling Driven ___ linear foot .
Steel HPiling Delivered ___ linear foot .
Reinforcement Bars pound Nominal size in inches Minnesota Standard Specifications STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of producing providing placing curing and protecting castinplace portland cement concrete for placement in structures pavements and incidental construction. . MATERIALS A Cementitious Materials Provide cementitious materials from certified sources listed on the ApprovedQualified Products list .
Use Type I III IS IL or IP cement to produce Type nonairentrained concrete .
Use Type I III IS IL or IP cement and an airentraining admixture listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List to produce Type airentrained concrete .
Use Type III portland cement as allowed by the contract or the Engineer .
A. Portland Cement A. Slag Cement A. Blended Hydraulic Cement A .
Fly Ash A. Ternary Mixes Ternary mixes are defined as portland cement or Type IL and two other supplementary cementitious materials or blended cement and one other supplementary cementitious material .
B Aggregates Provide aggregates from sources listed on the MnDOT Concrete Aggregate Properties list .
B .
Fine Aggregate B .
Intermediate Aggregate B. Coarse Aggregate C Blank D Water Provide water from potable sources .
The Concrete Engineer will allow clarified water as a substitution for potable water in accordance with the following From the ApprovedQualified Products list In any concrete defined as MnDOT Grades B F G M P and R Up to a maximum of .
of total mix water by weight Provided the clarified water is identified separately on the Certificate of Compliance .
E Concrete Admixtures Provide admixtures from the ApprovedQualified Products list for all concete grades shown in Table and Table .
Use of any of the following admixtures are at the Contractors discretion .
Type A Water Reducing Admixture .
Type B Retarding Admixture .
Type D Water Reducing and Retarding Admixture .
Type F High Range Water Reducing Admixture .
Type G High Range Water Reducing and Retarding Admixture .
Type S Specific Performance Based Admixture Use of the following accelerating admixtures require approval of the Concrete Engineer in conjunction with the Engineer unless otherwise allowed in the Contract .
Type C Accelerating Admixture .
Type E Water Reducing and Accelerating Admixture .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will permit the use of Type C or Type E accelerating admixtures when all of the following conditions exist .
The ambient temperature is below F . An Engineer approved cold weather protection plan is inplace and .
Cold weather protection materials are onsite and ready for use .
F Concrete Mix Designs F. Classification of Concrete The Department will classify concrete by mix number to identify type grade consistency and aggregate size if any in accordance with Table .
Table Mix Number Identification First Digit Second Digit Third Digit Fourth Digit Additional Digits Type Designation Grade Designation Maximum Slump Coarse Aggregate Gradation Designation Additional Digits Allowed or as Specified F .. a Type Designation Provide Type or Type concrete in accordance with Table Table Concrete Type Designation Concrete Type Target Air Content . . ǁ For concrete mix design purposes only .
ǁ Unless otherwise required by or elsewhere in the contract .
F .. b Grade Designation The Department will designate concrete grade in accordance with Table and Table using a letter designating the following Intended Use Maximum watercement wc ratio Maximum Cementitious Content Maximum Supplementary Cementitious Substitution SCM Slump range Minimum day compressive strength fc Coarse Aggregate Quality in accordance with F .. c Slump Designation The Department will designate the slump range as defined by the Grade Designation in accordance with Table and Table .
F .. d Coarse Aggregate Gradation Designation Select the appropriate coarse aggregate gradation designation in accordance with Table based on the intended use and the gradation requirements in Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete .
Table Coarse Aggregate Gradation Designation for Concrete Designation Coarse Aggregate Gradation Job Mix Formula JMF combination of fine and coarse aggregate Table Coarse Aggregate Designation for Concrete ASTM ASTM ASTM ASTM CA CA .
Minnesota Standard Specifications F .. e Additional Concrete Mix Designation Digits Specialty concrete mixes require additional concrete digits in accordance with Table .
Use EX for exposed aggregate mixes and CO for colored concrete mixes .
The Contractor may add additional digits to the right of the required digits in the concrete mix number .
Need to add a note F. Concrete Mix Design Requirements The Engineer determines final acceptance of the concrete for payment based on test results satisfactory field placement and performance .
F .. a Department Designed Concrete Mixes The Department will provide mix designs for the concrete defined in Table and Table .
F .. a Department Designed Concrete Requirements No additional submittal is required for Table mix designs .
Table Department Designed Concrete Mixes Type of Concrete Mix Number Specification Mix Design Location Field Batched Patching Mix U Table Low Slump Concrete UA Weekly Report of Low Slump Concrete Bagged Patching Mix U and UM Table F .. a Grout and Lean Mix Backfill Submit final mix design proportions on the General Concrete Mix Design Submittal for Grout and Lean Mix Backfill in accordance with Table .
Table Concrete Mix Design Requirements for Grout and Lean Mix Backfill Mixes Mix Number Maximum wc ratio Water Content pounds Cement Content pounds Fly Ash Content pounds Fine Aggregate Calculation pounds Coarse Aggregate Calculation pounds Air Content Slump Range Minimum day Compressive Strength fc AGROUT . . As needed psi AGROUT . . As needed psi Lean Mix ǁ .
ǂ NA in in Do not provide grout containing coarse aggregate or fly ash .
ǁ Coarse Aggregate Quality meets requirements of .. D. Coarse Aggregate for General Use .
After adding the specified quantities of cement fly ash and water provide the remaining aggregate to an absolute volume . . cu .
ft. ǂ Meeting ASTM gradation as shown in Table Unconfined compressive strength range F .. b Contractor Designed Concrete Mixes The Contractor will provide concrete mix designs for concrete defined in Table and Table and elsewhere as specified in the Contract .
The Contractor assumes full responsibility for the mix design and performance of the concrete .
F .. b General Concrete Mix Design Requirements The Department defines the concrete mix design requirements for Contractor Designed Mixes in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Concrete Mix Design Requirements Not applicable to High Performance Concrete or Mass Concrete Concrete Grade Mix Number Intended Use Maximum wc ratio Maximum Cementitious Content lbsyd Maximum SCM Fly Ash SlagTernary Slump Range Minimum day Compressive Strength fc Spec .
B Bridge Substructure B Abutment stems wingwalls paving brackets pier columns and caps pier struts .
psi .D .
F Flatwork F Slipform curb and gutter .
½ psi .D .
F FEX FEX FCO Walks curb and gutter slope paving median walks driveway entrances ADA pedestrian walks .
psi .D .
G General Concrete G Footings and pilecap .
psi .D .
G Footings pilecap walls castinplace manholes and catch basins fence posts signal bases light pole foundations erosion control structures castinplace box culverts culvert headwalls open flumes castinplace wall stems .
psi .D .
M Median Barrier M Slipform barrier median barrier nonbridge .
½ psi .D .
M Barrier median barrier nonbridge .
psi .D .
P Piling P Piling spread footing leveling pad .
psi .D .
R Pavement Rehabilitation R CPR Full depth concrete repairs concrete base .
psi .D .
S Bridge Superstructure S Slipform bridge barrier parapets end post .
½ psi .D .
S Bridge median barrier raised median pilaster curb sidewalk approach panel formed bridge barrier parapet end post collar .
psi .D .
X Miscellaneous Bridge X Cofferdam seals rock sockets drilled shafts .
psi .D .
X Drilled shafts above frost line .
psi .D .
Y Bridge Deck YM YS Bridge decks integral abutment diaphragms pier continuity diaphragms expansion joint replacement mix .
psi .D .
Y Deck patching mix .
psi .D .
If the intended use is not included elsewhere in the Specification or Special Provisions use mix G unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Identify specific color used on the certificate of compliance .
Colored concrete is only allowed when specified in the plans or the Contract .
The minimum watercement wc ratio is ..
The Contractor may choose to use the Coarse Aggregate Designation for the th digit in accordance with Table .
Adjust slump in accordance with .. G .. a for slipform concrete placement .
The S indicates a bridge deck with a structural slab and M indicates a monolithic bridge deck .
Mix Y requires the use of Coarse Aggregate Designation or for the th digit in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications F .. b HighEarly Concrete Mix Design Requirements The Department defines HighEarly HE concrete as concrete designed to achieve the minimum strength of psi for opening at hours .
Unless otherwise included in the plans all HE concrete requires approval of the Engineer prior to incorporation into the work .
The Engineer will allow one of the following methods to determine minimum time to opening A Field control cylinders in accordance with .. G .. c Field Control Strength Cylinders .
B Maturity method in accordance with .. G. Estimating Concrete Strength by the Maturity Method .
The Department defines the concrete mix design requirements for HighEarly concrete in accordance with Table .
Table HighEarly HE Concrete Requirements Not applicable to Bridge Superstructure or Mass Concrete Mix Number Concrete Grades Allowed Minimum Time to Opening Maximum wc ratio Maximum Cementitious Content lbs yd Slump Range Minimum Strength to Opening Minimum day Compressive Strength fc Spec .
HE F hrs .
psi psi .D .
HE B F G hrs .
psi psi .D .
YHE Y Repairs Only hrs .
psi psi .D .
RHE R Repairs Only hrs .
psi psi .D .
Supplementary Cementitious Materials allowed .
Adjust slump in accordance with .. G .. aConcrete Placed by the Slipform Method .
F .. b Project Specific Mix Design Requirements Submit project specific contractor designed mixes on the Project Specific Mix Design Submittal forms in accordance with Table and the Contract .
Table Project Specific Contractor Designed Mixes Concrete Grade Intended Use Specification Spec .
A Concrete Pavement .D .
M W and Y Precast Concrete Varies HPC High Performance Concrete Special Provision .D .
MC Mass Concrete Special Provision Varies CLSM Cellular Concrete Grout None F. Submittal Requirements At least calendar days before initial placement of the concrete submit the appropriate General Concrete Mix Design Submittal form to the Concrete Engineer for approval .
The Contractor Mix Design Forms are available from the MnDOT Concrete Engineering Website .
Design the concrete mix to an absolute volume of . . cu .
ft .
The Concrete Engineer will Provide specific gravity and absorption data using oven dry OD weights for mix design calculations .
Review the mix design submittal and approve the materials and mix design for compliance with the Specifications .
Table defines the mix design submittal requirements for Level and Level Mixes. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Mix Design Submittal Requirements SCM Substitution Limits Fine Aggregate Limit Gradation Requirements Preliminary Test Data Requirements Submittal Package Level Mixes Fly Ash Slag of total aggregate by volume and None General Concrete Mix Design Level Mixes Fly Ash Ternary Any None Use Either and Job Mix Formula JMF .. F .. a Use Either General Concrete Mix Design General Concrete Mix Design JMF High Early concrete in accordance with Table is defined as a Level Mix .
Fne aggregate limit does not apply to exposed aggregate concrete mixes .
F .. a Preliminary Test Data Requirements for Level Mixes For Level Mixes submit the proposed Mix Design Proportions on the General Concrete Mix Design Submittal based upon either a suitable experience record or conventional trial mixtures not to exceed the limits specified in Table or .
F .. a Suitable Experience Record A suitable experience record consists of at least consecutive tests or two groups of consecutive tests totaling at least tests within the previous months .
If the Contractor does not have tests the Concrete Engineer will consider a minimum of test results representing a time period of at least days .
The Concrete Engineer considers a suitable experience record to have the following characteristics as compared to the proposed mix A An fc no greater than psi above the required day compressive strength B Same type or grade of cementitious materials C Same class of coarse aggregate D Aggregate weights within of the proposed E WaterCement ratio no greater than the maximum allowed F Cementitious or SCM material weights within of proposed and G Batching conditions and testing procedures similar to those expected for the proposed work .
Submit all test results on the Strength Test Data sheet as part of the General Concrete Mix Design Submittal .
The Concrete Engineer reserves the right to request batching data representing the suitable experience record submittal .
F .. a Conventional Trial Mixtures If the Contractor does not have a suitable experience record as required in .. F .. a Suitable Experience Record above establish concrete proportions from trial mixtures utilizing an AASHTO accredited laboratory in accordance with the following A Use proportions and consistencies required for proposed work at the wc ratios or cementitious materials content that will produce a strength meeting or exceeding the required day compressive strength fc in accordance with Table or B Design trial mixtures to produce slump within allowable slump range C For airentrained concrete design trial mixtures to produce air content within .
percent of target air content D For each wc ratio or cementitious materials content make and cure at least three test cylinders for day breaks in accordance with ASTM C . For HE concrete mixes in addition to the day cylinders make a set of three test cylinders for hour breaks in accordance with ASTM C . Submit all test results for the trial mixtures certified by the AASHTO accredited laboratory in addition to the General Concrete Mix Design Submittal .
F .. b Determining the Required Average Strength Based upon the following information select the Mix Design Proportions required to produce fcr .
Using the Test Data spreadsheet determine the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Standard Deviation S and The Required Average Strength fcr in accordance with Table .
Table Required Average Strength fcr Equations Required Average Strength fc psi fcr fc .S OR fcr fc .S fc psi fcr .fc .S When fc psi fcr is the larger value computed from the equations .
F. Contractor Mix Design Adjustments The Department will allow mix design adjustments based upon the criteria as defined in Table Table Mix Design Adjustments Requirements Type of Change or Adjustment Mix Design Resubmittal Requirements Level Mixes Cementitious Sources Admixture Sources Admixture Dosage Rate No resubmittal required Aggregate Sources Aggregate Proportions Any cementitious or SCM proportion max fly ash Resubmittal of Mix Design Any cementitious or SCM proportion max fly ash Resubmittal in accordance with .. F .. a Level Mixes Admixture Dosage Rate Cement or SCM sources No resubmittal required Aggregate Source no change in Aggregate Class in any cementitious or SCM proportion in Aggregate Proportions Resubmittal of Mix Design Aggregate source and Class of Coarse Aggregate in any cementitious or SCM proportion Aggregate Proportions Admixture Sources Resubmittal in accordance with .. F .. a Only one increase in cementitious or SCM allowed per mix design next adjustment requires resubmittal in accordance with .. F .. a Preliminary Test Data Requirements for Level Mixes F. MnDOT Review for Continual Acceptance of Contractor Mix Designs The MnDOT Concrete Engineering Unit will review all test results relating to each individual Contractor approved mix design .
MnDOT will review the following test results Plant and Field Test Results Compressive Strength at days Monthly Aggregate Quality Testing Provided the concrete met the requirements of the Contract had satisfactory placement and performance the Contractor will have that mix design available for use during the next calendar year .
G Blank H Concrete Yield The Department defines concrete yield as the ratio of the volume of mixed concrete less accountable waste to the planned volume of the work constructed .
The Department will not assume responsibility for the yield from a given volume of mixed concrete. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Batching Equipment A. Mixer Requirements Provide stationary mixers or truck mixers .
A .
General Condition Maintain mixers as necessary to detect changes in condition due to accumulations of hardened concrete or mortar and examine to detect wear of blades .
Replace or recondition pickup and throwover blades in mixers with a rated capacity less than cu .
ft showing a blade wear loss of greater than ½ in and pickup and throwover blades in mixers of greater capacity showing a blade wear loss of no greater than ¾ in from the original factory dimensions .
A .
Manufacturers Rating Plate Provide mixers that include the manufacturers rating plate showing the following information Serial number of the unit Mixing speed of the drum or paddles and Maximum capacity in terms of volume of mixed concrete .
A .
Drum Speed for Stationary Mixers Operate the drum speed in the mixer as specified by the manufacturer or as directed by the Engineer .
A. Auxiliary Equipment Requirements Provide mixers equipped with the following Timing device Discharge locking device Water measuring device that operates mechanically and automatically during each batching cycle and A graduated adjustable indicator device to represent the volume of discharge in increments no greater than ¼ gal in full view .
A. Mixer Capacity Do not exceed the manufacturers rated capacity of the mixer when mixing a single batch of concrete .
Batch concrete in volumes the mixer can accommodate without spilling leaking or segregating during the charging mixing or discharging operations .
A. Mixing Time The Department defines the mixing time as the time period beginning when the cement and aggregates enter the mixer drum and ending when the discharge begins .
Refer to the manufacturers recommended minimum mixing time for single drum and dual drum mixers .
In the absence of manufacturers recommendation the Engineer will designate the minimum mixing time .
The minimum mixing time for any concrete batch is s. The Contractor may reduce the manufacturers recommended minimum mixing time or the Engineer designated mixing time if the Contractor obtains uniform mixing in accordance with .. E Mixing Requirements and as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
If there is evidence of inadequately mixed concrete unmixed or partially mixed materials during concrete placement the Engineer may direct an increase in the mixing time .
A .
Turbine Type Mixers Provide turbine type mixers meeting the applicable requirements for conventional type mixers in accordance with .. A. through .. A. and this subsection .
Maintain the mixer drum in a cylindrical shape within ¾ in from the original factory dimensions at any point .
Maintain the mixer discharge gate in a mortar tight condition in the closed position .
Replace or recondition mixer paddles showing a wear loss greater than ½ in from the original factory dimensions .
Add the mixing water to the batch materials in a manner that distributes the water to the inner or central areas of the drum .
Start the flow of water before introducing the solid batch materials into the mixer drum .
During mixing operate the paddles at a speed between revolutions and revolutions per minute .
After adding the batch materials to the drum mix the concrete for an additional s. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A. Horizontal AxialRevolving Blade Type Mixers Provide horizontal axialrevolving blade type mixers single or multiple shaft in accordance with the applicable requirements for conventional type mixers in accordance with .. A. through .. A. and this subsection .
Charge the water aggregates and cement in the sequence recommended by the Manufacturer .
Test the concrete uniformity as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will use concrete uniformity tests to determine the minimum mixing time .
B Transportation Units B .
General Requirements Equip transportation units intended for both mixing and agitating with watertight revolving drums mounted and powered and fitted with properly designed mixing blades in accordance with .. A. through .. A ..
Provide units capable of combining all the ingredients into a homogeneous mixture and designed to provide two drum speeds one for mixing and the other for agitating .
Provide units capable of delivering the concrete without segregation or loss of any of the batch materials .
Equip the mixer drum with a working counting device to record the number of revolutions .
Equip dump trucks and agitator trucks with vibrators to aid in discharge are mortar tight capable of complete discharge of the concrete and in accordance with .. F Placing Concrete .
B .
Capacity of Transportation Units Refer to the truck mixer manufacturers certification plate attached to the unit for the maximum capacity of the unit .
If the unit will not satisfactorily mix the maximum volume shown reduce the batch volume to allow proper mixing or discontinue use of the mixing unit as directed by the Engineer until the problem is corrected .
C Handling and Storing Materials C. Batch Material Requirements Do not change the source kind or gradation of batch materials after the start of concrete production for the work unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
If the Engineer approves use of different material completely exhaust the supply on hand before changing to the different material .
If delivering freshly washed aggregates to the batching plant drain the aggregates for at least h before using in the batching operation .
If draining freshly washed aggregates at the site of the batching plant completely separate the drained material from the undrained materials and provide for the disposal of water that accumulates from the drainage of materials .
Provide smooth firm and welldrained stockpile sites cleared of vegetation and extraneous matter .
Where the natural foundation is unsatisfactory as determined by the Engineer construct the stockpiles on suitable platforms .
Construct suitable bulkheads or partitions to separate different kinds of aggregate gradation or water content .
Construct stockpiles by methods that hold segregation and degradation to a minimum .
If the Engineer sees segregation or degradation the Engineer may designate that pile as unacceptable for use .
Do not use aggregates used to construct runways for loading or hauling equipment in concrete batches .
Use of aggregates from the bottom ft of a stockpile placed on an unprepared surface in concrete batches is allowed only under the Engineers direct supervision and if the material meets all requirements of Fine Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete and Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete .
Provide aggregates in accordance with the specified gradation requirements .
The Engineer will consider aggregates unacceptable if the variation in moisture content carried by any of the aggregates causes a marked variation in the consistency of successive batches of the mixed concrete and will suspend operations until corrected .
C. Concrete Temperature Control Produce concrete at temperatures from F to F and maintain temperatures until deposited in the work .
If necessary to maintain placement temperature uniformly heat or cool the water aggregates or both before introduction into the mixer .
Control the temperature of the mixing water during heating or cooling .
Use aggregate at temperatures from F to F. Do not allow cementitious material to contact other batch material when the aggregate temperature exceeds F. Do not heat the cement add salt or add chemical admixtures to the concrete mix to prevent freezing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Use a heating system to heat batch materials as approved by the Engineer .
Do not use steam jets to spot heat the material as the work progresses .
Do not place mixer heaters intended for heating the batch materials in the mixer drum .
D Batching Requirements Calibrate weighing equipment in accordance with Measurement of Quantities .
Inspect and calibrate the scales in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
D. Batching by Weight D .. a Proportioning Methods Proportion concrete batch materials by weight in a central plant or by volume as directed by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
D .. b Weighing Equipment and Tolerances Weigh or measure concrete mixture ingredients using load cells or meters for readymix and paving concrete to within the targeted batch weight in accordance with the following Water percent Cement percent Other cementitious materials percent Aggregates percent and Admixtures percent .
D .. c Batching of Mixing Water Separately measure each type of mixing water on scales or water metering devices containing the following A discharge indicator capable of being set to within gal of a predetermined quantity A positive automatic shutoff valve and An approved inspection seal on the scale or water metering device dating the time of the previous calibration and adjustment An authorized service agency will calibrate the water meter every months and make adjustments as necessary before use meeting the requirements of the weighing procedure in the Concrete Manual .
Check the water meter for accuracy at least once each month as the work progresses .
D .. d Batching of Cementitious Materials Weigh the cementitious material independently of the aggregates in separate compartments or on separate scales .
If the Contractor weighs the cement first and then separately records the weights of each individual cementitious material the Contractor may weigh the cementitious materials cumulatively as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
D .. e Batching of Aggregates If the Contractor records each individual fraction weight of aggregates separately the Contractor may weigh aggregates cumulatively as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
D .. f Admixture Proportioning If using two or more admixtures in a single concrete batch add each admixture separately to prevent interaction of the different admixtures before mixing with other batch materials .
Agitate admixtures to ensure homogeneous concentrations in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Incorporate admixtures to the batch mix in liquid form .
Maintain admixture solutions at a uniform concentration at all times .
Use the solution concentration and proportions designated by the manufacturer .
If using a mechanical dispenser for proportioning Class I or Class II admixtures provide a site gauge or meter .
Have the admixture manufacturer check admixture dispensers yearly to determine accuracy and ensure unobstructed flow .
D. Batching by Volume Proportion concrete for bridge deck overlays by volume or as required by the contract .
If the Contractor calibrates the mixer for the specific batch materials in use the Contractor may proportion concrete on other items of work by volume as approved by the Engineer in writing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will approve all methods and equipment used in volumetric proportioning .
Determine all material proportions and calibration settings on the basis of lb of cementitious material .
Provide and use only sacked cement in the original mill containers unless the Contractor calibrates the mixer for the specific materials in use .
Do not use previously opened sacks .
E Mixing Requirements The Engineer may check the water measuring equipment for accuracy before mixing operations begin and at any other time the Engineer considers necessary .
Mix concrete by one of the following methods A central plant stationary plant Entirely or in part in truck mixers or At the construction site .
Do not allow the mixing batch to merge or intermix with the subsequent dry batch during mixing .
Discharge water remaining in the drums before batching .
Mix concrete to provide a mixture that is homogeneous and uniform in color .
The Engineer will reject concrete batches that show a marked variation in consistency or evidence of improper mixing as unacceptable work in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
After completely mixing the concrete either in a central plant mixer or truck mixer continuously agitate while in transit to the point of placement until the concrete is discharged from the unit unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
If the mixing does not appear uniform perform slump tests at the percentage point and the percentage points during unloading .
If the results show a slump variation greater than ½ in stop work and correct the mixing unit .
Produce concrete in such quantity and at such a rate as proper placement and finishing will permit .
Do not retemper partially set concrete .
Do not hand mix concrete .
E. Mixing In Truck Mixer Charge the materials into the truck mixer drum by introducing sufficient water before adding solid materials .
Perform charging operations without losing materials .
Leave the truck mixer at the plant site for a minimum of min or revolutions during the mixing period .
Transport the concrete at agitating speed to the point of placement .
F Certified ReadyMix Concrete Provide concrete produced by a certified readymix plant .
Ensure the Producer performs quality control of concrete production under a certification program for readymix concrete plants .
Provide batches for a delivered load of concrete in sizes of at least cu .
yd .
The Engineer may reject readymix concrete delivered to the work site that does not meet the specified requirements for delivery time consistency quality air content or other properties as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
F. Certified ReadyMix Plant Program The Producer will perform Quality Control QC as part of the production process under the certification program for readymix concrete plants .
QC is the process control of the operations related to gradation and moisture control of the aggregates at the readymix plant .
Provide and maintain a QC program for readymix production including mix design process control inspection sampling and testing and adjustments in the process related to the production of concrete .
The Engineer will perform Quality Assurance QA as part of the acceptance process .
QA is the process of monitoring and evaluating various aspects of the Producers responsibilities related to the sampling testing and production of concrete. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F .. a Plant Certification Prior to the production of Department concrete each construction season a Department Representative shall perform a thorough onsite inspection of the concrete plant with a MnDOT Certified Plant Level or Level Technician representing the Producer .
In order to obtain certification complete the following Identify all persons responsible for testing and overseeing plant operations including their email and cell phone number on the MnDOT Form Concrete Plant Contact Report .
The Producer will complete MnDOT Form Concrete Plant Contact Report prior to the onsite inspection with the Department Representative. . A MnDOT Certified Concrete Plant Level or Technician representing the Producer signs the Concrete Plant Contact Report certifying compliance with the Certified Ready Mix requirements and continual maintenance of the plant to assure that the plant can produce concrete meeting MnDOT Specifications. . A MnDOT Certified Concrete Plant Level or Technician representing the Department signs the Concrete Plant Contact Report signifying that the plant complies with all requirements prior to concrete production .
Include a site map showing stockpile locations identified with the MnDOT pit number .
Provide cementitious and admixture samples .
Provide a computerized batching system capable of meeting the requirements of .. F. Certificate of Compliance .
Provide continuous access onsite to the Concrete Manual available from MnDOTs website .
Supply a working email address including an active internet connection at the certified readymix plant .
Keep plant reports charts and supporting documentation on file at the plant site for calendar years .
Provide electronic scales for weighing all materials .
Provide facilities in accordance with Plant Inspection Commercial Facility for the use of the plant technician in performing tests .
F .. b Maintaining Plant Certification The Producer will maintain plant certification by Displaying the current Contact Report and site map in plain sight at all times Updating the Contact Report with any material or equipment changes and submitting to the Department Sampling and testing the materials in accordance with this section and the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control Documenting the production and testing of the materials used in the certified readymix concrete in the QC Workbook Making Producer Plant QC Workbook and QC charts available electronically at all times Supplying the following information at the request of the Engineer .
Approved mix design sheets .
Agency cementitious and admixture test results .
Agency verification gradation test results .
Aggregate quality test results .
Any procedural changes that cause noncompliance with this program may result in decertification of the plant and cessation of further production of Department concrete as determined by the Concrete Engineer in accordance with .. F .. h Certified ReadyMix Plant Decertification .
F. Certificate of Compliance Provide a computerized Certificate of Compliance with each truckload of readymixed concrete at the time of delivery .
The Department defines computerized to mean a document that records mix design quantities from load cells and meters .
If the computer that generates the Certificate of Compliance malfunctions the Engineer may allow the Contractor to finish any pours in progress if the Producer issues a handwritten MnDOT Form Certificate of Compliance with each load .
Do not allow the Producer to begin new pours without a working computerized Certificate of Compliance .
Provide a computerized Certificate of Compliance that includes all of the following information Name of the readymix concrete plant Name of the Contractor Date State Project Number SP or SAP Bridge Number if applicable Time concrete was batched Truck number .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Quantity of concrete in this load Running total of each type of concrete each day for each project Type of concrete MnDOT Mix Designation Number Cementitious materials using MnDOT Standard Abbreviations Admixtures using MnDOT Standard Abbreviations Aggregate sources using digit State Pit Numbers Admixture quantity in fluid ounces per lb of cementitious materials or ounces per cubic yard Batch weights in columns in accordance with Table .
Print in order a through k. . Use formula to calculate weights. . Head columns with Standard Labels .
Table Standard Certificate of Compliance Labels Formula Letter Formula Standard Label a Ingredients aggregate cementitious water admixture type Ingredient b Product Source MnDOT Standard Abbreviation Source c Total Moisture Factor in decimals to places MCFac d Absorption Factor in decimals to places AbsFac e MnDOT mix design oven dry OD weights lbcu .
yd OD f Absorbed moisture in the aggregates lbcu .
yd e d Abs g Saturated surface dry SSD weights for aggregates lbcu .
yd e f SSD h Free moisture lbcu .
yd c d e Free Mst i Target weights for one cubic yard of concrete lbcu .
yd g h CY Targ j Target batch weights lb cu .
yd i cu .
m i Target k Actual batch weights lb Actual NOTE Actual cubic yards batched may vary due to differences in air content weight tolerances specific gravities of aggregates and other variables .
Total Water Batch Water Free Moisture in pounds Water available to add Mix Design Water Batch Size Total water in gallons Space to note the water adjustment information including .
Water in gallons added to truck at plant filled in by Producer enter zero if no water is added .
Water in gallons added to truck at the jobsite filled in by Producer or Engineer enter zero if no water is added and .
Total actual water in pounds Total Water from Certificate of Compliance plus any additions .
The following information printed with enough room beside each item to allow the Engineer to record the test results .
Air content .
Air temperature .
Concrete temperature .
Slump .
Cylinder number .
Location or part of structure .
Time discharge and .
Signature of Inspector .
Location for the Producer signature For colored concrete final color F. Definitions The Department defines readymix concrete as one of the following Centralmixed concrete proportioned and mixed in a stationary plant and hauled to the point of placement in revolving drum agitator trucks or a truck mixer or Truckmixed concrete proportioned in a stationary plant and fully mixed in truck mixers .
Table defines commonly used certified readymix terms. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Certified ReadyMix Terminology Term Definition Mix design water The maximum allowable water content for cu .
yd of concrete .
Total moisture factor Factor used to determine total amount of water carried by a given wet aggregate .
Absorption factor Factor used to determine the water contained within the pores of the aggregate and is held within the particles by capillary force .
Free moisture The water that is carried on the surface of the aggregate that becomes part of the total water .
Batch water Water actually batched into the truck by the batcher .
Batch water includes potable water and clarified water .
Total water Batch water added to free moisture .
Total water may also include the water used in diluting admixture solutions .
Temper water Water added in mixer to adjust slump .
Total actual water The water in the concrete mixture at the time of placement from any source other than the amount absorbed by the aggregate .
It includes all batch water placed in the mixer free moisture on the aggregate and any water added to the ready mix truck prior to placement .
ReadyMix Producer or Producer Party that is producing the concrete for the Contract .
It is understood that the ReadyMix Producer is the agent of the Contractor .
WaterCement wc Ratio WC ratio is defined as the ratio of the total water weight to the total cementitious weight which includes cement and supplementary cementitious materials .
F. Contractor Quality Control QC The Producers responsibilities include the following Maintain all plant and laboratory equipment within allowable tolerances as set forth in the MnDOT Specifications .
Provide qualified personnel when producing certified readymix concrete .
Spot check the actual batching of concrete to assure desired batch weights and tolerances comply .
Check the bins and piles for segregation contamination or interblending of the aggregates .
Check accuracy of scales and verify scale calibrations are uptodate .
Check that mix trucks are clean blades are not worn and revolution counters are working properly .
Take cementitious and admixtures samples per Schedule of Materials Control .
Document the following samples in the appropriate Sampling Log .
Cementitious Materials .
Admixtures .
Verification Gradations .
Coarse Aggregate Quality F .. a Personnel Provide a competent MnDOT Certified Concrete Plant Level Technician who is responsible for all certified readymix plant operations and QC testing .
The MnDOT Certified Concrete Plant Level Technician is required to remain onsite during concrete production or have cellular phone availability .
Provide a MnDOT Concrete Plant Level or Plant Level Technician to perform all testing and quality control requirements of .
F .. b Sampling and Testing Take all samples randomly in accordance with ASTM D Section at a rate defined in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
Perform all sampling and testing in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
The Engineer may oversee the QC sampling and testing process .
Perform QC gradation and moisture testing at the certified readymix plant site .
Use mechanical shakers for sieve analysis .
Determine the moisture content using the ovendry method in all fractions of the aggregate .
Provide equipment and perform calibrations meeting the requirements of the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications AASHTO T Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregates AASHTO T Total Moisture Content of Aggregate by Drying AASHTO M Wirecloth Sieves for Testing Purpose and AASHTO M Weighing Devices Used in the Testing of Materials .
F .. c QC Gradations Complete the Concrete Aggregate Worksheet for each aggregate size and source .
QC gradations .
Verification Companion Gradations The Engineer will not allow a Verification Companion Gradation as a substitute for a QC Gradation .
Identify QC companion samples with the following information .
Date .
Test number .
Time .
Type of material .
Plant and .
Sampling location .
F .. d Aggregate Gradation QC Charts Complete the MnDOT Aggregate Gradation Control Charts for each aggregate size and aggregate source Record Producer QC gradation and Department Verification Companion gradation results .
These results are included in the moving average calculation .
Record Department Verification Gradation results .
These results are not included in the moving average calculation .
F .. e Moisture Content Complete the Batching Report for each aggregate size and source .
F .. f Plant QC Workbook Complete the Concrete ReadyMix Plant QC Workbook which includes all of the following documents Diary Batching Report Concrete Aggregate Worksheet Weekly Concrete Aggregate Report JMF Concrete Aggregate Worksheet JMF Weekly Concrete Aggregate Report The Producer will electronically submit the QC Workbook to the Engineer by the Tuesday immediately following the previous weeks production .
F .. g Signing the Certificate of Compliance The Producers MnDOT Certified Plant Level or Level technician will Review the first Certificate of Compliance for each mix type each day for accuracy and Legibly hand sign the Certificate of Compliance at a location designated for Producer signature signifying agreement to the terms of this program and to certify that the materials comply with the requirements of the Contract and Write their MnDOT Technical Certification Number next to their signature .
F .. h Certified ReadyMix Plant Decertification The Concrete Engineer with coordination from the Engineer may decertify the plant and halt production of concrete under any of the following conditions Unauthorized procedural material or equipment changes made after the completion of the Concrete Plant Contact Report Failure to meet the required testing rates Failure to complete required documents Disregards any of the requirements of this section and Falsification of test records or certificates of compliance .
F. Quality Assurance QA The Engineers responsibilities include the following Confirm the Producers QC Workbook and Aggregate Gradation Control Charts are accurate and uptodate Check Certificate of Compliance for completeness and accuracy Spot check the actual batching of concrete to verify batch weights and tolerances Check the bins and stockpiles for segregation contamination and interblending of the aggregates Obtain Aggregate Quality samples per Schedule of Materials Control .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Observe Producers Certified Technician obtain aggregate samples and run gradation and moisture tests when possible Verify cementitious and admixtures are certified and approved Collect cementitious and admixtures samples per the Schedule of Material Control Provide the following test results to the Producer .
Cementitious Materials .
Admixtures .
Verification Gradations .
Coarse Aggregate Quality F .. a Personnel The Department will utilize technicians with certification at least meeting MnDOT Concrete Plant Level to perform all of the duties of .. F. Quality Assurance QA .
F .. b Verification Gradations The Engineer will Obtain Verification gradation samples per Schedule of Materials Control .
Record the Verification gradation results on the MnDOT Form Weekly Certified ReadyMix Plant Report or Concrete ReadyMix Plant QA Workbook .
Provide Verification gradation results to Producer in a timely manner so they can enter into Producers QC Workbook .
Compare results with Verification Companion sample run at the plant for compliance with labfield tolerance in accordance with Table .
F .. c Diary The Engineer will provide plant diaries in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
F .. d Batch Weight Verification Each time the Engineer obtains a verification gradation the Engineer will observe the actual water batched in a single load of concrete in accordance with the following Watching the readymix truck reverse the drum after washing Verifying use of the current moisture test Verifying that any additional water added to adjust the slump is recorded and Validating water weights on the load batched and comparing the total water with the design water .
The Engineer will document the actual water batched on MnDOT Form Weekly Certified ReadyMix Plant Report or Concrete ReadyMix Plant QA Workbook .
F .. e QA Workbook In lieu of completing a diary and the MnDOT Form Weekly Certified ReadyMix Plant Report the Engineer has the option of using the Concrete ReadyMix Plant QA Workbook .
F .. f Noncompliance with Certified ReadyMix Plant Program If the Engineer observes the Producer not complying with the requirements of the Certified ReadyMix Plant Program the Engineer may perform any or all of the following Notify the Producer of observed deficiencies promptly both verbally and in writing and provide a time deadline to correct the noncompliance .
Stop production until the Contractor takes corrective action .
Order the Contractor to remove the noncompetent person in accordance with Qualification of Workers .
F. Acceptance of Concrete Materials Only place concrete meeting the materials requirements in the work .
If the Contractor places concrete not meeting the materials requirements into the work the Engineer will not accept nonconforming concrete at the contract unit price .
F .. a Aggregate Gradation Does not apply to Job Mix Formulas The Engineer will base material acceptance on individual and moving average test results in accordance with Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Acceptance Criteria for Aggregate Gradations Contractor Action Within Gradation Limits of MnDOT or Outside of Gradation Limits in MnDOT or Individual gradation test Continue testing as required Immediately take second gradation a If second gradation passes resume testing as required b If second gradation fails stop production and contact Engineer Resume production when corrective action results in a passing gradation and continue testing as required Moving average of consecutive tests Continue testing as required Stop production and contact Engineer Determine the cause of continual borderline or failing material Resume production when corrective action results in a passing gradation Increase gradation testing at a rate of per cubic yards until the moving average is within the gradation limits If any aggregate size or source does not establish a moving average of consecutive tests use the average of all tests taken to determine acceptance .
The Engineer may increase the testing rates if gradation issues persist .
If the gradation tests on split samples from quality control or verification samples result in a variation between the Producer and the Engineer greater than that set forth in Table the Engineer will substitute QA andor Verification test results into the moving average calculation to determine acceptance .
If Producer test results are consistently coarser or finer than Engineer test results the Engineer will review in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents .
The Engineer will determine the monetary reduction due to the moving average gradation failure . .
Calculate the quantity of noncomplying concrete placed beginning with the first individual gradation test within the moving average failure and ending with the first passing individual gradation test after the moving average failure. . Based on the total quantity of noncompliant concrete placed the Engineer will apply the monetary reduction outlined in Table . .
If a moving average failure occurs on multiple sieves the Engineer will only reduce the price based on a single monetary deduction .
Table Moving Average Gradation of Specification Sieves Total Concrete Quantity Cubic Yards Lump Sum Monetary Reduction to .
to .
to . . or .
per cubic yard whichever is greater F .. b Lab Field Tolerance If the gradation tests on split samples from quality control or verification samples result in a variation between the Producer and the Engineer greater than that set forth in Table the parties shall follow the procedures for test result dispute resolution available from the MnDOT Laboratory Manual .
Table Allowable Variations on Percent Passing Sieves Sieve Size Allowed Percentage in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F .. c Coarse Aggregate Quality The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine adjusted contract unit prices for coarse aggregate quality failures in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
F .. d Cementitious Materials The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine adjusted contract unit prices for cementitious failures in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
F .. e Admixtures The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine adjusted contract unit prices for admixture failures in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G Concrete Placement Assume full responsibility for the acceptable production placement finishing and curing of all concrete under the conditions prevailing regardless of the restrictions imposed .
Provide any artificial lighting rain or cold weather protection necessary at no additional cost to the Department .
Place concrete after the Engineer inspects and approves the foundation preparations forms and falsework erection placement of reinforcement steel materials equipment condition and cold weather protection .
Do not place concrete if portions of the base subbase or subgrade layer are frozen or if the excessive moisture levels make the grade unstable .
Maintain the surface temperature above freezing for forms steel and adjacent concrete that will come in contact with the poured concrete before concrete placement .
Protect the concrete from freezing .
Protect the concrete against damage from construction operations or traffic .
The Engineer will evaluate any defects in concrete or concrete surfaces resulting from weather conditions inadequate lighting or other causes in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G. Notice of Inspection Notify the Engineer at least h before beginning concrete production to allow the Engineer time to provide inspection forces needed for the work and to approve preparations for concrete placement .
If the Contractor fails to provide h notice the Engineer may delay concrete placement and will consider any concrete incorporated into the work as unauthorized in accordance with .
Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer will consider any delays to the Contract resulting from unauthorized work as non excusable in accordance with .. C NonExcusable Delays .
If the producer needs to change plants during placement notify the Engineer and obtain approval before changing the plant .
G. Placement Temperatures Maintain concrete temperature from F to F until placement .
Unless Engineer approved cold weather protection plans are in place do not place concrete when the air temperature is either of the following at the point of placement Below F or The National Weather Service predicts the temperature to fall below F within the following h period .
G. Delivery Requirements Place concrete into the work in accordance with the following Type Concretewithin min of batching and Type Concretewithin min of batching when all admixtures are added at the plant at the manufacturers recommended dosage rates listed on the Approved Products list .
If the haul time does not facilitate mixing and placing the concrete within min test the concrete in accordance with .. G .. a Delivery Time Beyond Minutes .
The Contractor may transport Type concrete in nonagitating equipment if the concrete is discharged within min of batching .
Batch time starts when the batch plant or the transit mix truck adds the cement to the other batch materials. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G .. a Delivery Time Beyond Minutes If the haul time does not facilitate mixing and placing the concrete within min perform the following procedures for prequalifying a concrete mix to extend the delivery time to min .
Extending the delivery time beyond min will require additional testing at minute intervals up to the maximum desired delivery time as directed by the Concrete Engineer .
Provide a contractor mix design in accordance with .. F.b Contractor Designed Concrete Mixes for each combination of materials Laboratory trial batching on the proposed mix includes the following testing requirements .
Perform all laboratory trial batching at an AASHTO accredited laboratory .
Perform all plastic concrete testing after adding all admixtures to the concrete mixture .
Perform slump air content unit weight and temperature testing immediately after batching at min and at min .
Fabricate concrete cylinders for compressive strength at min and at min sets of and cylinders for hardened air content testing at min and at min sets of .
Test the cylinders for compressive strength at days .
Determine the hardened air content ASTM C at a minimum of days .
The Contractor is required to test samples representing min and samples representing min and provide MnDOT with the other samples for testing at their discretion .
Retain any hardened concrete test specimens for a minimum of days for MnDOT to examine at their discretion .
Ensure the admixture manufacturers technical representative is present during the trial batching .
Contact the MnDOT Concrete Engineering Unit a minimum of two days before mixing .
This same two day notification is required before any physical testing on hardened concrete samples and .
Once accepted by the Concrete Engineer the Department will consider the laboratory trial batching acceptable for use for five years unless they determine the material sources have changed significantly since the initial laboratory testing and acceptance .
The Engineer will require field trial batching on all projects .
Field trial batching on the proposed mix for each specific project shall include batching in the presence of the Engineer and the following .
Provide a QC Plan for extending the delivery time beyond min .
Mix and transport the concrete using the same materials used in the laboratory trial batching .
Batch a minimum cubic yards of concrete utilizing the same methods intended for use when supplying concrete placed into the permanent work .
Maintain the ready mix truck in transit by either driving around the yard or on the roadway and maintain the drum speed at to revolutions per minute for the entire min .
Perform all plastic concrete testing after adding admixtures to the concrete mixture .
Perform slump air content unit weight and temperature testing at min and min .
Fabricate concrete cylinders for compressive strength at min and min sets of and cylinders for hardened air content testing at min and min sets of .
Test the cylinders for compressive strength at a minimum of seven days .
Determine the hardened air content ASTM C at a minimum of seven days .
The Contractor is required to test one sample representing min and one sample representing min and provide MnDOT with the other two samples for testing at their discretion .
Retain any hardened concrete test specimens for a minimum of days for MnDOT to examine at their discretion .
Incorporate the trial batch concrete into other work with the approval of the Engineer and .
The Contractor must demonstrate to the Engineer the ability to properly mix control and place the concrete .
The Concrete Engineer will review the trial batch results and all related concrete testing for compliance with the QC Plan and the Contract .
Final approval of the mixture is based on satisfactory field placement and performance .
G. Field Adjustments Mix the load a minimum of min or revolutions at mixing speed after addition of admixture or additional mixing water .
G .. a Water Adjustments The Engineer will allow water adjustments in accordance with all of the following Prior to discharging approximately cubic yard of concrete Water is available to add as stated on the Certificate of Compliance and Concrete is within min from the initial batch time stated on the Certificate of Compliance .
G .. b Water Adjustments for Concrete Placed by the SlipForm Method The Engineer will allow water adjustments for all grades of concrete placed by the slipform method except Grade A paving concrete in accordance with all of the following If water is available to add as stated on the Certificate of Compliance and Concrete is within min from the initial batch time stated on the Certificate of Compliance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G .. c Admixture Adjustments Approved admixture additions are allowed within min from the initial batch time stated on the Certificate of Compliance .
If the load of concrete has no available water to add or the load is greater than minutes old the Engineer will allow one admixture adjustment diluted with up to gallons of water .
G .. d Consistency and Air Content Adjustments The Engineer will test the concrete for compliance with .. G. Consistency and .. G. Air Content in accordance with the following If the first test taken by the Engineer passes the Engineer will continue verification testing in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
If the test taken by the Engineer fails make adjustments and perform any quality control testing before the Engineer performs a final test .
Acceptance or rejection of the truck is based on the Engineers final test result .
The Engineer will test up to two additional trucks in accordance with items and above and If the concrete does not meet the specification after those three trucks the Engineer will reduce their verification testing rate to once per truck for acceptance for the remainder of the pour .
For concrete mixes UA and U allow mix to hydrate min before slump test to assure all cement is saturated .
G. Test Methods and Specimens Perform random sampling and testing in accordance with the Concrete Manual and determine testing rates meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
The Engineer performs random sampling and testing in accordance with the Concrete Manual determines testing rates meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
Anyone fabricating concrete cylinders or beams is required to hold either a current ACI Field Technician Certification or a MnDOT Field Technician Certification .
Anyone performing concrete strength testing of cylinders is required to hold one of the following current certifications .
ACI Strength Testing Technician Certification .
MnDOT Strength Testing Technician Certification or .
WisDOT Strength Testing Technician Certification .
The Engineer will furnish molds based on the maximum size aggregate for the test specimens in accordance with the following .
in in cylinder molds .
in in cylinder molds for maximum aggregate sizes greater than ¼ in and .
in in in beam molds use other beam mold sizes as approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will transport the cylinders in accordance with the following .
A minimum of at least hours after casting. . A minimum of at least hours after casting for high early strength day cylinders. . With securely placed tight fitting plastic caps on plastic molds or by other methods to prevent moisture loss . .
Protected from jarring bouncing and freezing. . No greater than hours unless cylinders are maintained in the moistened condition at ambient temperature of F to F. G .. a Moist Curing Environments At least hours prior to concrete placement provide moist curing environments of adequate size and number including all ancillary equipment and materials necessary to maintain moist curing environments in accordance with ASTM C .. C Special Requirements and the following For each separate moist curing environment Provide a calibrated waterproof digital temperature recording device that records the daily maximum and minimum ambient temperatures for the previous days .
Maintain the standard day strength cylinders or beams in an ambient temperature range from F to F during the initial and intermediate curing periods .
The Engineer will monitor the daily temperatures of the curing environments .
Agency monitoring does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility to maintain the water temperature as specified herein .
If the Contractor fails to comply with the requirements shown herein the Engineer may delay concrete placement and will consider any concrete incorporated into the work as unauthorized in accordance with .
Unauthorized Work .
The .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Engineer will consider any delays to the Contract resulting from unauthorized work as nonexcusable in accordance with .. C NonExcusable Delays .
All costs related to providing and maintaining moist curing environments is considered incidental .
G .. b Standard day Strength Cylinders The Engineer will perform the following for standard strength cylinders .
Cast cylinders sets of for testing at days in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control. . Mark cylinders for identification of the represented unit or section of concrete in accordance with the following . . . . . . . . etc ..
In order to differentiate between portions of a project prefixes and suffixes are allowed . .
Cure the cylinders meeting the requirements of the .. G .. a Moist Curing Environments . .
Complete the MnDOT Concrete Cylinder Identification Card including the results for air content slump if required concrete and air temperature testing from the same load .
The Concrete Engineer defines the curing period as the following .
Initial curing period as immediately after final finishing for a period of up to hours .
After the initial curing period the Engineer will both transport and further cure the cylinders in the provided curing tanks for intermediate curing up to days from the day of casting or deliver directly to the laboratory for final curing. . Intermediate Curing Period as the time between specimen pickup from the initial curing site and delivery to the laboratory for final curing not to exceed days from the day of casting . .
Final Curing Period as the time when cylinders are cured in the laboratory within days of casting .
G .. c Field Control Strength Cylinders The Engineer will use field control cylinders to determine when the sequence of construction operations is dependent upon the rate of concrete strength development .
The Engineer will cast field control cylinders to determine when the concrete attains the required strength for all desired field control limitations .
The Engineer will perform the following for field control strength cylinders Cast up to three field control cylinders per structure .
The Contractor is responsible for any additional field control cylinders .
Mark field control cylinders for identification of the represented unit or section of concrete in accordance with .. G .. a .
Cure the cylinders in the same location and under the same conditions as the concrete structure or unit involved meeting the requirements of the Concrete Manual .
For HighEarly HE Concrete as defined in Table the Engineer will allow the Contractor to cure field control cylinders using insulated cylinder storage compartment .
Provide insulated storage compartments and any equipment necessary to continually monitor temperatures of both the newly poured concrete structure and the insulated cylinder storage compartment .
Maintain the insulated storage compartment at a temperature no greater than F above the newly poured concrete structures temperature .
When the temperature exceeds F or the temperature monitoring system fails the Engineer will not accept field control cylinder results .
Complete the MnDOT Concrete Cylinder Identification Card including the results for air content slump if required concrete and air temperature testing from the same load .
During the Departments normal laboratory operating hours the Engineer will perform compressive strength testing on the field control cylinders .
If Project scheduling requires testing outside of the Departments laboratories normal operating hours or the Departments nearest laboratory is greater than miles from the project Provide certified and calibrated hydraulic cylinder testing machine within miles of the project and at a location approved by the Engineer .
Test the field control cylinders in the presence of the Engineer in accordance with ASTM C. The Engineer will allow the Contractor to submit a strengthmaturity relationship curve for use in lieu of field control cylinders in accordance with .. G. Estimating Concrete Strength by the Maturity Method .
G .. d Strength Specimens for Concrete Paving Use flexural beams to determine strength or provide cylinders as allowed by the contract or approved by the Engineer .
Cast standard beams or cylinders for testing at days .
Cast a sufficient number of field control beams or cylinders to determine when the concrete attains the required strength for all desired control limitations .
Cure the standard beams or cylinders meeting the requirements of the Concrete Manual .
Cure the field control beams or cylinders in the same location and under the same conditions as the concrete structure or unit involved meeting the requirements of the Concrete Manual. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will test the flexural beams and record the results on MnDOT Form Concrete Test Beam Data .
If using cylinders the Engineer will submit cylinders and a completed identification card to the Departments Laboratory .
G .. e Concrete Compressive Strength The Concrete Engineer defines a single strength test as the average day strength of three cylinders fabricated from a single sample of concrete and cured in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
If of the set of cylinders shows a strength variability of greater than outside of the initial calculated three cylinder average strength the Engineer will average the remaining two cylinders and report as the day compressive strength .
If or more of the set of cylinders shows a strength variability greater than outside of the initial calculated average strength the Engineer will use all three cylinder results to calculate the day compressive strength .
The Engineer will consider concrete acceptable in accordance with Table provided both the single strength test and the moving average of consecutive strength tests are met for a required fc .
Table Acceptance Criteria for Standard day Cylinders Single Strength Tests Moving average of consecutive strength tests fc psi fc psi fc fc psi .
fc fc If a project does not establish a moving average of consecutive strength tests use the average of strength tests to determine acceptance .
If there is only a single strength test contact the Concrete Engineer for recommendation .
G .. f NonConforming Material If the Contractor places concrete not meeting the strength requirements of .. G .. e Concrete Compressive Strength into the work the Engineer may not accept nonconforming concrete at the contract unit price .
The Engineer will evaluate nonconforming strength results in accordance with the following G .. f Single Strength Test psi Below fc If any single strength test cylinders shows a strength psi below fc and is not deficient due to erroneousinvalid strength tests as defined in .. G .. f Moving Average Below fc no additional investigation will occur and the Engineer will include the low strength test result in the moving average .
G .. f Single Strength Test psi Below fc If any single strength test cylinders shows a strength psi below fc and is not deficient due to erroneousinvalid strength tests as defined in .. G .. f Moving Average Below fc the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will investigate to determine if the concrete has attained the critical loadcarrying capacity .
The investigation may consist of but is not limited to reviewing the following A Sampling and testing plastic concrete B Handling of cylinders C Cylinder curing procedures D Compressive strength testing procedures E Certificate of Compliances F Evaluation using Rebound Hammer ASTM C Penetration Resistance ASTM C or other method approved by the Concrete Engineer G Review of the design calculations for the concrete in question If it is determined that the concrete represented by the single strength test has attained the critical load carrying capacity the Engineer will include the strength test in the moving average calculation .
If it is determined that the concrete has not attained the critical load carrying capacity the Engineer will direct the Contractor to remove and replace concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Contractor may dispute the remove and replace order within days of written notification by the Engineer .
If the Contractor disputes the order follow the dispute resolution coring procedure in accordance with .. G .. f Dispute Resolution Coring for Single Strength Test Failure .
G .. f Dispute Resolution Coring for Single Strength Test Failure The Engineer and Contractor will mutually agree on an Independent Third Party to core and test the concrete in accordance with ASTM C. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A The Engineer will identify a minimum of three locations for the Independent Third Party to core .
B The Independent Third Party will take one core at each location .
C The Independent Third Party will complete all coring within days of notification of the low strength concrete .
D The Contractor is responsible for ensuring the core holes are repaired .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will review the core test results and evaluate in accordance with Table providing all other concrete tests meet requirements .
Table Evaluation of Core Test Results Core average of cores Test Results Engineer considers concrete Cost of Coring and Testing Resolution of fc and No individual core is of fc Acceptable to remain in place Agency No monetary reduction for single strength test failure .
of fc Unacceptable Contractor Remove and replace concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work as directed by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
G .. f Moving Average Below fc If the moving average of three consecutive strength tests fc the Concrete Engineer will review the strength test results and determine if a new mix design is required in accordance with Table or Table .
The Engineer will remove any strength test results from the moving average if the following occurs A .
After investigation the deficient concrete strength is found to be an erroneousinvalid strength test A .
The suspect concrete was removed and replaced A .
Dispute resolution coring identified the concrete acceptable to remain in place Reasons for finding erroneous test results as determined by the Concrete Engineer B. Cylinders kept in the field longer than days B .
Improper handlingcuring of the cylinders andor B .
Improper testing of the cylinders For the quantity of nonconforming concrete not meeting the moving average of three consecutive strength tests the Engineer will make determinations regarding the disposition payment or removal of the concrete in accordance with Tables .
Table All Concrete Grades Moving average of consecutive strength tests Monetary Reduction for Moving Average Failure .
of fc .
per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by test that brought moving average into nonconformance .
and .
of fc .
per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by test that brought moving average into nonconformance .
of fc Remove and replace concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work as directed by the Engineer .
If the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer determines the concrete can remain in place the Engineer will adjust the concrete at a reduction of .
per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by test that brought moving average into nonconformance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G. Estimating Concrete Strength by the Maturity Method The Engineer will allow the maturity method to determine development of concrete strength .
Use of this method requires the establishment of a relationship between concrete strength and the computed maturity index using the NurseSaul method for a specific concrete mixture prior to construction .
Use this method in accordance with this specification and the Concrete Manual to estimate the inplace strength of the concrete .
G .. a Development of MaturityStrength Relationship The Engineer will allow development of the maturity curve in either the laboratory or in the field provided the precautions for field curing and testing are followed as described in the MnDOT Concrete Manual .
Test the concrete strength specimens for development of the maturity curve .
Determine the strength development criteria based on the type of concrete in accordance with the following For concrete pavement .. O Opening Pavement to Traffic For concrete pavement repairs .. B .
Opening to Construction Equipment and Traffic For concrete structures .. G Concrete Curing and Protection For sidewalks driveway entrances and curb and gutter a minimum of psi is required .
Until an acceptable strengthmaturity relationship is established verify strength using concrete beams or cylinders .
G .. a Procedure Estimate the inplace concrete strength using the maturity method as described in ASTM C except as noted in this specification as follows A Fabricate cylinders plus additional cylinders to embed temperature sensors or beams B The NurseSaul method of computing maturity C A datum temperature of C F D Maintain specimens at temperatures greater than F for the duration of the maturity curve development .
Test three strength specimens at five different ages specified in Table for the type of concrete work .
Table Chronological Testing Ages of Strength Specimens Type of Concrete Testing Ages Concrete Pavement as defined in Determined by the Contractor Normal Strength Concrete as defined in and days HighEarly HE Concrete as defined in hours and days Ultra HighEarly UHE Concrete as defined in and hours and days The Contractor may adjust the testing ages if approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
Test at least two sets of strength specimens before the anticipated opening strength .
G .. a Equipment Provide the following equipment for determining the maturity A Maturity meter or temperature sensor and data logger with a secure means of collecting data that is unalterable and conforms to the requirements in ASTM C. B Beam or cylinder molds for development of the maturity curve and other concrete making and testing equipment .
G .. b Estimating InPlace Strength Using Maturity Place concrete maturity meters or temperature sensors within the concrete in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Maturity Meter or Temperature Sensor Placement and Frequency Maturity Application Placement Frequency Concrete Paving Embed at approximately middepth and approximately but no less than inches from the edge of the pavement .
Place at least one for every lineal feet of paving including one in the last feet of each days paving .
Full Depth Concrete Pavement Repairs Embed at approximately middepth and approximately but no less than inches from the edge of the pavement .
Place at least two for each day of concrete placement with one at the end of the day .
Partial Depth Concrete Repairs Embed at least inches from the surface .
Place at least two for each day of concrete placement with one at the end of the day .
Sidewalk Driveway Entrances Curb and Gutter Embed at approximately middepth and approximately but no less than inches from the edge of the pavement .
Place at least two for each day of concrete placement with one at the end of the day .
Concrete Structures Attach to the reinforcing steel near the edge of the exposed surface using a nonmetallic fastener .
Place at least two for each concrete element .
The computed maturity results from each sensor will only apply to concrete placed under the following conditions The same mix designation and the same project as the test location Placed on the same day and on before or within feet after placement of the sensor Cured under conditions similar to those of the test location .
Record the temperature readings and calculate the maturity values on the MaturityField Data form .
G .. c Verify StrengthMaturity Relationship Perform a verification strength test to ensure the inplace concrete strength correlates with the maturitystrength relationship as follows Notify the Engineer at least hours in advance of the time and location of both the verification specimens casting and strength testing .
When the maturity curve is developed prior to the start of construction or in a laboratory perform a verification strength test on the first day of concrete placement .
Perform a verification strength test at least once every seven calender days during normal plant production for concrete paving .
For all other concrete perform a verification strength test at least once every thirty calendar days during normal plant production .
If the plant has not supplied concrete to the project for a period of greater than thirty calendar days perform a verification strength test .
Cast cylinders plus one additional cylinder to embed the temperature sensor or beams for each verification strength test .
The Engineer will test the concrete strength specimens for verification of the maturity curve as close to the maturity value determined to represent the opening loading or form removal strength criteria in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
Record the results of verification test on the Concrete MaturityStrength Verification form and submit an updated copy with the newest test result to the Engineer the day that the verification test is completed .
The Engineer may direct additional verification testing as necessary .
Submit electronic data from the maturity meters or temperature loggers in a commadelimited .txt or .csv file format to the Engineer which includes at least the project number date and location of the meters or loggers .
The Engineer will review and interpret the verification strength test results and determine if the verification testing validates the maturity curve in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Interpreting Verification Strength Test Results If the actual verification strength test falls Result Action Within the limits of the maturity curve Maturity curve verified Continue using the current maturity curve higher than the maturity curve The Engineer will not consider the maturity curve verified but may consider acceptable for future use if verified .
Develop a new maturity curve at the discretion of the Contractor .
lower than the maturity curve The relationship will no longer be acceptable and a second verification test is required or the Contractor can develop a new maturitycurve at their discretion . .
Perform a second verification test . .
If the second verification test does not fall within of the maturity curve develop a new maturitystrength relationship . .
The Engineer will not allow the maturity method for that concrete mix until a new relationship is developed .
G .. d Changes in Concrete Mixture The Engineer may require development of a new maturitystrength relationship if any of the following changes occur Change in mixture proportions greater than by weight Increase in the watercementitious materials ratio by more than .
Change in the source of any material in the approved mix design If any of the changes in this subsection occur for a particular concrete mix perform a verification test in accordance with .. G .. c Verify StrengthMaturity Relationship .
G .. e Maturity Meter Calibration Calibrate maturity meters yearly to ensure proper operation and temperature sensing .
Verify proper operation of maturity sensor every days during normal plant production in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
G. Consistency The Engineer will test the concrete for consistency using the slump test during the progress of the work .
The Engineer may reject concrete batches with consistencies outside of the slump range limits in Table Table and Table .
If any test shows the slump outside of the slump range requirements the Engineer will reject the concrete represented by that test .
In order to bring the mixture back into the slump range requirements the Engineer will allow adjustments to the concrete in accordance with .. G. Delivery Requirements and .. G. Field Adjustments .
Adjust the slump not to exceed the slump range allowed to optimize both placement and finishing .
Contact the Engineer if encountering unusual placement conditions that render the maximum slump unsuitable .
G .. a Concrete Placed by the SlipForm Method Place concrete that does not slough and is adequately consolidated at a slump value that optimizes placement for the designated mixture and in accordance with .. G. Field Adjustments .
G .. b NonConforming Material Only place concrete meeting the slump requirements in the work .
If the Contractor places concrete not meeting the slump requirements into the work the Engineer will not accept nonconforming concrete at the contract unit price .
For the quantity of nonconforming concrete not meeting the required slump the Engineer will make determinations regarding the disposition payment or removal of the concrete in accordance with Tables and . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table All Concrete Grades in slump Outside of Slump Range Monetary Reduction Below slump range No deduction for materials placed as approved by the Engineer .
½ in above slump range .
per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed ½ in above slump range .
per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed The Engineer will not reduce contract unit price for low slump concrete placed with the slipform method as approved by the Engineer .
Table Low Slump Concrete From ½ in to in Outside of Slump Range Monetary Reduction Below slump range No deduction for materials placed as approved by the Engineer ½ in above slump range .
per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed ¾ in above slump range .
per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed The Engineer will not reduce contract unit price for low slump concrete placed with the slipform method as approved by the Engineer .
G. Air Content Maintain the air content of Type general concrete at the specified target of .
percent .
percent and .
percent of the measured volume of the plastic concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents .
Measure the air content at the point of placement but before consolidation .
Make any adjustments immediately to maintain the desired air content .
G .. a NonConforming Material Only place Type concrete meeting the air content requirements in the work .
If the Contractor places Type concrete not meeting the air content requirements into the work the Engineer will not accept nonconforming concrete at the contract unit price .
For the quantity of nonconforming concrete not meeting the required air content the Engineer will make determinations regarding the disposition payment or removal in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table All Concrete Target Air Content .
Air Content Monetary Reduction . . per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed .
. . per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed . .
The Engineer will pay percent of the contract unit price for the concrete represented for material placed as approved by the Engineer. . . . per cubic yard or of the Contractorprovided invoice for quantity represented by the materials placed . .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine the concrete suitability for the intended use in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
This may include testing on the hardened concrete as required by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer . .
Remove and replace concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work as directed by the Engineer .
This may include testing on the hardened concrete as required by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
If the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer determines the concrete can remain in place the Engineer may not pay for the concrete and may require coating with an approved epoxy penetrant sealer from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
G. Allowable Testing Tolerances Allowable tolerances are based on the results from two different testers and two different pieces of equipment from the same sample .
Perform the test within the allowable tolerances in accordance with Table .
Table Allowable Testing Tolerances Test Allowable Tolerance Air content volume of concrete .
Average slump in .
in in in .
in in .
in Unit weight per cu .
ft calculated to an airfree basis .
lbcu .
ft Compressive strength psi psi average of tests psi .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure fresh concrete produced as required by the contract by the theoretical volume .
The Engineer will deduct accountable waste from the concrete measurement .
The Engineer will measure concrete mixtures on the basis of the dimensions of the structure shown on the plans .
If the plans do not include a contract item for concrete used in miscellaneous items include the cost of the concrete with the relevant contract items . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will include the cost of the Certified ReadyMix Plant Program with other relevant contract items .
The contract cubic yard price for Concrete Mix No .
___ includes the cost of production placement finishing curing and protection of concrete .
The Department will pay for structural concrete on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Concrete Mix No.___ cubic yard Minnesota Standard Specifications PRECAST CONCRETE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of producing providing placing curing and protecting precast portland cement concrete in structures pavements and incidental construction .
The State Materials Engineer is the Engineer for the purposes of this specification. . MATERIALS A Cementitious Materials Provide cementitious materials from certified sources listed on the ApprovedQualified Products list .
Use Type I III IS IL IP or Type III cement to produce Type nonairentrained concrete .
Use Type I III IS IL IP or Type III cement and an airentraining admixture listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List to produce Type airentrained concrete .
A. Portland Cement A. Slag Cement A. Blended Hydraulic Cement A .
Fly Ash A. Ternary Mixes Ternary mixes are defined as portland cement or Type IL and two other supplementary cementitious materials or blended cement and one other supplementary cementitious material .
B Aggregates Provide aggregates from sources listed on the MnDOT Concrete Aggregate Properties list .
B .
Fine Aggregate B .
Intermediate Aggregate B. Coarse Aggregate C Blank D Water E Concrete Admixtures Provide admixtures from the ApprovedQualified Products list for all concrete grades shown in Table .
Use of any of the following admixtures are at the Precasters discretion .
Type A Water Reducing Admixture .
Type B Retarding Admixture .
Type D Water Reducing and Retarding Admixture .
Type F High Range Water Reducing Admixture .
Type G High Range Water Reducing and Retarding Admixture .
Type S Specific Performance Based Admixture Use of the following accelerating admixtures require approval of the Concrete Engineer in conjunction with the Engineer unless otherwise allowed in the Contract .
Type C Accelerating Admixture .
Type E Water Reducing and Accelerating Admixture The Materials Engineer may permit the use of Type C or Type E accelerating admixtures when all of the following conditions exist .
The ambient temperature is below F . An Engineer approved cold weather protection plan is inplace and .
Cold weather protection materials are onsite and ready for use .
F Precast Concrete Mix Designs F. Classification of Concrete .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will classify concrete by mix number to identify type grade consistency aggregate size coarse aggregate class and supplementary cementitious material if any in accordance with Table .
Table Mix Number Identification First Digit Second Digit Third Digit Fourth Digit Additional Digits Type Designation Grade Designation Maximum Slump Coarse Aggregate Gradation Designation Additional Digits Allowed or as Specified F .. a Type Designation Provide Type or Type concrete in accordance with Table Table Concrete Type Designation Concrete Type Target Air Content . . For concrete mix design purposes only .
F .. b Grade Designation The Department will designate concrete grade in accordance with Table using a letter to represent the following Intended Use Maximum watercement wc ratio Cementitious Content Range Maximum Supplementary Cementitious Substitution SCM Slump range Minimum day compressive strength fc Coarse Aggregate Quality in accordance with F .. c Slump Designation The Department will designate the slump range as defined by the Grade Designation in accordance with Table .
F .. d Coarse Aggregate CA Designation Determine the coarse aggregate designation in accordance with Table based on the intended use and the gradation requirements in Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete .
Table Coarse Aggregate Designation for Concrete Designation Coarse Aggregate Gradation Job Mix Formula JMF combination of fine and coarse aggregate Table Coarse Aggregate Designation for Concrete ASTM ASTM ASTM ASTM CA CA F .. e Additional Concrete Mix Designation Digits Specialty concrete mixes require additional concrete digits in accordance with Table .
The Precaster may add additional digits to the right of the required digits in the concrete mix number. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Concrete Mix Design Requirements The Precaster assumes full responsibility for the mix design and performance of the concrete .
The Department defines the concrete mix design requirements for Precast Designed Mixes in accordance with Table .
When specified precast bridge deck precast pavement panels and any other special precast product requirements are included in the Special Provisions of the Contract .
Table Precast Concrete Mix Design Requirements Concrete Grade Mix Number Intended Use Maximum wc ratio Cementitious Content lbscy Maximum SCM Fly Ash Slag Ternary Slump Range Minimum Compressive Strength fc day Spec .
W W Bridge Girders .
Design Strength Per Plan .D .
W Noisewall posts box culverts bridge girders .
Design Strength Per Plan .D .
Y Y Wetcast retaining wall blocks noisewall panels equipment pad .
psi .D .
Y Thin Panel Retaining Walls .
psi .D .
M M Precast Concrete Barrier .
psi .D .
The Precaster may choose to use the Coarse Aggregate Designation for the th digit in accordance with Table if allowed by the structure .
If the intended use is not included elsewhere in the Specification or Special Provisions design concrete mix W. Review the Plans to determine if the bridge girders require air entrainment .
Flowable slumps exceeding the designated slump range require approval of the MnDOT State Materials Engineer .
Requires strength cylinders in accordance with .. G. for determining shipping strength .
F. Precast Submittal Requirements At least calendar days before initial placement of the concrete submit a Precast Mix Design Submittal to the Concrete Engineer for approval .
The Precast Mix Design Submittal is available from the MnDOT Concrete Engineering Website .
Design the concrete mix to an absolute volume of . . cu .
ft .
The Concrete Engineer will Provide specific gravity and absorption data using saturated surface dry SSD weights for mix design calculations .
Review the mix design submittal and approve the materials and mix design for compliance with the Specifications .
F. Precast Mix Design Adjustments The Department will allow mix design adjustments based upon the criteria as defined in Table Table Mix Design Adjustments Requirements Type of Change or Adjustment Mix Design Approval Resubmittal Requirements Admixture Dosage Rate Cement or SCM sources No resubmittal required Admixture Source Aggregate Source Any cementitious or SCM proportion Aggregate Proportions Resubmittal of Mix Design .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Batching Equipment A. Mixer Requirements Provide stationary mixers or truck mixers .
A .
General Condition Maintain mixers as necessary to detect changes in condition due to accumulations of hardened concrete or mortar and examine to detect wear of blades .
Replace or recondition pickup and throwover blades in mixers with a rated capacity less than cu .
ft showing a blade wear loss of greater than ½ in and pickup and throwover blades in mixers of greater capacity showing a blade wear loss of no greater than ¾ in from the original factory dimensions .
A .
Manufacturers Rating Plate Provide mixers that include the manufacturers rating plate showing the following information Serial number of the unit Mixing speed of the drum or paddles and Maximum capacity in terms of volume of mixed concrete .
A .
Drum Speed for Stationary Mixers Operate the drum speed in the mixer as specified by the manufacturer or as directed by the Engineer .
A. Auxiliary Equipment Requirements Provide mixers equipped with the following Timing device Discharge locking device Water measuring device that operates mechanically and automatically during each batching cycle and A graduated adjustable indicator device to represent the volume of discharge in increments no greater than ¼ gal in full view .
A. Mixer Capacity Do not exceed the manufacturers rated capacity of the mixer when mixing a single batch of concrete .
Batch concrete in volumes the mixer can accommodate without spilling leaking or segregating during the charging mixing or discharging operations .
Provide mixers with a capacity of at least cubic yard .
A. Mixing Time The Department defines the mixing time as the time period beginning when the cement and aggregates enter the mixer drum and ending when the discharge begins .
Refer to the manufacturers recommended minimum mixing time for single drum and dual drum mixers .
In the absence of manufacturers recommendation the Engineer will designate the minimum mixing time .
The minimum mixing time for any concrete batch is s. The Precaster may reduce the manufacturers recommended minimum mixing time or the Engineer designated mixing time if the Precaster obtains uniform mixing in accordance with .. E Mixing Requirements and as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
If there is evidence of inadequately mixed concrete unmixed or partially mixed materials during concrete placement the Engineer may direct an increase in the mixing time .
A .
Turbine Type Mixers Provide turbine type mixers meeting the applicable requirements for conventional type mixers in accordance with .. A. through .. A. and this subsection .
Maintain the mixer drum in a cylindrical shape within ¾ in from the original factory dimensions at any point .
Maintain the mixer discharge gate in a mortar tight condition in the closed position .
Replace or recondition mixer paddles showing a wear loss greater than ½ in from the original factory dimensions .
Add the mixing water to the batch materials in a manner that distributes the water to the inner or central areas of the drum .
Start the flow of water before introducing the solid batch materials into the mixer drum .
During mixing operate the paddles at a speed between revolutions and revolutions per minute .
After adding the batch materials to the drum mix the concrete for an additional s. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A. Horizontal AxialRevolving Blade Type Mixers Provide horizontal axialrevolving blade type mixers in accordance with the applicable requirements for conventional type mixers in accordance with .. A. through .. A. and this subsection .
Test the concrete uniformity as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will use concrete uniformity tests to determine the minimum mixing time .
A. CounterCurrent Pan Type Mixers Provide countercurrent pan type mixers in accordance with industry standards and the applicable requirements for conventional type mixers in accordance with .. A. through .. A ..
The countercurrent pan type mixer must have stationary side wall scrapers a primary mixing motor and a secondary mixing plow .
Completely clean the pan of concrete prior to proceeding with the next batch .
Maintain the pan and all working parts of the countercurrent manufacturers recommended tolerances .
Test the concrete uniformity as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will use concrete uniformity tests to determine the minimum mixing time .
B Transportation Units B .
General Requirements Equip transportation units intended for both mixing and agitating with watertight revolving drums mounted and powered and fitted with properly designed mixing blades in accordance with .. A. through .. A ..
Provide units capable of combining all the ingredients into a homogeneous mixture and designed to provide two drum speeds one for mixing and the other for agitating .
Provide units capable of delivering the concrete without segregation or loss of any of the batch materials .
Equip the mixer drum with a working counting device to record the number of revolutions .
Equip dump trucks and agitator trucks with vibrators to aid in discharge are mortar tight capable of complete discharge of the concrete .
B .
Capacity of Transportation Units Refer to the truck mixer manufacturers certification plate attached to the unit for the maximum capacity of the unit .
If the unit will not satisfactorily mix the maximum volume shown reduce the batch volume to allow proper mixing or discontinue use of the mixing unit as directed by the Engineer until the problem is corrected .
C Handling and Storing Materials C. Batch Material Requirements Do not change the source kind or gradation of batch materials after the start of concrete production for the work unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
If the Engineer approves use of different material completely exhaust the supply on hand before changing to the different material .
If delivering freshly washed aggregates to the batching plant drain the aggregates before using in the batching operation .
If draining freshly washed aggregates at the site of the batching plant completely separate the drained material from the undrained materials and provide for the disposal of water that accumulates from the drainage of materials .
Drain any excess water from the aggregate hoppers prior to batching concrete .
Provide smooth firm and welldrained stockpile sites cleared of vegetable and extraneous matter .
Where the natural foundation is unsatisfactory as determined by the Engineer construct the stockpiles on suitable platforms .
Construct suitable bulkheads or partitions to separate different kinds of aggregate gradation or water content .
Construct stockpiles by methods that hold segregation and degradation to a minimum .
If the Engineer sees segregation or degradation the Engineer may designate that pile as unacceptable for use .
Do not use aggregates used to construct runways for loading or hauling equipment in concrete batches .
Use of aggregates from the bottom ft of a stockpile placed on an unprepared surface in concrete batches is allowed only under the Engineers direct supervision and if the material meets all requirements of Fine Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete and Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete .
Provide aggregates in accordance with the specified gradation requirements .
The Engineer will consider aggregates unacceptable if the variation in moisture content carried by any of the aggregates causes a marked variation in the consistency of successive batches of the mixed concrete and will suspend operations until corrected. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Concrete Temperature Control Produce concrete at temperatures from F to F and maintain temperatures until deposited in the work .
If necessary to maintain placement temperature uniformly heat or cool the water aggregates or both before introduction into the mixer .
Control the temperature of the mixing water during heating or cooling .
Use aggregate at temperatures from F to F. Do not allow cementitious material to contact other batch material when the aggregate temperature exceeds F. Do not heat the cement add salt or add chemical admixtures to the concrete mix to prevent freezing .
Use a heating system to heat batch materials as approved by the Engineer .
Do not use steam jets to spot heat the material as the work progresses .
Do not place mixer heaters intended for heating the batch materials in the mixer drum .
D Batching Requirements Calibrate weighing equipment in accordance with Measurement of Quantities .
Inspect and calibrate the scales in accordance with the Concrete Manual .
D. Batching by Weight D .. a Proportioning Methods Proportion concrete batch materials by weight in a central plant or by volume as directed by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
D .. b Weighing Equipment and Tolerances Weigh or measure concrete mixture ingredients to within the targeted batch weight in accordance with the following Water percent Cement percent Other cementitious materials percent Aggregates percent and Admixtures percent .
D .. c Batching of Mixing Water Measure the mixing water on scales or water metering devices containing the following A discharge indicator capable of being set to within gal of a predetermined quantity A positive automatic shutoff valve and An approved inspection seal on the scale or water metering device dating the time of the previous calibration and adjustment An authorized service agency will calibrate the water meter in accordance with the following Before startup of the production season Every months during production and When requested by the engineer .
Make adjustments as necessary before use meeting the requirements of the weighing procedure in section .
of the Concrete Manual .
Check the water meter for accuracy at least once each month as the work progresses .
D .. d Batching of Cementitious Materials Weigh the cementitious material independently of the aggregates in separate compartments or on separate scales .
If the Precaster weighs the cement first and then separately records the weights of each individual cementitious material the Precaster may weigh the cementitious materials cumulatively as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
D .. e Batching of Aggregates If the Precaster records each individual fraction weight of aggregates separately the Precaster may weigh aggregates cumulatively as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D .. f Admixture Proportioning If using two or more admixtures in a single concrete batch add each admixture separately to prevent interaction of the different admixtures before mixing with other batch materials .
Agitate admixtures to ensure homogeneous concentrations in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Incorporate admixtures to the batch mix in liquid form .
Maintain admixture solutions at a uniform concentration at all times .
Use the solution concentration and proportions designated by the manufacturer .
If using a mechanical dispenser for proportioning Class I or Class II admixtures provide a site gauge or meter .
Have the admixture manufacturer check admixture dispensers yearly to determine accuracy and ensure unobstructed flow .
D. Batching by Volume Proportion concrete for precast products by volume or as required by the contract .
The Engineer will approve all methods and equipment used in volumetric proportioning .
Determine all material proportions and calibration settings on the basis of lb of cementitious material .
Provide and use only sacked cement in the original mill containers unless the Precaster calibrates the mixer for the specific materials in use .
Do not use previously opened sacks .
Increase the cementitious content by percent in the computation of volume proportions unless the Precaster calibrates the mixer for the specific materials in use .
E Mixing Requirements The Engineer may check the water measuring equipment for accuracy before mixing operations begin and at any other time the Engineer considers necessary .
Mix concrete by one of the following methods A central plant stationary plant Entirely or in part in truck mixers or At the construction site .
Do not allow the mixing batch to merge or intermix with the subsequent dry batch during mixing .
Discharge water remaining in the drums before batching .
Mix concrete to provide a mixture that is homogeneous and uniform in color .
The Engineer will reject concrete batches that show a marked variation in consistency or evidence of improper mixing as unacceptable work in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
After completely mixing the concrete either in a central plant mixer or truck mixer continuously agitate while in transit to the point of placement until the concrete is discharged from the unit unless otherwise allowed by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
Transport in nonagitating equipment is exempt from this requirement .
If the mixing does not appear uniform perform slump tests at the percentage point and the percentage points during unloading .
If the results show a slump variation greater than ½ in stop work and correct the mixing unit .
Produce concrete in such quantity and at such a rate as proper placement and finishing will permit .
Do not retemper partially set concrete .
Do not hand mix concrete .
E. Mixing In Truck Mixer Charge the materials into the truck mixer drum by introducing sufficient water before adding solid materials .
Perform charging operations without losing materials .
Leave the truck mixer at the plant site for a minimum of min or revolutions during the mixing period .
Transport the concrete at agitating speed to the point of placement .
F Batch Ticket Provide a computerized or handwritten batch ticket for each batch of concrete .
The Department defines computerized to mean a document that records mix design quantities from load cells and meters .
Provide a batch ticket for each item of information including the following Date .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Time concrete was batched Quantity of concrete in this load Mix number Labels identifying each material that correlates with the Precast mix design Target weight of materials and Actual batched weights of materials .
Review and sign the first batch ticket for each mixer each mix type each day for accuracy .
G Concrete Placement Assume full responsibility for the acceptable production placement finishing and curing of all concrete under the conditions prevailing regardless of the restrictions imposed .
Provide any artificial lighting rain or cold weather protection necessary including that directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
Place concrete after the Engineer inspects and approves forms and falsework erection placement of reinforcement steel materials equipment condition and cold weather protection .
Do not place concrete if portions of the form are frozen .
Maintain the surface temperature above freezing for forms steel strands inserts brackets and adjacent concrete that will come in contact with the poured concrete .
Protect the concrete from freezing .
Protect the concrete against damage from construction operations .
The Engineer will evaluate any defects in concrete or concrete surfaces resulting from weather conditions inadequate lighting or other causes in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G. Placement Temperatures Maintain concrete at a temperature from F to F until placement .
Unless approved coldweather plans are inplace do not place concrete when the air temperature is either of the following at the point of placement Below F or The National Weather Service predicts the temperature to fall below F within the following h period .
G. Delivery Requirements Place concrete into the forms in accordance with the following Type Concretewithin min of batching and Type Concretewithin minutes of batching when all admixtures are added at the plant at the manufacturers recommended dosage rates listed on the Approved Products list .
The Precaster may transport Type or Type concrete in nonagitating equipment if the concrete is discharged within min of batching .
Batch time starts when the batch plant or the transit mix truck adds the cement to the other batch materials .
G. Field Adjustments Mix the load a minimum of min or revolutions at mixing speed after addition of admixture or water .
G .. a Water Adjustments G .. a Water Adjustments The Engineer will allow water adjustments in accordance with the following Prior to discharging approximately cubic yard of concrete .
Not to exceed the total water available to add stated on the Certificate of Compliance .
Provided the concrete is within min from the initial batch time stated on the Certificate of Compliance .
G .. b Admixture Adjustments Approved admixture additions are allowed within min from the initial batch time stated on the Certificate of Compliance .
If the load of concrete has no available water to add or the load is greater than minutes old the Engineer will allow one admixture adjustment diluted with up to gallons of water .
G .. c Consistency and Air Content Adjustments If the first test taken passes continue verification testing in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If the test taken fails make adjustments and perform any quality control testing before the final test .
Acceptance or rejection of the truck is based on the final test result .
Test up to two additional trucks in accordance with items and above and If the concrete does not meet the specification after those three trucks increase verification testing rate to once per truck for acceptance for the remainder of the pour .
G. Test Methods and Specimens Perform sampling and testing in accordance with the Concrete Manual and test according to the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
Anyone fabricating concrete cylinders is required to hold either a current ACI Field Technician Certification or a MnDOT Field Technician Certification .
Anyone performing concrete strength testing of cylinders is required to hold one of the following current certifications .
ACI Strength Testing Technician Certification .
MnDOT Strength Testing Technician Certification or .
WisDOT Strength Testing Technician Certification .
Furnish molds based on the maximum size aggregate for the test specimens in accordance with the following .
in in cylinder molds .
in in cylinder molds for maximum aggregate sizes greater than ¼ in .
G .. a Strength Cylinders The Precaster will cast all strength cylinders to determine the following Handling or Stripping Strength Shipping Strength Verification Cast all cylinders used for determining strength at each stage for all types of precast operations .
Cure all cylinders in the same location and under the same conditions as the concrete structure or unit involved meeting the requirements of ASTM C. G. Consistency Test the concrete for consistency using the slump test during the progress of the work .
If any test shows the slump outside of the slump range requirements reject the concrete represented by that test .
In order to bring the mixture back into the slump range requirements the Engineer will allow adjustments to the concrete in accordance with .. G. Delivery Requirements and .. G. Field Adjustments .
Adjust the slump not to exceed the slump range allowed to optimize both placement and finishing .
Contact the Materials Engineer if encountering unusual placement conditions that render the maximum slump unsuitable .
G .. a NonConforming Material Only place concrete meeting the slump requirements in the work .
If the Precaster places concrete not meeting the slump requirements into the work the Engineer will determine acceptance in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G. Air Content Maintain the air content of Type general concrete at the specified target of .
percent .
percent and .
percent of the measured volume of the plastic concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents .
Measure the air content at the point of placement but before consolidation .
Make any adjustments immediately to maintain the desired air content .
The Engineer will reject concrete with a measured air content greater than .
or less than .. G .. a NonConforming Material Only place Type concrete meeting the air content requirements in the work .
If the Precaster places Type concrete not meeting the air content requirements into the work the Engineer will determine acceptance in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work. . Minnesota Standard Specifications STRUCTURAL METALS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of shop and field work for manufacturing fabricating and coating structural metals. . MATERIALS If the contract states that the project is a Federal aid project provide domestic material .
Provide Mill Test Reports MTRs for Federal aid projects to document that the material was melted and manufactured in the U.S.A .
If the Contractor supplies foreign material the provisions of Source of Supply and Quality shall apply .
Provide new materials in accordance with the following sections .
Unless otherwise required by the contract use structural steel in bridges in accordance with HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel and use structural steel for all other structures in accordance with LowCarbon Structural Steel .
Provide materials from mills warehouses or processors with supporting certified MTRs meeting the requirements of applicable ASTM specifications .
If the MTR does not contain sufficient information provide copies of the test results to the Engineer for review and approval before fabrication .
A LowCarbon Structural Steel B General Requirements for Structural Steel C Structural Alloy Steel C. HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel C. HighStrength LowAlloy ColumbiumVanadium Steel C. Stainless Steel D Pin and Roller Steel D. Hot Rolled Bar Steel D. ColdFinished Bar Steel E Steel Forgings F High Performance Steel Y.S .
ksi G High Performance Steel Y.S .
ksi H Gray Iron Castings I Carbon Steel Castings J Alloy Steel Castings K Blank L Malleable Iron Castings M Bronze M. Wrought Bronze Plates M. Bronze Castings Type M. Bronze Castings Type M. Lubricated Bronze Bearing Plates and Bushings N Sheet Brass .
Minnesota Standard Specifications O Sheet Copper P Blank Q Blank R Sheet Lead S Sheet Metal Products T AluminumWrought and Extruded U Pipe U .
Cast Iron Soil Pipe U .
Structural Steel Tubing U .
Structural Steel Pipe U .
Aluminum Tube for Pipe Railing U. Wrought Steel Pipe U. Ductile Iron Pressure Pipe U .
Copper Water Tube and Fittings U .
Rigid Steel Conduit V Anchor Rods W Fasteners X Galvanized Hardware Y Galvanized Structural Shapes .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General For the purpose of the work specified in this section these terms have the following meaning Engineer means the Bridge Engineer unless otherwise indicated .
Fabricator means the manufacturer or supplier of fabricated structural metals .
In the event that the Contractor performs this work the term will mean the Contractor or the Contractors agent .
Supplier means fabricator galvanizer and paint shop .
Provide the Engineer with a list of fabricators galvanizers and painters including addresses and a list of products they will provide .
Do not order materials or direct the fabricator to perform shop work until the Engineer approves of the shop drawings .
If installing fabricated components on an existing structure measure field dimensions in accordance with Structure Renovation .
A. Definitions A .. a Minor Structural Components The Department defines minor structural components as materials used in the following applications Bridges Bearing assemblies sole plates expansion joint devices shear connectors ballast plates diaphragms for bridges except curved steel bridges pile and appurtenances drainage systems guardrail connections railings fencing conduit systems and protection angles Electric lighting traffic signs and signal systems Pedestrian bridges and Other system or component designated by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .. b Major Structural Components The Department defines major structural components as all components other than minor structural components as defined in .. A .. a Minor Structural Components .
A .
Certification Requirements Provide a certification from a fabricator certified in accordance with AISC Quality Certification Program Category Simple Steel Bridge Structures Sbr for the following types of structures and structure components Rolled beam bridges with a pay quantity for structural steel no greater than lb Pedestrian bridges Steel diaphragms with a linear quantity greater than ft Diaphragms designated major structural components curved steel bridges and Other items as directed by the Engineer .
Provide a certification from a fabricator certified in accordance with AISC Quality Certification Program Category Major Steel Bridges Cbr for the following types of structures and structure components Rolled beam bridges with a pay quantity for structural steel of at least lb Welded bridge girders Tubs Boxes Trusses and Other items designated by the Engineer .
Provide fracture critical items from a fabricator certified in accordance with AISC Quality Certification Program Category Major Steel Bridges Cbr with Fracture Critical Member endorsement F. The ContractorFabricator performing coating application must demonstrate qualification by obtaining the AISC Sophisticated Paint Endorsement SPE SSPC QP Certification or a quality certification system acceptable to the Engineer and a Quality Manual QM that is acceptable to the Engineer .
B Shop Detail Drawings B .
General Requirements Submit to the Engineer shop detail drawings from the fabricator that include the following Detailed plans showing the dimensions and sizes of materials Details and information necessary for fabrication Fastener lists for shop and field erection Blocking and camber diagrams Match marking diagram Radiographic diagram showing weld locations and identification in accordance with this section Complete field erection plan showing piece marks and All dimensions as measured in the field .
Ensure shop detail drawings include welding symbols meeting the requirements of ANSIAWS A .
Standard Symbols for Welding Brazing and Nondestructive Examination .
Verify that the fabricator placed Welding Procedure Specification WPS numbers in the tail of the arrows .
Submit shop detail drawings from the fabricator for the complete fabrication of structural metals as required by the contract .
If the Department provides standard detail drawings as required by the contract submit finished detail drawings from the fabricator with additions and revisions .
If the contract requires a Standard Plate the Department will not require redetailed plates except to indicate fit at connections to other structural members for changes shown on the plans or to complete detailed information to the shop or the material supplier .
Provide these detail changes from the fabricator .
B .
Format Submit shop detail drawings from the fabricator meeting the following characteristics and requirements Prepared in a neat and legible form on media from which clear sharply defined prints can be made for the Engineers review and inspection purposes inch inch ½ inch border on all edges except a inch border on the inch left edge .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Containing title box in the lower right hand corner with the following information .
Departments structure number .
Project number .
Federal Project number if applicable .
Fabricators name .
Fabricators contract number .
Detailers and checkers initials .
Date of preparation and .
Brief description of the details shown on each sheet .
Height of letters and numerals on each drawing at least .
inches Text details lines and dimensions capable of reducing in size to inch inch without affecting readability Containing a complete bill of materials listing the individual pieces with piece marks and quantities including dimensions Consecutively numbered sheets and First drawing of the shop details containing a schedule of sheet numbers including a brief description for reference .
The Contractor may also provide standard sheets from the fabricator with fastener lists .
B. Submittal for Engineers Review and Acceptance Submit two sets of prints of required shop detail drawings meeting .. B .
Format from the fabricator to the Engineer for review and release for fabrication .
Shop drawings must comply with the contract documents .
Provide written authorization from the design EOR Engineer of Record for any deviation from the contract documents .
Incorporate all contractor comments into shop drawings prior to submittal to reviewer .
The reviewer will return one set of prints of the shop detail drawings to the Fabricator with comments .
Submit only checked drawings in complete collated sets from the fabricator for review .
The Contractor may submit details such as icebreakers anchorages bearing plates and castings separately to facilitate the work .
Fabricator may submit the shop drawings to the Contractor .
Stamp these drawings with For Contractor Use Only .
Do not forward these stamped drawings to MnDOT .
Submit a schedule showing the submission dates of shop drawings and anticipated dates for shop fabrication from the fabricator as directed by the Engineer .
Arrange the schedule to avoid delay in completing the work .
If constructing a structure composed of several units consider submitting shop detail drawings of the separate units in proper order to expedite the review and release for fabrication of the details .
If the Engineer requests changes to the submitted drawings or if the fabricator makes additional changes not required by the Engineer provide revised drawings with revision control from the fabricator with circles underscores or other marks to distinguish the changes from unchanged details or dimensions .
The Engineer will release shop detail drawings for fabrication after corrections are completed .
Provide six sets of corrected drawings and additional copies as required by the contract or requested by the Engineer from the fabricator at no additional cost to the Department .
Mark the corrected drawings as Revision and remove all comments and marks to make clean drawings for acceptance stamping and distribution for use .
The shop drawings accepted by the Engineer will become part of the Contract .
Do not make changes on accepted drawings unless otherwise approved by the Engineer in writing .
Mark changes approved by the Engineer on the accepted shop drawings with revision version in number sequence next to all changes and resubmit them for approval stamping as revised sheet and distributing to replace the superseded version of drawings .
The Engineers acceptance of shop drawings will not relieve the Contractor of full responsibility for submission of complete and accurate drawings and for the accurate assembly and fitting of all structural members .
B. Submittal for Completed Work After the fabricator completes the shop work provide detailed shop drawings to the Engineer in two formats One set of drawings on inch inch bond paper and An electronic file in PDF format containing all sheets .
Ensure that the drawings submitted accurately reflect the actual configuration of all structural members and components including modifications made during fabrication and after delivery to the project under the fabricators direction .
If making the electronic files by scanning use a minimum scan resolution of dpi. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C General Fabrication Practices Provide structural material fabricated and assembled meeting the requirements of AASHTONSBA Steel Bridge Collaboration Steel Bridge Fabrication Guide Specification and AWS welding codes except as modified in this chapter .
Provide material structurally welded meeting the requirements of ANSIAASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code for major structural components and ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding Code Steel for minor structural components .
Ensure the Certified Welding Inspector CWI or an equivalent witnesses the welder and welding operator qualification tests unless otherwise specified in this section .
Before the start of work the supplier will be prequalified on MnDOTs approved suppliers for fabricated structural metals products list as maintained by the Structural Metals Engineer at httpwww.dot.state.mn.usbridgepdfapprovedsuppliers.pdf or at least calendar days prior to beginning work the supplier is to submit a Quality Manual QM to the Engineer for review .
Ensure the QM is written in accordance with the MnDOT Supplier Qualification Standard SQS .
The Engineer will use the SQS as the basis of acceptance for the submitted QM .
In addition to routine inspections the Engineer will audit suppliers with approved QMs on a biannual or annual basis or as otherwise directed by the Engineer to ensure the implementation of the QM .
The Department will invoke its Corrective Action Process if the routine inspections or audits indicate nonconformance .
Any and all corrective actions deemed appropriate by the Engineer are effective immediately and apply to any work remaining on a current project and all future projects .
If the Engineer determines that work does not comply with the QM or that fabrication does not follow approved fabrication procedures the Engineer will deem the materials as nonconforming in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the Engineer finds nonconforming work direct the supplier to immediately correct the procedure and submit a written nonconformance report containing data required by the Engineer to ensure compliance with the QM specifications and drawings .
Perform additional testing as required by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
For repeat offences or negligence the Department will require corrective action of hiring a third party Quality Control Inspector at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor may obtain a copy of the Departments Corrective Action Process from the Engineer .
C. Prefabrication Conference Before fabrication the Engineer may schedule a Prefabrication Conference with the Contractor and the fabricator to discuss pertinent specifications procedures and requirements of the job .
The Engineer will consult the Contractor and the fabricator to decide the location date and agenda items for the conference .
C. Notification Notify the Engineer at least business days before the fabricator begins work so that the Engineer may perform inspections .
Do not allow the fabricator to begin work before notifying the Engineer .
C. Identification of Materials Before fabrication begins the Fabricator will provide a copy of purchase orders Mill Test Report MTR or other documentation required by the Engineer indicating that the materials meet the physical chemical and source mill requirements of this section for each heat of steel used in the work .
The Fabricator will provide copies of purchase orders when placing the orders .
When the materials are received the fabricator will indicate in writing or by ink stamp that the MTRs have been checked for compliance .
Include the name of the individual who checked the MTR and the date of inspection with the purchase order .
If the Engineer determines that the documentation is incomplete direct the fabricator to sample and test materials as directed by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
Provide scale weights of individual members or sections as required by the Engineer .
Except for the following the Fabricator of minor structural components will provide Certificates of Compliance and shipping documents for each contract item to the Engineer instead of submitting purchase orders and MTRs Pedestrian bridges Post and truss chord materials for traffic signs High mast light poles Modular expansion devices Pot bearings and Other items designated by the Engineer .
In conjunction with the fabricator keep appropriate documentation on file for at least seven years .
During each stage of fabrication of major structural components ensure the fabricator provides and maintains identification to establish the heat of the material from which the component is fabricated .
Provide the Engineer with a list showing heat numbers referenced to the material incorporated into each component .
The Engineer will reject material that loses its identity unless the identity can be reestablished to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
Provide wide flange beams flanges webs splice plates welded cover plates and fracture critical members with identification numbers placed on each individual piece of material that referenced to the corresponding heat number. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Ensure the fabricator uses nonoilbased markers or low stress die stamps for the identification coding of material .
C. Weld Identification System Before implementation ensure the fabricator uses the MnDOT standard weld identification system as described in .. C .. a Standard Weld Identification System or an alternate system approved by the Engineer to identify welds subject to radiographic testing ultrasonic testing or both .
Use a traceability system with a unique identification assigned to all welds being examined .
Do not repeat identification numbers .
Use identification numbers traceable back to the original member examined and document the identification number on the shop detail drawings .
C .. a Standard Weld Identification System C .. a Piece Mark Provide material marked with the fabricators piece identification as shown on the approved shop detail drawings .
C .. a Splice Plane Number The Department defines a splice plane as a ft wide vertical section of a piece that contains a full penetration welded splice in any component of the piece .
The Department considers any other full penetration welded splice in any component of the piece within the ft vertical splice plane in the same splice plane .
Provide the number of the splice plane on the piece starting from the left end of the piece as shown on the radiographic diagram .
C .. a Piece Components Code Verify that the fabricator placed film identification numbers or location marks only on film meeting the requirements of AWS D ..
Begin marking from NS edge for flanges and the bottom edge for webs .
Bottom flange Web single web or near side NS web for two webs Top Flange single top flange or NS flange for two top flanges Web far side FS web for two webs Top Flange FS flange for two top flanges C .. a General Notes Ensure the fabricator performs the following Performs radiographic and ultrasonic testing of welds meeting the requirements of AWS D. except as modified by this section Establishes the center line of the weld on the components of the piece before welding by placing punch marks ft back from the center line of the weld and inch from the edge of the plate Provides Image Quality Indicators wire penetrameters as directed by the Engineer and For joints radiographically inspected less than percent include the untested areas in the Film Identification Number scheme .
C. Storage of Materials Store material above ground on platforms skids or other supports .
Protect material from dirt oil and other foreign matter .
Drain material so that water is never in constant contact with the surface .
Replace damaged material with new material or repair using a procedure approved by the Engineer .
C. Nonconformances Provide an established Quality System outlined in the QM for controlling nonconforming material from the fabricator including procedures for identification isolation and disposition .
Submit Nonconformance Report NCR forms from the supplier to the Engineer documenting deviation from the QCP approved shop drawings the plans or specifications .
Include the following in the Nonconformance Report form Company name and address Report title Nonconformance Report number Date Company job number Piece mark Owner of bridgestructure Contractor Owners project number Location Detailed description of the nonconformance Photo sketch or drawing .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Proposed repairdisposition of the nonconformance Identify any possible increase in cost or delay to the project and Quality Control Managers signature and date .
Address nonconforming material with an NCR no more than working days after discovery .
The Engineer will advise the supplier of the resolution to nonconformance in writing .
D Structural Components D. Welded Shear Stud Connectors In accordance with OSHA Subpart R . attach shear stud connectors and other similar devices to the top flange of beams or other steel components after the installation of decking falsework or other walking surfaces .
D. End Connection Angles The Engineer will only require finishing of end connection angles to correct a nonconforming assembly .
Produce a finished angle at least ⅜ inch thick .
Do not reduce the original thickness of the angle by greater than ⅛ inch .
Grind flush portions of members extending beyond the face of the connection angles .
Do not recess the web of a connecting member by greater than ⅜ inch from the face of the connection angles .
D. Bolts Provide high strength structural steel bolts in accordance with Fasteners except the Contractor may use common structural steel bolts for connections in expansion and deflection devices and in hand railings .
Place structural bolts with a projection from ⅛ inch to ⅜ inch through the nut .
Provide extra bolts in the amount of bolts plus percent of the actual number of field bolts necessary at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will not include this number of additional bolts in the plan quantity and will include the cost of these additional bolts in the contract unit prices for the bolts in the contract item .
D. Pins and Rollers Provide pins and rollers with a µin finish .
Provide pin threads meeting the requirements of American Standard Coarse Thread Series Class and free fit meeting the requirements of ANSI B .. Thread pin ends and nuts with diameters of at least ⅜ inches with threads per inch .
Provide nuts meeting the following requirements and characteristics Made of structural steel in accordance with LowCarbon Structural Steel HighStrength Low Alloy Structural Steel and HighStrength LowAlloy ColumbiumVanadium Steel Recessed Hexagonal and Galvanized in accordance with Galvanized Hardware .
Machine the grip face of the nut square to the axis of the pin .
Ensure the recessed face of the nuts will bear uniformly against the end face of the pin when turning the nut tight .
Place pins with a projection of at least ¼ in through the nut after assembly .
If making a recessed cut between the threads and the shoulder of the pin do not make cuts wider than ¼ in or deeper than the base of the thread .
D. Shims The Department defines shims as metal plates not shown on the plans that bring metal surfaces of members into contact or bring the structure to the grade or alignment shown on the plans .
Make shims ⅛ inch or thicker of structural steel .
Make shims ⅛ inch or thinner from sheet steel or sheet brass .
Provide shims at no additional cost to the Department .
E Structural Fabrication Ensure the fabricator performs the following E. Cutting Cut steel and fabricate steel plates and splice plates for major structural components so the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the main tensile or compressive stresses .
Cut metals to the size shown on the plans with allowance for necessary or required finishing operations .
Cut metals within inch from true lines .
The Department defines true lines as theoretical lines exactly corresponding to and used to transfer dimensions as shown on the plans to materials for cutting drilling and fitting. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Cut flange plates or other members to a true curve .
Do not use a series of straight cuts to create the curve .
E .. a ReEntrants Form interior and reentrant corners with a radius of at least inch .
Form filleted corners with radii no greater than inch by drilling .
E .. b Shearing Do not shear nonferrous metals with a thickness greater than ½ inch .
E .. c Edge and Corner Condition All exposed edges and corners are to be free of slag burrs and gouges .
E. Machining E .. a General Perform heat treatment before final machining .
The Department defines heat treatment as intentionally and systematically applying heat at a temperature below the melting point of any ferrous castings weldment or other components .
E .. b Machining Tolerances For members requiring machine finishing the standard tolerance is .
inch .
For bearing assemblies a tolerance of .
inches will be applied to the following Spacing between bearing assembly pintles and pintle holes Depth of pintle holes and height of pintles after welding and Thickness of each individual plate that makes up a bearing assembly .
E .. c Machine Lubricant Use machining lubricant on structural material requiring machine work or drilling capable of being completely removed .
E .. d Surface Finish For machine finish surfaces unless otherwise specified the required finish will be µin .
E. Bending Before bending round the corners of the plates to a radius of inch throughout the portion of the plate at which the bending is to occur as shown on the plans .
Bend metals before coating or heat treatment .
Bend without causing fractures kinks reduced section below minimum or other defects in the material .
E. Cambering and Curving The Engineer will verify measurements of vertical camber and horizontal curvature for final acceptance after the completion of welding and heating operations and after the flanges cool to uniform ambient temperature .
The Engineer will check horizontal curvature with the girder in the vertical position .
The Engineer may reject materials showing over hardening fractures or other defects due to improper heating .
E. Straightening Material Straighten material without shearing fracturing stressing or damaging the bolts welds or base metal .
Use straightening methods approved by the Engineer .
Replace material damaged during straightening operations with new material at no additional cost to the Department .
If the Engineer determines it is not possible to straighten a member as part of an assembly remove the bent material from the assembly straighten and reassemble .
E. Dimensional Tolerances Provide fascia beam webs with a flatness tolerance no greater than half the limit in ANSIAASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code .
Flange and splice plates to be longitudinally flat to inch in the contact area in order to achieve full connection contact with bolts tightened to the snug tight condition .
Additionally flange plates are to be perpendicular to the web within inch in the connection area .
Flatness of surfaces intended for contact bearing with other structural parts will be within .
inches for each contact surface .
For materials that are warped or distorted straighten to ⅛ inch in ft with Engineers approval. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F Structural Welding Ensure the fabricator performs the following F. General Obtain written approval from the Engineer before performing welding including weld repair or deviating from the approved shop drawings or project plan .
Submit Weld Procedure Specifications WPS with shop detail drawings .
Do not begin fabrication until the Engineer has approved the WPSs .
The Engineer may require testing for particular weld details described in the WPS to assure the Engineer that proper welds can be made .
Test welds as required by the Engineer .
Provide information or Procedure Qualification Records PQRs demonstrating that the proposed WPSs meet the requirements of the ANSIAASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code BWC as approved by the Engineer .
PQRs once approved will remain valid indefinitely .
Provide a minimum weld size per BWC and Structural Metal when a weld symbol is void of a weld size .
For the purpose of this specification a weld repair is defined as any area of the welded product not in compliance with the WPS approved Quality Manual or current edition of BWC .
Notify the Engineer to witness welding and testing .
If the Engineer can not witness qualification or certification welding or testing arrange the witness of an approved third party at no additional cost to the Department .
Conduct testing of qualification welds in a laboratory accredited by the American Association for Laboratory Accreditation ALA or an approved equal at no additional cost to the Department F .. a Welded Flange Splices Place welded flange splices at least inches from web splices .
For welded girders with radii no greater than ft the Department will allow additional splices only on individual flanges that are uniform in thickness and greater than ft in length .
The Department will allow these splices in addition to the splices shown on the plans .
Provide flanges with no more than two additional splices .
Locate additional splices in accordance with the following Near the third points of individual flange plates Midway between adjacent diaphragm connections At least inches from transverse stiffeners and welded connection plates At least ft from field splices bearing points at piers and flange groove welds as shown on the plans and At locations approved by the Engineer .
F .. b WebtoFlange Welds The Department defines a repair as any area of the welded product not meeting the requirements of BWC .
Limit each individual webtoflange weld repairs to percent of the weld length and grinding webtoflange weld repairs to percent of the weld length .
If the Contractor exceeds the repair limits the Engineer will revoke the WPS used to perform the initial production welding .
F. Preparation of Base Metal For coated metals remove coatings on either side of the weld area to a distance of at least inches .
F. Conditions for Welding Preheat without producing visible moisture in the weld joint before welding .
F. Backing Produce Complete Joint Penetration CJP groove welds using steel backing that is continuous for the full length of the weld .
Make joints in the steel backing CJP joints also .
G Fracture Critical Members Ensure the fabricator performs the following Provide fracture critical members meeting the requirements of BWC Fracture Control Plan FCP for Fracture Critical Bridge Members and as modified by this section Provide fracture critical members as shown on the plans .
The Engineer may provide written exemption from these requirements for welds in designated members not subject to tension forces and Do not weld or drill holes for temporary attachments to rolled beams or girders. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G. Fracture Critical Welder Qualifications Provide fracture critical members welded by welders meeting the certification requirements in accordance with BWC .
Annual requalification is to be based on acceptable radiographic test results of either a production groove weld or test plate .
If employing a welder requalified by test use a WPS written in accordance with the requirements of BWC and show the applicable test plate .
H Hole Forming Operations H. Bolt Holes Hole forming operations other than drilling will require a written procedure in the suppliers Quality Manual and a verification test for each hole forming process .
Produce holes after any required bending cambering curving or heattreating of member .
Subpunching or subdrilling of holes is permitted only where specifically allowed by this specification .
Except for field connections and field splices the Contractor may punch material forming parts of a member composed of no greater than five thicknesses of metal inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts for the following Structural steel no thicker than ¾ inch High strength steel no thicker than ⅝ inch or Quenched and tempered alloy steel and nonferrous metals no thicker than ½ inch .
In addition to drilling and punching the fabricator may produce holes for minor structural components by plasma water jet or laser cutting methods .
Produce holes and slots that meet the following criteria Free of sharp torn or jagged edges Walls square to the surface Surface roughness not exceeding micro inches and Size tolerance of inch when compared to as detailed .
H .. a Line Assembly Ensure the fabricator performs the following If the contract requires line assembly drill the connection holes in flange and web splices full size in the assembled position Drill connection holes in secondary members including diaphragms diaphragm stiffeners lateral bracing and lateral bracing connection plates inch greater than the bolt diameter to facilitate alignment Use predrilled splice plates as a template only one time and For oversized holes place hardened washers meeting the requirements of ASTM F under the bolt head and nut .
H .. b Full Assembly If the contract requires full assembly ensure the fabricator drills bolt holes for field connections in all members and all components of each structural unit from the solid to the specified size while assembled with the following exceptions Two subsized holes may be used to attach each diaphragm to stiffeners and field splice plates to webs and flanges to facilitate assembly .
The fabricator has the option to drill one ply of a field connection with full size holes providing it is used as a template only once .
H .. c Punched Bolt Holes Ensure the diameter of the die does not exceed the diameter of the punch by greater than inch .
If the fabricator enlarges holes to admit the bolts provide a written repair procedure from the fabricator to the Engineer for approval .
H .. d Field Connection Bolt Holes Ensure the fabricator drills holes full size to a steel template while assembled for the following Floor beams Stringer end field connections and Holes in all field connections and field splices of main members of trusses arches continuous beam spans bents towers each face plate girders and rigid frames .
The Contractor may drill holes for the following full size and unassembled to a steel template if approved by the Engineer in writing Field splices of rolled beam stringers continuous over floor beams or cross frames and Holes for floor beams cross frames or bent plate diaphragms. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If using a steel template for drilling field connection holes to full size ensure the fabricator locates the template to the correct position and angle and bolt the template in place before drilling and uses duplicate templates to drill matching members and the opposite faces of a single member .
H. Boring Pin Holes Ensure the fabricator produces the final surface of pin holes by a finishing cut and provides pin holes in diameters in accordance with the following No greater than inch for pins no greater than inches in diameter and No greater than inch for pins greater than inches in diameter .
Ensure the distance outsidetooutside of end holes in tension members and insidetoinside of end holes in compression members does not vary from that specified by greater than inch .
Ensure the fabricator bores pin holes in builtup members after the completion of assembly .
I Blank J Shop Assembly Ensure the fabricator performs the following Complete fabrication weld inspection nondestructive testing and any repairs before placing any component in the assembly .
Adjust each assembly unit to the true field position with respect to alignment camber grade and skew as shown on the plans prior to drilling field connection .
The fabricator may angularly rotate the assembly from true field position with respect to grade providing the fabricator supplies shop drawings showing elevations at all points of bearing and the relative position of webs of main members with respect to true field position .
Provide calculations to support the information shown in the drawings .
Rotation is not allowed on hold over members .
For multiple span continuous structures both straight and curved progressive assembly is allowed providing a length no shorter than the length supported by three adjacent points of bearing is used as a minimum length of each structural subassembly .
For these progressive assemblies hold over pieces between adjoining assemblies shall be held to the following tolerances in relation to their documented position prior to removal At point of support Vertical inch Horizontal and Tilt inch At member ends Vertical Horizontal and Tilt inch Clean metal surfaces in contact with each other before assembling .
Assemble pin and draw together the parts of a member before drilling or bolting .
Assemble all structures that contain secondary connections utilizing full size holes in accordance with .J .
Full Assembly .
In the assembly plan identify maximum deviations of differential camber and sweep between girder lines .
Provide a written record of each shop assembly setup .
The inspection of the assembly and the written report shall be completed by a competent individual with experience in structural assemblies .
If a total station or similar device is used to check the assemblies the operator shall be certified to a National Standard or the equipment manufacture .
If a progressive assembly is used the written report shall contain all the required information for each assembly and a final written report for the full length and width of the structure .
Include the following assembly dimensions theoretical as shown on a blocking diagram and actual measurements with the written record X Y and Z dimensions horizontal offset elevations and tilt at bearing points ¼ span points field splice locations Plan ordinates closest to mid span and any other connection points and Span lengths .
Temporary bolts shall be drawn sufficiently tight to bring the required parts into bearing and to preclude loosening of the nut .
The permanent bolt assembly shall be in accordance with .. G. Connections Using High Strength Bolts .
Take apart assembled pieces if necessary to remove burrs shavings or other irregularities produced by the operation .
Adjust the members if they have any twists bends and other deformations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications J .
Line Assembly Assemble major structural components pedestrian truss bridges overhead sign trusses and modular and finger expansion joint devices at the fabrication shop unless otherwise required by the contract .
Line assemble principal members such as but not limited to beams girders arches trusses etc .
full length with all components completely assembled .
J .
Full Assembly Performs full assembly as required by the Contract in accordance with the following Assemble in totality the main members for the complete length as required by the Contract and assemble to the full width of the structural unit Block all members in the no load or zero gravity position unless other requirements are specified in the Contract .
This shall include at a minimum five points of support for each individual main member ends ¼ points and midpoint and Include components such as diaphragms brackets laterals wind frames links and transverse floor systems .
The Department will not require components such as expansion and deflection devices and bearings to be assembled .
J .
Match Marking Matchmark connecting parts assembled in the shop to assure proper fit in the field using low stress die stamps before disassembly .
Use a match marking system that uses a series of letters and numbers to indicate the exact location in the structure without continual reference to detail drawings .
Do not use shop piece marks as a matchmarking scheme .
Mark all pieces or parts planned for assembly at a point with the same mark to avoid rotation of pieces .
Use material used for match marking capable of removal without damage to the appearance of painted or unpainted surface visible in the completed structure .
K Uncoated Weathering Steel Surfaces Ensure the fabricator performs the following Removes foreign matter including oil grease dirt and concrete spatter from uncoated HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel or other types of weathered steel material in accordance with SSPCSP Surface Preparation Specifications Solvent Cleaning and Blasts clean uncoated weathering steel including contact areas of bolted structural connections in the shop or field in accordance with SSPCSPNACE No .
Commercial Blast Cleaning .
L Coating The Department defines coating as any protective barrier including paint galvanizing or metalizing .
Ensure the fabricator performs the following Before performing work supply a Quality Manual QM as approved by the Engineer and meeting the requirements of the AASHTONSBA Steel Bridge Fabrication QCQA Guide Specification and the AASHTONSBA Guide Specification for Coating Systems with Inorganic ZincRich Primer and Do not apply the coating material to a part until the Engineer inspects and approves the work .
The Engineer may reject material coated before approval in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
Remove rejected material as directed by the Engineer .
L. Galvanizing Galvanize in accordance with Galvanized Hardware or Galvanized Structural Shapes this section and as shown in the special provisions .
Purchase Orders shall identify which specific items are to be duplex coated and which materials to be galvanized are reactive e.g .
HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel etc ..
Completely seal weld contacting or welded overlapping surfaces .
Degrease material for rolled or folded joints before forming .
Clean material of paint lacquer and crayon markings before galvanizing .
Do not galvanize closed or blind sections of pipe .
Prior to pickling and galvanizing abrasive blast clean surfaces to be galvanized to SSPCSP NACE No .
Commercial Blast Cleaning .
The following products are exempt from this requirement .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Bearings Channel Bent Plate or Bolt assembled Diaphragms Sole Plates Expansion Devices Shear Connectors Ballast Plates Piling Drainage Systems Conduit Protection Angles and Other systems or components designated by the Engineer .
L. Metallizing Before metalizing steel surfaces blast and clean meeting the requirements of AWS C. Guide for Protection of Steel with Thermal Sprayed Coatings of Aluminum and Zinc and their Alloys and Composites .
Use zinc metalizing wire or powder of a purity equal to Federal Specification MILW .
percent zinc .
Metalize to an average coating total thickness of .
inches .
Coat to a thickness of at least .
inches .
Preheat the substrate to F to eliminate surface condensation and reduce shrinkage and differentials between the coating and the substrate .
Do not metalize unless approved by the Engineer in writing .
L. Painting Prepare the surface and paint in accordance with Inorganic ZincRich Paint System unless otherwise required by the contract .
Bevel corners of painted bridge member edges to at least inch .
If thermal cutting material to final size grind or mill edges to remove thermal cutting marks sufficient to achieve and measure the required painting surface profile .
M Fabricator Inspection Ensure the fabricator provides QC personnel as required by the approved Quality Manual QM and the following M. Nondestructive Testing NDT Ensure the fabricator performs nondestructive testing in accordance with the appropriate ASTM specifications and applicable welding code specifications and the following Use trained personnel who have at least two years of experience as an American Society for Nondestructive Testing ASNT NDT Level II operator and qualified in accordance with ASNTTCA Submit a copy of the NDT operators training and certification records to the Engineer before performing any NDT inspections Provide the Engineer a copy of the written practices and procedures for each NDT method used and Submit a final written report of NDT to the Engineer with interim test reports submitted as performed .
For the NDT of bridge components the Department defines tension areas in accordance with the following Any location in a rolled beam or welded girder where a. the superstructure curvature is greater than degrees andor b. members are designed as an interactive D structure where members are sharing or distributing load to one another andor c. Contract requires full assembly in fabrication .
Any other tension area as shown in the Project Plan .
Perform NDT at locations and frequencies in accordance with the Contract andor the applicable Welding Code with the following modifications Radiograph Testing RT is required of any CJP horizontal web splices RT or UT is required for backing bars when used and left in place Radiograph Testing RT is required for any CJP web or flange welds in compression or shear areas and In addition to testing onesixth of the web depth beginning at the points of maximum tension of the remaining area will be tested .
If the Contract or welding Code does not otherwise specify NDT Ultrasonic Testing UT of any CJP is required .
Ensure the fabricator performs the following Do not weld groovewelded parts to other members until the Engineer approves NDT of groove welds .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Perform NDT of repair welding in accordance with the repair procedure as described in .. C. Nonconformances at no additional cost to the Department and Perform NDT of areas required by the Engineer .
The Department may require NDT of areas not designated in the contract for such inspection .
If the inspection shows the area to be defective the fabricator shall perform the NDT at no additional cost to the Department .
If the inspection is satisfactory the Department will pay for the inspection as Extra Work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
In addition when NDT of an area designated in the contract for inspection shows defects the Engineer may direct the fabricator to perform NDT of adjacent areas to determine the extent of the defective area at no additional cost to the Department .
M .. a Visual Testing VT Ensure the fabricator performs visual inspections during the entire welding process and again after the weld is complete cool and clean of slag and residue .
Final visual inspections for acceptance will be documented and made available to the Engineer for review .
M .. b Dye Penetrant Testing PT Ensure the fabricator checks edges of complete penetration groove welds on major structural components for inches on each side of the centerline of the weld or inch beyond either side of the weld area whichever is greater using Dye Penetrant Testing PT .
The fabricator may substitute Magnetic Particle Testing MT with approval from the Engineer .
M .. c Magnetic Particle Testing MT Ensure the fabricator performs MT on the following At least inches of every ft of length for fillet welds in major structural components and pedestrian bridges percent of bearing stiffener welds At least percent of all weld terminations and percent of the base plate and gusset plate welds for overhead signs and high mast light poles .
Ensure the fabricator locates the tests at random areas of the weld .
Do not use the prod method unless approved by the Engineer .
M .. d Radiographic Testing RT Provide Computed Radiography CR or Digital Radiography DR .
The Department will retain ownership of radiographic images provided by the Contractor .
Name image files with bridge number and weld identification shot number .
Electronic Radiography methods consist of CR utilizing Storage Phosphor Imaging Plate SPIP or DR utilizing a Digital Detector Array DDA .
Ensure CR complies with ASTM E Standard Practice for Computed Radiology Photostimulable Luminescence Method and ASTM E Standard Practice for Performance Evaluation and LongTerm Stability of Computed Radiography Systems .
Ensure DR complies with ASTM E Standard Practice for Radiological Examination Using Digital Detector Arrays and ASTM E Standard Practice for Digital Detector Array Performance Evaluation and LongTerm Stability .
Ensure SPIP and DDA widths are sufficient to depict all portions of the weld joint including the HAZs and provide sufficient additional space for the required holetype or wiretype IQIs and radiograph identification without infringing upon the area of interest .
Ensure all radiographs radiographic images are free from mechanical chemical or other blemishes to the extent that they can not mask or be confused with the image of any discontinuity in the area of interest in the radiograph .
Such blemishes include but are not limited to the following False indications due to defective plates or internal faults and Artifacts due to nonfunctional pixels .
Ensure the contrast and brightness range that demonstrates the required sensitivity be considered valid contrast and brightness values for interpretation .
When multiple IQIs are utilized to cover different thickness ranges the contrast and brightness range that demonstrates the required IQI image of each IQI is determined .
Intervening thicknesses may be interpreted using the overlapping portions of the determined contrast and brightness ranges .
When there is no overlap additional IQIs are to be used .
When performing CR or DR ensure a measuring scale is utilized to serve as a length reference .
The scale is to be attached to the SPIP holder or DDA prior to exposure .
As an alternative when using SPIPs a transparent scale with opaque gradations may be placed on the SPIP prior to processing .
In any case the reference comparator can not interfere with interpretation of the image .
Provide a work station monitor for evaluating images equipped with a display resolution with a pixel count which is at least equal to the pixel count of the direct imaging plate. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Archive images using a reproducible electronic medium .
Provide data file format and storage that comply with ASTM E Standard Practice for Digital Imaging and Communication in Nondestructive Evaluation DICONDE format .
Documented and prove the image archival method at system installation .
Include the image file nomenclature to enable the retrieval of images at a later date .
Archived image files must maintain the bit depth and spatial resolution of the original image .
Image data compression is not allowed .
Preserve store the initial image presented by the CR or DR system without altering the original spatial resolution and pixel intensity .
Preserve store the final image used for disposition when additional image processing is applied excluding windowlevel and digital image zoom to achieve the required image quality level .
Store annotations made to the image in a manner which will not mask or hide diagnostic areas of the image .
M .. e Overhead Signs The Department considers sign posts and trusses for free standing cantilevered and noncantilevered overhead signs as cyclically loaded structures .
Bridge mounted signs are considered statically loaded structures .
Provide overhead sign structures welded in accordance with the requirements of AWS D. as outlined in the AASHTO Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Perform RT UT and MT as outlined in the current overhead sign standards sheets .
The Engineer will base acceptance for overhead signs in accordance with AWS D. N Department Inspection N. General The Engineer will inspect major and minor structural steel components before use in the work .
The Engineer may perform inspections at the mill foundry fabrication shop or in the field .
The purpose of Department inspections is to establish compliance with those test requirements and process controls outlined in the contract as required by federal and state laws .
The Department inspection does not supplement or replace the suppliers own Quality Control and does not relieve the supplier of its responsibility for the correction of errors and faulty workmanship of for the replacement of nonconforming materials .
The Department may reject work not performed in accordance with the suppliers approved QM in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Department will not charge the Contractor for plant inspections by Department personnel .
Provide the Department Inspectors with suitable hard hats face and hand shields safety glasses respirators and other safety equipment necessary to ensure the Inspectors safety while performing structural metals inspections .
Notify the Engineer at least business days before the fabricator begins work to allow the Engineer to perform inspections .
Do not allow the fabricator to perform work or manufacture material until after notifying the Engineer .
The Engineer may reject work performed without notice in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work or may subject the work performed to additional NDT at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department may reject material or work not meeting the requirements of the contract .
The Contractor in conjunction with the fabricator may appeal to the Engineer .
The Engineer will make final decisions on disputes .
The Engineer may reject material shipped to the project site without a Department inspection tag as unacceptable work in accordance with Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
N. Facilities for Inspection Ensure the fabricator provides an office access to a computer and a copy machine and any needed tools and assistance to the Inspector for at least business days before work is scheduled to start to business days after the shipment of material .
Ensure the fabricator provides an inspectors office meeting the following requirements and characteristics Floor space of at least sq ft Containing at least two desks or a desk and table two chairs a file case and other necessary furniture Clean modern and having adequate lighting heating and ventilation Located in a completely partitioned area and provided with a separate locking door and Contains telephone service and a separate highspeed computer data connection .
The relevant contract unit price for steel bridge construction includes the cost of providing maintaining and repairing or replacing inspection facilities as included in the cost of steel bridge construction .
O Marking and Shipping Ensure the fabricator performs the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Before shipping legibly mark material according to the field erection plan and as approved by the Engineer Place markings on the inside of fascia beams on a bridge Mark duplicate pieces unless otherwise approved by the Engineer Bolt connection plates for members in position for shipment Ship pins bolts nuts and washers in weatherproof containers no greater than lb .
Ship pins with nuts in place Package bolts of the same length and diameter nuts and washers meeting the requirements of ASTM F Packaging and Package Instructions Pad coated material to keep the material clean and undamaged during loading transporting unloading handling and storage Ship beams and girders in an upright position unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Block material to prevent buckling warping or twisting during transportation and Block cambered members to prevent loss of camber . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT .
BASIS OF PAYMENT METAL REINFORCEMENT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and placing metal reinforcement of the types shapes and sizes as required by the contract. . MATERIALS A Reinforcement Bars B Steel Fabric C Spiral Reinforcement .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Bending Bend bars to the shapes as shown on the plans .
The Contractor may bend the bars cold .
If hot bending a noncoated bar do not heat bars to temperatures greater than F and do not quench the bars .
Bar bending details shall conform to the American Concrete Institute Details Detailing of Concrete Reinforcement unless otherwise shown or noted in the plans .
Ensure that the bar bend diameters are as shown Recommended in the American Concrete Institute .
Repair bond loss or coating damage after bending epoxy coated reinforcement bars in accordance with Reinforcement Bars .
Clean damaged areas to remove loose or deleterious material before patching .
Remove rust by blast cleaning .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Materials Engineer will not require the repair of hairline cracks with no bond loss or other damage .
Perform repairs before oxidation appears .
B Storage and Protection Do not store metal reinforcement in a manner that will cause induce or accelerate corrosion or contamination of the metal .
Locate timbers dunnage on the ground to support the bundles and keep them free of contamination .
Store materials at the project site to allow the Engineer to visually inspect and check the various types of reinforcement for conformance to the dimensions as shown on the plans .
Store bars of the same type together .
Identify reinforcement bars with tags bearing the identification symbols as shown on the plans .
Protect coated reinforcement bars before handling or shipping to prevent damage to the coating .
Pad bundling bands and lift bundles using an OSHAapproved spreader bar multiple supports or platform bridge to prevent bartobar abrasion from sags in the bar bundle .
Do not drag or drop bars or bundles .
Support bars or bundles in transit to prevent damage to the coating .
If the epoxycoated reinforcing steel is incorporated into the Project and is exposed to the weather or stored exposed to the weather for more than calendar days cover the steel to protect the material from sunlight saltspray and weather exposure .
Provide for air circulation around the covered steel to minimize condensation under the protective covering. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Placing Supporting and Tying Bar Reinforcement C. General Requirements Before placing concrete in a unit ensure the reinforcement bars meet the condition defined in the current CRSI manual titled Placing Reinforcing Bars Chapter VII Unloading Storing and Handling Bars on the Job .
Place the bars as specified in Tolerances in Placement section in Chapter X General Principles for Bar Placing Splicing and Tying Reinforcing Bars .
Carefully place the beam seatpedestal reinforcement to avoid interference with drilling holes for fixed bearing anchor rods .
Provide a template demonstrating that the anchor rods have a inch clear distance to all reinforcement for the entire embedment at all bearing anchor rod locations .
Confirm the proper clearance to the reinforcement with the Engineer prior to placing the affected substructure concrete .
Place the beam or girder in its final position prior to drilling or coring holes for the anchor rods .
If reinforcement steel is encountered during the drilling or coring process contact the Engineer and the Engineer will determine how to proceed .
Verify the depth of the holes in the presence of the Engineer prior to inserting the anchor rods .
Firmly support and securely tie reinforcement bars in their proper position .
Tie all outermost intersections and enough of the intermediate intersections to ensure that no shifting or displacement of the bars will occur during subsequent operations .
Bar supports are intended to support the steel reinforcement and normal construction loads and are not intended to and should not be used to support runways for concrete buggies or similar loads .
Use black soft iron wire of at least gauge for tying the reinforcement bars .
Do not use welded ties .
Do not place concrete before the Engineer inspects and approves the placement support system and ties for the reinforcement bars .
Provide supports with the following characteristics for reinforcement bars bearing on the falsework sheathing for exposed concrete surfaces Stainless steel Hotdip galvanized epoxy vinyl or plastic coated tips extending at least ½ inch above the sheathing or Plastic .
The wire coating shall not chip peel crack or distort under any job conditions and temperatures .
C. Special Requirements for Bridge Slabs Support and tie reinforcement bars for bridge slabs in accordance with the General Requirements and the maximum spacing requirements specified in Table .
These spacing requirements define only the maximum permissible distances between ties or lines of support .
Table does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for providing additional supports or ties for holding and supporting bars firmly in their correct position .
For bridge slabs use slab bolsters as the primary support for the bottom transverse reinforcement bars meeting the requirements of Bar Support Specifications and Standard Nomenclature in the CRSI Manual of Standard Practice .
Place the bolsters on the falsework sheathing in continuous lines parallel to the beams girders or centerline of the roadway at locations that will permit placement of supports for the top transverse reinforcement bars directly over the bolsters on the bottom transverse bars .
Use continuous lines of upper continuous high chairs with wire runners as the support system for the top transverse reinforcement bars .
Place the high chairs to transfer load to the bottom bolsters without causing deflection in the bottom transverse bars .
Use individual type high chairs only as supplemental support or for sections where the use of continuous type high chairs is not practical and the Engineer approves in writing the use of the individual type high chairs .
For all interior bays on beam span bridges place slab bolsters and upper continuous high chairs within inches of the edge of beam flanges .
Use tie wires to tie down the top mat of bridge slab reinforcing to the inplace beam stirrups or shear connectors at spacing no greater than ft as measured longitudinally along each beam .
If the support system specified in this section is not practical the Contractor may propose an alternative support system for slab span bridges or other special designs .
Provide working drawings showing the proposed support system to the Engineer .
If approved by the Engineer in writing the Contractor may use the proposed support system .
Table Maximum Spacing of Supports and Ties for Bridge Slabs Bar Size Number Maximum Spacing for Slab Bolsters and Continuous Type High Chairs ft and .
and . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Support the bottom layer of longitudinal reinforcement bars for slab span bridges castinplace concrete girders beams struts and similar sections on beam bolsters or heavy beam bolsters commensurate with the mass to be supported .
Do not use precast concrete block or brick supports on formed surfaces .
Use the upper beam bolsters or the upper heavy beam bolsters to support subsequent layers of longitudinal bottom reinforcement except for bars that can be tied to vertical bars unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
After the completion of the placement and tying of the reinforcement bars for a section of bridge slab and before ordering concrete delivery for that section set the strikeoff rails or guides to the correct elevation .
Notify the Engineer when the section is ready for a final check .
Operate the strikeoff device over the entire section in the presence of the Engineer .
Attach a filler strip ¼ inch less in thickness than the minimum concrete cover requirement to the bottom of the strikeoff during this check to detect areas where the top reinforcement may encroach on the required clearance .
Do not place concrete for a bridge slab before the Engineer inspects and approves the deck grades .
Tie the top mat of epoxycoated reinforcement bars at every transverse bar intersection along each continuous row of longitudinal bars .
Tie the bottom mat of reinforcement bars and noncontinuous rows of top mat bars at least at every second transverse bar intersection .
Stagger the ties for the bottom mat along adjacent rows of longitudinal bars .
Use plastic or nyloncoated tie wires .
Use plastic bar supports or epoxycoated wire bar supports with coating resistant to abrasion .
Provide epoxy coating for bar supports at least .
inch thick and in accordance with Reinforcement Bars .
Provide plastic coated tips or additional epoxy coating on the legs of the supports for wire bar supports that bear on falsework sheathing for exposed concrete surfaces .
Ensure the additional material extends at least ½ inch above the sheathing not including portions of the supports other than the legs .
Use a greycolored coating with a total coating thickness on the ½ inch portion including the initial .
inches of epoxy coating of at least inch .
Use incompressible and abrasion resistant plastic or epoxy material .
C. Special Requirements for Coated Bars The Engineer will not require the Contractor to repair damage caused during shipment of coated bars or by the installation procedures if the damaged area is no greater than ¼ inch ¼ inch and the sum of damaged areas in each ft length of bar is no greater than percent of the bar surface area .
Repair damage greater than ¼ inch ¼ inch as recommended by the manufacturer .
The Engineer will reject bars with total damage greater than percent of bar surface area .
Remove rejected bars .
Ensure the total bar surface area covered by patching material is no greater than percent .
Do not flame cut coated reinforcing bar in any application .
If using an abrasive blade to cut epoxycoated reinforcing bar and the cut ends are properly coated with a twopart epoxy patching material as recommended by the manufacturer of the epoxy coating the Department will allow cutting of epoxycoated bars .
Use a nonmetallic vibrator head to consolidate the concrete around coated reinforcement bars and other components .
D Splicing Metal Reinforcement Provide reinforcement in the lengths shown on the plans .
Do not place splices unless otherwise shown on the plans or approved in writing by the Engineer .
Place field splices at locations and with details as approved by the Engineer .
D. Lap Splices Provide lap splices as shown on the plans .
If not shown on the plans provide bar reinforcement lap lengths per table Length of Bar Splices .
Table Length of Bar Splices U.S .
Customary Bar Size Diameter Number of Diameters Length of Splice inches Fraction inches Decimal inches . . . . . . . . . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Length of Bar Splices U.S .
Customary Bar Size Diameter Number of Diameters Length of Splice inches Fraction inches Decimal inches .
Must be preapproved by the Engineer in writing .
Lap wire mesh reinforcement at least the width of one full mesh plus inches for transverse laps or one full mesh plus inch plus two end overhangs for longitudinal laps .
D. Couplers for Reinforcement Bars Provide reinforcement bar couplers at construction joints in the locations as shown on the plans and with the following characteristics Epoxycoated in accordance with Reinforcement Bars Developing at least percent of the yield strength of the reinforcement bar and Having a fatigue design limit of at least ksi when tested in accordance NCHRP Project .
Submit written coupler details yield strength and fatigue test results and the name of the manufacturer to the Engineer for written approval before installation .
If assembling threaded couplers insert the bar into the coupler to the full depth of the thread and torque the assembly as recommended by the manufacturer .
E Spiral Reinforcement The Contractor may provide rigid or collapsible cages of spiral reinforcement for circular columns .
Finish the ends of each column spiral with one and onehalf turns of the reinforcement .
The Contractor may make the spiral cages rigid by tying the vertical column bars to the spiral wires at their intersections or by using epoxycoated metal spacer strips .
Provide enough tied intersections or use enough spacer strips to ensure a rigid noncollapsible cage with properly spaced loops when the cage is in its final position .
Do not tack weld the reinforcement .
Provide fulllength spiral reinforcement cages .
If approved by the Engineer provide spiral reinforcement cages in two pieces with added stock to provide for lapping the two adjoining ends at least one and onehalf turns . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Reinforcement Bars The Engineer will measure Reinforcement Bars including reinforcement in bar mats by the weight incorporated into the structure in accordance with Table .
The Engineer will only include quantities for splices shown on the plans .
Reinforcement bars are marked in U.S .
Customary sizes .
The following table specifies the nominal dimensions of the bar Table Reinforcement Bars Theoretical Weights U.S .
Customary Bar Size Nominal Dimensions Diameter inches Area in Weight lbft .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B Steel Fabric The Engineer will measure Steel Fabric by the weight incorporated into the structure based on the quantity shown on the plans .
The Engineer will only include quantities for splices shown on the plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Spiral Reinforcement The Engineer will measure Spiral Reinforcement by the weight incorporated into the structure based on the weight shown in the table in chapter of the Bridge Construction Manual .
The Engineer will only include quantities for splices shown on the plans .
D Couplers The Engineer will measure Reinforcement Bar Couplers by the number of couplers installed as required by the contract and as directed by the Engineer . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for metal reinforcement at the contract unit prices for the contract items listed in the detailed specifications for the type of structure where the metal reinforcement is used .
For structure type with no detailed specifications the Department will pay for metal reinforcement on the basis of the following schedule .
The contract unit price for the relevant metal reinforcement contract item includes the cost of providing fabricating delivering placing the metal reinforcement as specified in this section bar supports bar chairs spacers and tie wire .
The contract unit price for Spiral Reinforcement includes the cost of metal spacer strips bar supports and tie wires .
Item No .
Item Unit .
Couplers Reinforcement Bars T___ each .
Reinforcement Bars pound .
Steel Fabric pound .
Spiral Reinforcement pound ORGANIC ZINCRICH PAINT SYSTEM .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of the following for shop or field fullsystem applications of organic zincrich paint systems for new construction and recoating of existing structures Surface preparations Providing and applying the coating Protecting and curing the coating Protecting pedestrians vehicular traffic and property against damage and All work incidental to these operations .
A Definitions Whenever the following terms are used in this section the terms shall have the following meaning Engineer Shall be defined as in Definitions except for shop applied paint coats where Engineer shall mean the State Bridge Engineer .
Contractor Shall mean the fabricator paint contractor applicator or other entity that prepares the surfaces and applies the coatings .
Shop in shop coating The indoor facility where structural metals are prepared and coated .
Field Coating The outdoor onsite coating of new or previously coated steel structures before or after erection .
Quality Assurance QA The process and persons responsible for verification of the conformance of materials and methods of application to the governing specification in order to achieve a desired result .
Quality Control QC The process and persons responsible for administrative and production procedures employed to attain the desired product outcome and quality .
The job foreman or production painter can not be this person .
Quality Manual QM The formal written document prepared by the contractor that describes the policies and procedures that ensure and verify that the coated structural steel component will satisfy the contract requirements .
Quality Assurance Inspector QAI The Departments representative responsible for duties specified in the Quality Assurance Plan with the authority to accept work that meets Contract requirements .
Contact surfaces Those surfaces in the completed structure that touch other surfaces .
Corner The intersection of two surfaces .
Edge An exposed throughthickness surface of a plate or rolled shape .
This may be the asrolled side face of a beam flange channel flange or angle leg or may result from thermal cutting sawing or shearing .
Edges may be planar or rounded and either perpendicular or skewed to adjacent faces .
Noncontact surfaces Surfaces that are not in direct contact with other surfaces .
Prime Coat Application of a zincrich coating to a bare metal substrate .
Coating thickness The DryFilm Paint Thickness DFT above the peaks of the blast profile. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Mist Coat Fog Coat or Tack Coat a thin mistspray application of a coating to improve adhesion and uniformity of the subsequent full application of the same coating .
b A light coat of unspecified DFT used to prevent rust staining of steel substrates or temporarily inhibit corrosion .
Stripe Coat A coating of sufficient thickness to completely hide the surface being coated on all edges corners seams crevices interior angles junctions of joining members bolt heads nuts and threads weld lines and similar surface irregularities .
This coating shall be followed as soon as practicable by the application of the full prime coat to its specified thickness .
Qualified Holding appropriate documentation and officially on record as competent and experienced to perform a specified function or practice of a specific skill .
Coating System The surface preparation and application of specific coating classifications i.e .
Inorganic Zinc Rich Organic ZincRich Polyurethane Acrylic Polyurea Latex Galvanize Powder etc .
of coating products to provide a film forming a unified whole for the purpose of corrosion protection andor aesthetics .
Paint System A set of interacting film forming paint materials and products which combine to make up a complete coating system .
Hold Point Puts a hold on any future activities until an inspection is passed .
Do not proceed without the written approval of the Engineer .
The Department and the Contractor will use the Startup Checklist and the Daily Quality Assurance Check List located on the www.dot.state.mn.usbridgeconstruction.html site so that quality is assured .
Duplex Coating System A system whereas galvanizing replaces the zincrich primer and subsequently intermediate and top coated in accordance with this specification. . MATERIALS A ZincRich Paint Systems Provide paint systems listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List for bridge structural steel coating three coat systems organic .
Deliver the paint to the site in the original unopened containers no greater than gal .
Do not alter the contents unless approved by the Engineer in writing .
Package multicomponent coatings in separate containers or kits .
Provide the Engineer with the following for each paint shipment The manufacturers material safety data sheets MSDS Material certifications and Written instructions for mixing handling and application of the coatings .
Ensure a manufacturers technical representative with knowledge of this paint system is available to assist during coating application. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Contractor Qualifications and Documentation A .
Field Applicators At least calendar days prior to starting any painting work submit a Quality Manual QM meeting the requirements of this section and AASHTONSBA Steel Bridge Collaboration S. SSPCPA Guide Specification for Application of Coating Systems with ZincRich Primers to Steel Bridges to the Engineer for approval including a method to provide the minimum requirements and frequencies in the QM as shown in C. and Table and a custom proposal of how SSPC PA will be documented to the Engineer for acceptance in writing .
Perform the preparation and application of field applied coatings with staff meeting the requirements of The Society of Protective Coatings Certified Application Specialist SSPS CAS Level .
One CAS Level is required on sight overseeing the work in each work area up to a crew of workers .
Multiple work areas will require an additional CAS for each area .
A .
Shop Applicators Before the start of work the supplier will be prequalified on MnDOTs approved suppliers for fabricated structural metals products list as maintained by the Structural Metals Engineer at httpwww.dot.state.mn.usbridgepdfapprovedsuppliers.pdf or at least calendar days prior to beginning work the supplier is to submit a Quality Manual QM to the Engineer for review .
Ensure the QM is written in accordance with the MnDOT Supplier Qualification Standard SQS .
The Engineer will use the SQS as the basis of acceptance for the submitted QM .
In addition to routine inspections the Engineer will audit suppliers with approved QMs on a biannual or annual basis or as otherwise directed by the Engineer to ensure the implementation of the QM .
The Department will invoke its Corrective Action Process if the routine inspections or audits indicate nonconformance .
Any and all corrective actions deemed appropriate by the Engineer are effective immediately and apply to any work remaining on a current project and all future projects .
If the Engineer determines that work does not comply with the QM or that fabrication does .
Minnesota Standard Specifications not follow approved fabrication procedures the Engineer will deem the materials as nonconforming in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the Engineer finds nonconforming work direct the supplier to immediately correct the procedure and submit a written nonconformance report containing data required by the Engineer to ensure compliance with the QM specifications and drawings .
Perform additional testing as required by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
For repeat offences or negligence the Department will require corrective action of hiring a third party Quality Control Inspector at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor may obtain a copy of the Departments Corrective Action Process from the Engineer .
B General For new construction preserve or transfer erection markings to ensure legibility when erecting members .
Provide removable markings or place markings at locations not visible in the completed structure .
Use marking material that will not damage the paint system .
If painting a structure erected under a previous contract the Department will not require disassembly of portions of the structure or removal of appurtenances to expose contact surfaces or otherwise inaccessible metal surfaces unless otherwise shown on the plans or in the special provisions .
For new construction projects paint contact surfaces with the zinc primer at the recommended DFT except for surfaces completely sealed by Welding Bolt heads Nuts and washers and Embedment in concrete ex .
shear devices and anchorages .
Coat the top surfaces of beams and girders with a mist coat of primer .
Protect the environment and property as required by federal state and MnDOT regulations .
Protect nonpainted surfaces concrete bridge deck overhangs and vertical faces of abutments that are adjacent to the painted surfaces from overspray unless otherwise shown on the plans or in the special provisions .
The Engineer will allow up to inches of overspray and may require the excessive over sprayed paint be removed covered with a special surface finish or wire wheeled from the adjacent surfaces .
Provide a system for inspection that will allow the inspector to safely access the steel components .
For safety systems that require temporary fastening to the steel to support the system use fastening hardware that will not damage the paint .
Repair damages as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
C Inspection Perform QC inspections of the shop and field painting in accordance with an approved QM .
The Department will appoint a Quality Assurance Inspector QAI as a Department representative to accept work meeting the Contract requirements .
C. Quality Manual QM Requirements Provide the minimum requirements and frequencies in the QM as shown in Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Coating Inspection Requirements Requirement FrequencyExtent General Ambient temperature Every field h Every shop h or at the start of each shift Dew point and relative humidity Every field h Every shop h or at the start of each shift Surface temperature Every field h Every shop h or at the start of each shift Date and time Every field h Every shop h or at the start of each shift Piece mark or bundle Every field h Every shop h or at the start of each shift Compressed Air Test ASTM D Daily when abrasive blasting or blow down operations are occurring DFT each coat of paint SSPC PA Visual inspection each coat of paint percent Surface Preparation Preclean per SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning Each component to be prime coated .
Visually inspect Abrasive blast clean per SSPCSP Near White Blast Cleaning Each component to be prime coated Visually inspect per VIS Standard for Blast Comparisons percent Soluble Salt Test See Special Provisions Blast profile inspection per ASTM D Steel Girders minimum of three locations per each blasted .
Diaphragms three locations minimum per each blasted .
Sole Plates three locations minimum per each blasted .
Pedestrian Bridges minimum of three locations on each truss and a minimum of three locations on the floor beam .
Railing ten locations minimum for each lineal ft of rail .
Bridge Truss three locations minimum for each sq .
ft. or the amount of truss blasted by each blasting nozzle in an eight hour shift whichever is less .
Items not covered by this list shall have three documented profile locations for every sq .
ft. blasted .
Prime Intermediate and Finish Coat Batch number Every paint kit Verification of surface cleanliness Examine visually within h before prime painting and with a white cloth wipe test nothing will transferred on to the cloth surface Temperature of mixed product When mixing components Proper mixing and straining Every pot mix Induction time and reaction time Every pot mix Pot life Every pot mix Cure time Each lot of work Cure Verification Prior to the next application Proper use of stripe coats prime coat only Visual percent of all applicable areas as specified in .. F Paint Coats Coating evaluation and repair Visual percent of each element Recoat time Each lot of work and as recommended by the manufacturer Adhesion Final Coating system As required by the Engineer Coating system final evaluation and repair Visual percent of each element .
Minnesota Standard Specifications In addition to the above requirements include the following information in the FIELD painting QM Proof of SSPC QP certification for field painting and that it is maintained throughout the painting portion of the contract per AASHTONSBA Steel Bridge Collaboration S. SSPCPA Guide Copies of certifications of all CAS Level employees on the job Product Data Sheets Manufacturers Documentation stating that all personnel involved with the application of the paint were trained on mixing and application of the coatings system Nonconformance Report form A custom proposal of how SSPC PA will be documented A preapproved Request for Deviation An initial color draw down sample on a Leneta chart per .. F. and Names of employees on the job including their titles .
Provide written records meeting all Coating Inspection Requirements to the Engineer within working days from when the shift was completed to receive partial payment .
Provide written records meeting all Coating Inspection Requirements in its entirety at the completion of the job prior to receiving final payment .
Provide a final QM set to the MnDOT Bridge Engineer also .
The QAI or the Engineer will reject the coating system or reduce payment per Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work if the Contractor did not adhere to the approved QM or provided inadequate documentation of adherence to the QM .
Conduct subsequent testing with the QAI for the Engineers approval at no additional cost to the Department to determine compliance .
D Surface Preparation The QAI or Engineer will inspect the surface preparation as it is done after its completion review the QM documentation or any combination of the three .
Notify the QAI or the Engineer at least working days before beginning surface preparation .
D. Cleaning D .. a Solvent Cleaning Clean areas containing organic and synthetic and other visible contaminants with solvent meeting the requirements of SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning .
Protect the adjacent environment and property while solvent cleaning .
D .. b Abrasive Blasting Abrasive blast clean surfaces to achieve a SSPCSP NACE No .
NearWhite Blast Cleaning before applying prime coat .
Use job site visual standards and SSPCVIS Guide and Reference Photographs for Steel Surfaces Prepared by Abrasive Blast Cleaning .
Perform blast cleaning operations meeting the requirements of Minnesota MPCA Rule .
through .. Abrasive blast clean to achieve a profile range from .
mils to .
mils .
Reblast clean surfaces when the surface profile is less than .
mils .
Provide a Nonconformance Report NCR or use a preapproved Request for Deviation as stated in the approved QM to the Engineer if the profile exceeds .
mils .
Provide written documentation proving that the specified profile has been achieved .
When recyclable blast media is used assess the blast cleaning abrasives prior to using for the presence of conductive potential ionic contaminants by determining the total concentration of water soluble conductive species using a conductivity test ASTM D Standard Test Method for Conductimetric Analysis of Water Soluble Ionic Contamination of Blast Cleaning Abrasives .
D .. b. Duplex System shop Perform preparation of galvanized surfaces prior to application of paint in accordance with SSPC SP Brushoff Blast Cleaning of NonFerrous Metals and ASTM D Standard Practice for Preparation of Zinc HotDip Galvanized Coated Iron and Steel Product and Hardware Surfaces for Painting .
Inspect brushoff blasted surfaces for fins tears reduced DFTs that fall below the required minimum or any other damage .
Submit to the Engineer an NCR documenting all damage prior to repairing the surface .
D .. c Post Blasting After blast cleaning remove blasting debris from steel surfaces using procedures that leave the surfaces free of moisture and contaminants .
Remove the blasting residue from the containment area specifically the floor area to prevent dust from being airborne once painting process starts .
Provide structural steel members free of surface defects such as small seams blisters weld spatter fins laps and tears .
Perform grinding up to inch or of the material thickness whichever is less .
Perform grinding parallel to the direction of the stresses .
Remove surface defects and repair gouges before applying prime coat. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E Application of Paint E. General For shop application of paint submit documentation to the Quality Assurance Inspector QAI showing that the paint manufacturers technical representative trained all directly involved shop personnel including QC on the proper mixing and application of the coatings system for the project .
Make training curriculum available to the Engineer upon request .
Provide prime intermediate and finish coats of paint in accordance with .. A ZincRich Paint Systems .
For shop applied duplex coating system the hotdip galvanize coating replaces the liquid zincrich prime coat .
Do not start painting until the QAI or the Engineer approves the surface preparation and paint .
Before applying paint clean the surface of flash rust dust dirt grease oil moisture overspray and other deleterious contaminants that will prevent the paint from adhering hold point .
Provide a white cloth material to the QAI for cleanliness testing .
Apply paint to produce a smooth and uniform film free of runs drips sags pinholes blisters mudcracking and other deleterious conditions by spray application ONLY unless a different application method is allowed in the contract .
Apply paint in accordance with manufacturers printed instructions except as stated in this document .
Rollers daubers brushes are not allowed to be used to apply paint unless approved by the Engineer in writing .
Do not apply paint to metal surfaces when weather conditions that the manufacturers literature defines as unsatisfactory are present and when The air temperature falls below F Metal surface temperatures are less than F above the dew point Water mist is in the air and Metal surfaces are damp or frosted .
Do not apply paint if other work operations wind or traffic causes the air to carry dust dirt or sand onto the prepared or newly painted metal surfaces .
Do not apply spray applied paint without protective shields that prevent scattering wet paint particles in areas where rebounding or blowing paint particles could cause harm to persons adjacent environment or property .
The QAI or Engineer will suspend spray painting operations if the Contractor does not properly control paint application .
Do not thin paint more than as stated in the manufacturers written instructions .
After mixing strain the primer through a mesh screen or a double layer of cheesecloth .
Do not allow undispersed clumps of zinc to remain in the paint after mixing .
Before applying a subsequent coat of paint perform the following Cure the previous coat to the recoat time as defined in the manufacturers Product Data Sheet and Screen or scrape smooth and repaint wrinkled detached distorted scuffed abraded areas .
Remove dust or chalklike deposits .
Repair or replace defective previously applied paint coats as required by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
Apply the subsequent paint coat within the maximum time interval recommended by the manufacturer .
If the maximum time interval is exceeded blast the areas to SSPCSP NACE NO .
NearWhite Blast Cleaning and recoat at no additional cost to the Department .
Do not paint within inches of the zones requiring field welding as shown on the plans .
Prepare and paint the heat affected areas after field welding in accordance with this section .
When the Contract specifies shop painting and the Contractor does not provide the specified coatings in the shop apply the paint coats for the unpainted portion at the project site .
Submit paint repair procedures to the QAI or the Engineer for approval .
E. Spraying Perform power spraying using a fine even spray .
The Contractor may brush out paint applied with spray equipment to obtain uniform coverage and to eliminate wrinkling blistering sags runs and air holes if the brushing is done immediately .
When spraying maintain a spray tiptosurface distance to achieve an even wet coat free of runs drips sags overspray and dry spray .
When using conventional air spray equip the air lines with approved water and oil traps .
Use ASTM D Standard Test Method for Indicating Oil or Water in Compressed Air to ensure the compressed air is oil and water free .
E. Rollers Brushes and Daubers This section may only be used with written permission from the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contractor may apply paint by rolling brushing or daubers in areas unsuitable for spray painting such as small surface areas where overspray would be excessive and small areas requiring paint repair .
If using brushes manipulate the paint under the brush to provide a smooth uniform coating over the entire surface including corners and crevices .
Perform final brush strokes horizontal and parallel to each other .
Remove brush hairs on the paint surface .
Equip the paint pot with an approved agitator during application of paint by rolling brushing or daubers .
F Paint Coats F. Measurement of Paint Thickness The Department refers to Dry Film Thickness DFT when using the term thickness in this section .
Use a properly calibrated thickness gage to measure the paint thickness and average thickness meeting at a minimum the requirements of SSPC PA Measurement of Dry Coating Thickness with Magnetic Gages .
Measure paint thickness from the top of the peaks of the blast profile .
Perform painting operations as recommended by the manufacturers literature unless otherwise specified in this section .
If the manufacturers recommended DFT differs from the DFT in accordance with this section submit a request in writing to the Engineer before painting to determine the DFT deviation from the manufacturers written recommendations .
Refer to .. J for deficient paint thickness .
F. Stripe Coats Before applying prime coat apply a stripe coat on the edges corners seams crevices interior angles junctions of joining members rivets or bolt heads nuts and threads weld lines and similar irregularities .
Ensure the stripe coat completely hides the surface to be covered .
Apply the prime coat on top of the stripe coat before it is fully cured to its specified thickness as defined in this section and after the QAI or the Engineer accepts the stripe coat hold point .
Apply the stripe coat per .. E. F. Prime Coat Apply the stripe coat and primer coat after preparing the surface in accordance with this section and as approved by the QAI or the Engineer and before the surface rusts .
Equip the paint pot with an agitator during spray painting work .
Provide an agitator or stirring rod capable of reaching within inches of the bottom of the pot to keep the paint mixed during application .
Apply prime coat to a DFT as stated in Table with no spot reading measuring less than the minimum primer DFT listed unless the manufacturer requires otherwise .
Remain within the maximum DFT limits as defined by the manufacturer .
Table Blast Profile Paint Thickness Requirements for Primer Blast Profile Minimum Primer DFT Average Primer DFT . . mils .
mils minimum .
mils average . . mils .
mils minimum .
mils average .
mils Write a Nonconformance Report NCR or use a preapproved Request for Deviation as stated in your QM Write a Nonconformance Report NCR or use a preapproved Request for Deviation as stated in your QM For contact surfaces of bolt splices do not apply prime coat to a thickness greater than the manufacturers certified thickness for Class B slip coefficient .
Apply the prime paint coat per .. E hold point .
F. Intermediate Coat Apply the intermediate coat to a DFT of at least .
mils after the prime coat cures to the drytotopcoat as defined in the manufacturers Product Data Sheet .
Remain within the maximum DFT limits as defined by the manufacturer .
Provide epoxy intermediate coat in a color that will contrast between the organic zincrich primer and the polyurethane topcoat .
Apply the intermediate paint coat to prime coated surfaces exposed in the completed structure. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Apply the intermediate paint coat per .. E hold point .
F. Finish Coats Apply the finish coat to a DFT of at least .
mils remain within the maximum DFT limits as defined by the manufacturer after the intermediate cures to the drytotopcoat as defined in the manufacturers Product Data Sheet .
Ensure the finish coat color matches the color standard required by the contract .
Assure the supplied product meets the requirements of Basic Requirements for Paints .
Per provide a color draw down sample on a Leneta chart per ASTM D Standard Test Method for Hiding Power of Paints by Reflectometry to the Engineer .
The Department requires an acceptable initial draw down sample prior to beginning any work because color testing is the initial control for the quality of the product .
Apply the finish paint coat to intermediate coated surfaces exposed in the completed structure .
Ensure the finished surface is uniform in color and free of visible lap marks and other blemishes .
Apply the finish paint coat per .. E hold point .
Fillet seal crevices and cavities along the edge of faying surfaces that are separated by inch or more with an approved sealant that is listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List for Bridge Structural Steel Coating Sealants and apply per the coating manufacturer installation instructions .
Do not seal the bottom edge of vertical faying surfaces allowing the juncture to release trapped moisture .
Ensure the sealant color is a match to the finish paint color by submitting a sample to the MnDOT lab for color approval or utilize an approved clear caulk .
Apply the caulk in a smooth manner hold point .
F. Total Paint Thickness Ensure the total paint thickness of the entire paint system averages at least mils but remains in the maximum thickness limits defined by the manufacturer of the paint system .
If the Engineer finds total paint thickness deficient or excessive over any part of a structure and if the Engineer does not require additional paint applications or removal of paint the Department will reduce payment for the appropriate item of work .
G Markings for Identification Stencil the year of painting and the specification numbers of the prime intermediate and top coats in numerals inches high on the interior surface of fascia beams at the same corner displaying the bridge name plate and at the corner diagonally opposite that corner example .
G. Stenciling after Primer When the primer is applied in the shop ensure the fabricatorpainter stencils the name of the paint manufacturer and the primer product name applied in the shop on the inside web of both fascia girders in characters inches high and in a contrasting color compatible with the specified paint system .
H Fasteners H. Requirements for Coating Remove all organic or other material that would interfere with the adhesion of the coating .
The Contractor may use industrial cleaning solutions to remove fastener lubricants if the solutions do not contaminate or interfere with adherence of subsequently applied coating materials as approved by the QAI or the Engineer .
Adhesion tests may be required by the Engineer to prove that there is no interference at no additional cost to the Department .
H. Paint Thickness Requirements After installing fasteners and after removing lubricant and residuals from exposed parts of fasteners apply additional primer to meet the required primer thickness as defined in this section .
Provide the required thickness of the intermediate and finish coats to fasteners as defined in this section .
I Handling Storage and Shipping of Painted Steel Do not apply paint to members loaded for shipment except to apply touchup paint as approved by the QAI or the Engineer .
Do not damage the painted steel in the shop and field during shipping erection and construction of the bridge and components .
Do not move or handle the painted steel items until the coating cures in accordance with the manufacturers data sheet hold point .
Use nylon straps padded hooks slings or other nonmetallic lifting devices to protect coated components or products during handling and loading .
Use softeners and edge protection devices to protect the steel from binding chains .
Provide padded hooks and slings to hoist the painted components .
Store completed items in accordance with Storage of Materials and the following Tag or permanently mark items before final storage .
Include individual piece marks bridge number project number manufacturer number and the applicator job number in the identification markings and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Locate the final storage area out of any traffic lanes and in an area capable of bearing the full weight of the members or items and stable enough to maintain bundles members or items within the supporting substrate .
Inspect and store bundles members or items in one general location before final acceptance unless otherwise approved by the QAI or the Engineer .
Support individual items or bundles of coated products in transit in a manner that will prevent damage to the coating .
Do not drop or drag individual items or bundles of coated products .
Pad when shipping bundling or banding materials to protect the components from direct contact with packaging materials that may damage the coated products finish .
Use softeners and edge protection devices in conjunction with highdensity foam or other acceptable packaging materials at all points of contact .
J Paint Repair The Contractor may use a Tooke Gauge to perform a destructive test to measure the DFT at no additional cost to the Department if it is not possible to satisfactorily determine the coating thickness of any paint coat after application .
Repair the destructively tested area as approved by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
Do not perform mechanical grinding to reduce paint thickness .
Completely remove and recoat the paint system with deficient or excessive paint thickness as defined in this section for prime intermediate or topcoat if directed by the Engineer .
Submit paint repair procedures to the Engineer in writing for acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will make area calculations .
The Engineer will not make allowance in area calculations for actual areas of rivets and bolt heads curved surfaces of welds radii or corners .
A Shop Painting The Engineer will measure shop painting required by the contract based on the area of acceptable paint coverage on non contact areas as computed from the dimensions shown on the plans .
The Engineer will not include contact areas in the measurement for payment .
B Field Painting for New Construction The Engineer will measure field painting in the bolted field splice areas of newly constructed shop painted steel based on the field splice area of acceptable paint coverage as shown on the plans .
The Department will consider the cost of paint repairs to correct damage from field storage or erection with the relevant contract unit prices for structural steel .
C Field Painting of an Existing Bridge The Engineer will measure field painting of structural steel on the basis of the area of acceptable paint coverage as computed from the dimensions as shown on the plans for the structure . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT A Shop Painting The contract square foot for Organic ZincRich Paint Shop includes the costs providing and applying an acceptable shop applied paint system including all necessary repairs to the paint coating that occur before unloading at the project storage site .
B Field Painting of Shop Painted Components The contract square foot price for Organic ZincRich Paint System Field includes the costs of preparing and applying field applied paint systems to shop primed bolted splice areas .
C Painting of Existing Old Components or Structures The contract square foot price for Organic ZincRich Paint System Old includes the costs of surface preparation providing and applying coating system to existing structural steel .
D Payment The Department will pay for organic zincrich paint system on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Organic ZincRich Paint System Shop square foot .
Organic ZincRich Paint System Field square foot .
Organic ZincRich Paint System Old square foot INORGANIC ZINCRICH PAINT SYSTEM .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of the following for new work where the application of inorganic zincrich primer is done in the shop and where field applied intermediate and top coating is desired .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Surface preparations Providing and applying the coating Protecting and curing the coating Protecting pedestrians vehicular traffic and property against damage and All work incidental to these operations .
A Definitions Whenever the following terms are used in this section the terms shall have the following meaning Engineer As defined in Definitions except for shop applied paint coats where Engineer shall mean the State Bridge Engineer .
Contractor Shall mean the fabricator paint contractor applicator or other entity that prepares the surfaces and applies the coatings .
Shop in shop coating The indoor facility where structural metals are prepared and coated .
Field Coating The outdoor onsite coating of new or previously coated steel structures before or after erection .
Quality Assurance QA The process and persons responsible for verification of the conformance of materials and methods of application to the governing specification in order to achieve a desired result .
Quality Control QC The process and persons responsible for administrative and production procedures employed to attain the desired product outcome and quality .
The job foreman or production painter can not be this person .
Quality Manual QM The formal written document prepared by the contractor that describes the policies and procedures that ensure and verify that the coated structural steel component will satisfy the contract requirements .
Quality Assurance Inspector QAI The Departments representative responsible for duties specified in the Quality Assurance Plan with the authority to accept work that meets the contract requirements .
Contact surfaces Those surfaces in the completed structure that touch other surfaces .
Corner The intersection of two surfaces .
Edge An exposed throughthickness surface of a plate or rolled shape .
This may be the asrolled side face of a beam flange channel flange or angle leg or may result from thermal cutting sawing or shearing .
Edges may be planar or rounded and either perpendicular or skewed to adjacent faces .
Noncontact surfaces Surfaces that are not in direct contact with other surfaces .
Prime Coat Application of a zincrich coating to a bare metal substrate .
Coating thickness The Dry Film Paint Thickness DFT above the peaks of the blast profile .
Mist Coat Fog Coat or Tack Coat a thin mistspray application of a coating to improve adhesion and uniformity of the subsequent full application of the same coating .
b A light coat of unspecified DFT used to prevent rust staining of steel substrates or temporarily inhibit corrosion .
Stripe Coat A coating of sufficient thickness to completely hide the surface being coated on all edges corners seams crevices interior angles junctions of joining members bolt heads nuts and threads weld lines and similar surface irregularities .
This coating shall be followed as soon as practicable by the application of the full prime coat to its specified thickness .
Qualified Holding appropriate documentation and officially on record as competent and experienced to perform a specified function or practice of a specific skill .
Coating System The surface preparation and application of specific coating classifications i.e .
Inorganic Zinc Rich Organic ZincRich Polyurethane Acrylic Polyurea Latex Galvanize Powder etc .
of coating products to provide a film forming a unified whole for the purpose of corrosion protection andor aesthetics .
Paint System A set of interacting film forming paint materials and products which combine to make up a complete coating system .
Hold Point Puts a hold on any future activities until an inspection is passed .
Do not proceed without the written approval of the Engineer .
For Field applied coats the Department and the Contractor will use the Start up Checklist and the Daily Quality Assurance Check List located on the www.dot.state.mn.usbridgeconstruction.html site so that quality is assured. . MATERIALS A ZincRich Paint Systems Provide paint systems listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List for bridge structural steel coating three coat systems inorganic .
Deliver the paint to the site in its original unopened containers no greater than gal .
Do not alter the contents unless approved by the Engineer in writing .
Package multicomponent coatings in separate containers or kits .
Provide the Engineer with the following for each paint shipment .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The manufacturers Material Safety Data Sheets MSDS Material certifications and Written instructions for mixing handling and application of the coatings .
Ensure a manufacturers technical representative with knowledge of the approved paint system is available to assist during coating preparation and application. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Contractor Qualifications and Documentation A .
Field Applicators At least calendar days prior to starting any painting work submit a Quality Manual QM meeting the requirements of this section and AASHTONSBA Steel Bridge Collaboration S. SSPCPA Guide Specification for Application of Coating Systems with ZincRich Primers to Steel Bridges to the Engineer for approval including a method to provide the minimum requirements and frequencies in the QM as shown in C. and Table and a custom proposal of how SSPC PA will be documented to the Engineer for acceptance in writing .
Perform the preparation and application of field applied coatings with staff meeting the requirements of The Society of Protective Coatings Certified Application Specialist SSPS CAS Level .
One CAS Level is required on sight overseeing the work in each work area up to a crew of workers .
Multiple work areas will require an additional CAS for each area .
A .
Shop Applicators Before the start of work the supplier will be prequalified on MnDOTs approved suppliers for fabricated structural metals products list as maintained by the Structural Metals Engineer at httpwww.dot.state.mn.usbridgepdfapprovedsuppliers.pdf or at least calendar days prior to beginning work the supplier is to submit a Quality Manual QM to the Engineer for review .
Ensure the QM is written in accordance with the MnDOT Supplier Qualification Standard SQS .
The Engineer will use the SQS as the basis of acceptance for the submitted QM .
In addition to routine inspections the Engineer will audit suppliers with approved QMs on a biannual or annual basis or as otherwise directed by the Engineer to ensure the implementation of the QM .
The Department will invoke its Corrective Action Process if the routine inspections or audits indicate nonconformance .
Any and all corrective actions deemed appropriate by the Engineer are effective immediately and apply to any work remaining on a current project and all future projects .
If the Engineer determines that work does not comply with the QM or that fabrication does not follow approved fabrication procedures the Engineer will deem the materials as nonconforming in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the Engineer finds nonconforming work direct the supplier to immediately correct the procedure and submit a written nonconformance report containing data required by the Engineer to ensure compliance with the QM specifications and drawings .
Perform additional testing as required by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
For repeat offences or negligence the Department will require corrective action of hiring a third party Quality Control Inspector at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor may obtain a copy of the Departments Corrective Action Process from the Engineer .
B General For new construction preserve or transfer erection markings to ensure legibility when erecting members .
Provide removable markings or place markings at locations not visible in the completed structure .
Use marking material that will not damage the paint system .
If painting a structure erected under a previous contract the Department will not require disassembly of portions of the structure or removal of appurtenances to expose contact surfaces or otherwise inaccessible metal surfaces unless otherwise shown on the plans or in the special provisions .
For new construction projects paint contact surfaces with the zinc primer at the specified DFT except for surfaces completely sealed by Welding Bolt heads Nuts and washers and Embedment in concrete ex .
shear devices and anchorages .
Coat the top surfaces of beams and girders with a mist coat of primer .
Protect the environment and property as required by federal state and MnDOT regulations .
Protect nonpainted surfaces concrete bridge overhangs and vertical faces of abutments that are adjacent to the painted surfaces from overspray unless otherwise shown on the plans or in the special provisions .
The Engineer will allow up to inches of overspray and may require the excessive over sprayed paint be removed covered with a special surface finish or wire wheeled from the adjacent surfaces. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide a system for inspection that will allow the inspector to safely access all the steel components .
For safety systems that require temporary fastening to the steel to support the system use fastening hardware that will not damage the paint .
Repair damages as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
C Inspection Perform QC inspections of the shop and field painting in accordance with an approved QM .
The Department will appoint a Quality Assurance Inspector QAI as a Department representative to accept work meeting the contract requirements .
C. Quality Manual QM Requirements Provide the minimum requirements and frequencies in the QM as listed in Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Coating Inspection Requirements Requirement FrequencyExtent General Ambient temperature Every field h shop h or at the start of each shift Dew point and relative humidity Every field h shop h or at the start of each shift Surface temperature Every field h shop h or at the start of each shift Date and time Each lot of work shop Every field h Piece mark or bundle Each lot of work shop Every field h Compressed Air Test ASTM D Daily when abrasive blasting or blow down operations are occurring DFT each coat of paint SSPC PA Visual inspection each coat of paint percent Surface Preparation Preclean per SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning Each component to be prime coated .
Visually inspect Abrasive blast clean per SSPCSP NearWhite Blast Cleaning Each component to be prime coated Visually inspect per VIS Standard for Blast Comparisons percent Soluble Salt Test See Special Provisions Blast profile inspection per ASTM D Steel Girders minimum of three readings per each blasted Diaphragms three readings minimum per each lot blasted Sole Plates three readings minimum per each lot blasted Pedestrian Bridges minimum of three readings on each truss and a minimum of three readings on the floor beam Railing three readings minimum for each lineal feet of rail Bridge Truss three readings minimum for each sq .
ft. or the amount of truss blasted in an eight hour shift whichever is less The amount of diaphragms or sole plates going through an automated blast machine at one time or the amount being blasted in an eight hour shift .
Items not covered by this list shall have three documented profile readings for every sq .
ft. blasted .
Prime Intermediate and Finish Coat Batch number Every paint kit Verification of surface cleanliness Examine visually within h before prime painting and with a white cloth wipe test nothing will appear on the cloth surface Temperature of mixed product When mixing components Proper mixing and straining Every pot mix Induction time and reaction time Every pot mix Pot life Every pot mix Cure time Each lot of work Cure Verification Prior to next coat application Proper use of stripe coats prime coat only Visual percent of all applicable areas as specified in .. F Paint Coats Coating evaluation and repair Visual percent of each element Recoat time Each lot of work as recommended by the manufacturer Adhesion Final Coating system As required by the Engineer Coating system final evaluation and repair Visual percent of each element .
Minnesota Standard Specifications In addition to the above requirements include the following information in the FIELD painting QM Proof of SSPC QP certification for field painting and that it is maintained throughout the painting portion of the contract per AASHTONSBA Steel Bridge Collaboration S. SSPCPA Guide Copies of certifications of all CAS Level employees on the job Product Data Sheets Manufacturers Documentation stating that all personnel involved with the application of the paint were trained on mixing and application of the coatings system Nonconformance Report form A custom proposal of how SSPC PA will be documented A preapproved Request for Deviation An initial color draw down sample on a Leneta chart per .. F. and Names of employees on the job including their titles .
Provide written records meeting all Coating Inspection Requirements to the Engineer within working days from when the shift was completed to receive partial payment .
Provide written records meeting all Coating Inspection Requirements in its entirety at the completion of the job prior to receiving final payment .
Provide a final QM set to the MnDOT Bridge Engineer also .
The QAI or the Engineer will reject the coating system or reduce payment per Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work if the Contractor did not adhere to the approved QM or provided inadequate documentation of adherence to the QM .
Conduct subsequent testing with the QAI for the Engineers approval at no additional cost to the Department to determine compliance .
D Surface Preparation The QAI or Engineer will inspect the surface preparation as it is done after its completion or review the QM documentation or any combination of the three .
Notify the QAI or the Engineer at least working days before beginning surface preparation .
D. Cleaning D .. a Solvent Cleaning Clean areas containing organic and synthetic and other visible contaminants with solvent meeting the requirements of SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning .
Protect the adjacent environment and property while solvent cleaning .
D .. b Abrasive Blasting Abrasive blast clean surfaces to achieve a SSPCSP NACE No .
NearWhite Blast Cleaning before applying prime coat .
Use job site visual standards and SSPCVIS Guide and Reference Photographs for Steel Surfaces Prepared by Abrasive Blast Cleaning .
Perform blast cleaning operations meeting the requirements of Minnesota MPCA Rules .
through .. Abrasive blast clean to achieve a profile range from .
mils to .
mils .
Reblast clean surfaces when the surface profile is less than .
mils .
Provide a Nonconformance Report NCR as specified in the QM to the Engineer if the profile exceeds .
mils .
Provide written documentation proving that the specified profile has been achieved .
D .. c Post Blasting After blast cleaning remove blasting debris from steel surfaces using procedures that leave the surfaces free of moisture and contaminants .
Remove the blasting residue from the containment area specifically the floor area to prevent dust from being airborne once painting process starts .
Provide structural steel members free of surface defects such as small seams blisters weld spatter fins laps and tears .
Perform grinding up to inch or of the material thickness whichever is less .
Perform grinding parallel to the direction of the stresses .
Remove surface defects and repair gouges before applying prime coat .
E Application of Paint E. General For shop application of paint submit documentation to the Quality Assurance Inspector QAI showing that the paint manufacturers technical representative trained all directly involved shop personnel including QC on the proper mixing and application of the coatings system for the project .
Make training curriculum available to the Engineer upon request .
Provide prime intermediate and finish coats of paint in accordance with .. A ZincRich Paint Systems .
Do not start painting until the QAI or the Engineer approves the surface preparation and paint .
Before applying paint clean the surface of flash rust dust dirt grease oil moisture overspray and all other deleterious contaminants that will prevent the paint from adhering hold point .
Apply paint to produce a smooth and uniform film free of runs drips sags pinholes blisters mudcracking and other deleterious conditions by spray application ONLY unless a different application method is allowed in the contract .
Apply paint in .
Minnesota Standard Specifications accordance with manufacturers printed instructions except as stated in this document .
Rollers daubers brushes are not allowed to be used to apply paint unless approved by the Engineer in writing .
Do not apply paint to metal surfaces when weather conditions that the manufacturers literature defines as unsatisfactory are present and when The air temperature falls below F Metal surface temperatures are less than F above the dew point Water mist is in the air and Metal surfaces are damp or frosted .
Do not apply paint if other work operations wind or traffic causes the air to carry dust dirt or sand onto the prepared or newly painted metal surfaces .
Do not apply spray painted paint without protective shields that prevent scattering wet paint particles in areas where rebounding or blowing paint particles cause harm to persons adjacent environment or property .
The QAI or Engineer will suspend spray painting operations if the Contractor does not properly control paint application .
Do not thin paint more than what is stated in the manufacturers written instructions .
After mixing strain the primer through a mesh screen or a double layer of cheesecloth .
Do not allow undispersed clumps of zinc to remain in the paint after mixing .
Before applying a subsequent coat of paint perform the following Cure the previous coat to the recoat time defined in the manufacturers Product Data Sheet and Screen or scrape smooth and repaint wrinkled detached distorted scuffed or abraded areas .
Remove dust or chalklike deposits .
Repair or replace defective previously applied paint coats as required by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
Apply the subsequent paint coat within the maximum time interval recommended by the manufacturer .
If the maximum time interval is exceeded blast the areas to SSPCSP NACE NO .
NearWhite Blast Cleaning and recoat at no additional cost to the Department .
Do not paint within inches of the zones requiring field welding as shown on the plans .
Prepare and paint the heat affected areas after field welding in accordance with this section .
When the contract specifies shop painting and the Contractor does not provide the specified coatings in the shop apply the paint coats for unpainted portion at the project site .
Submit paint repair procedures to the QAI or the Engineer for approval .
E. Spraying Perform power spraying using a fine even spray .
The Contractor may brush out paint applied with spray equipment to obtain uniform coverage and to eliminate wrinkling blistering sags runs and air holes if the brushing is done immediately .
E. Rollers Brushes and Daubers This section may only be used with written permission from the Engineer .
The Contractor may apply paint by rolling brushing or daubers in areas unsuitable for spray painting such as small surface areas where overspray would be excessive and small areas requiring paint repair .
If using brushes manipulate the paint under the brush to provide a smooth uniform coating over the entire surface including corners and crevices .
Perform final brush strokes horizontal and parallel to each other .
Remove brush hairs on the paint surface .
Equip the paint pot with an approved agitator during application of zincrich paint by rolling brushing or daubers .
F Paint Coats F. Measurement of Paint Thickness The Department refers to Dry Film Thickness DFT when using the term thickness in this section .
Use a properly calibrated thickness gage to measure the paint thickness and average thickness meeting the requirements of SSPCPA Measurement of Dry Coating Thickness with Magnetic Gages .
Measure paint thickness from the top of the peaks of the blast profile .
Perform painting operations as recommended by the manufacturers literature unless otherwise specified in this section .
If the manufacturers recommended DFT differs from the DFT in accordance with this section submit a request in writing to the Engineer before painting to approve the DFT deviation to the manufacturers written recommendations .
Refer to .. J for deficient paint thickness. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Stripe Coats Before applying prime coat apply a stripe coat on the edges corners seams crevices interior angles junctions of joining members rivets or bolt heads nuts and threads weld lines and similar irregularities .
Ensure the stripe coat completely hides the surface to be covered .
Apply the prime on top of the stripe coat before it is fully cured and to its specified thickness as defined in this section and after the QAI or the Engineer accepts the stripe coat hold point .
Apply the stripe coats per .. E. F. Prime Coat Apply the stripe coat and primer coat after preparing the surface in accordance with this section and as approved by the QAI or the Engineer and before the surface rusts .
Equip the paint pot with an agitator during spray brush or dauber painting work .
Provide an agitator or stirring rod capable of reaching within inches of the bottom of the pot to keep the paint mixed during application .
Apply prime coat to a DFT average of at least .
mils with no spot reading measuring less than mils unless otherwise required by the contract .
For contact surfaces of bolt splices do not apply prime coat to a thickness greater than the manufacturers certified thickness for Class B slip coefficient .
Apply the prime coat per .. E hold point .
F. Intermediate Coat Apply the intermediate coat to a DFT of at least .
mils after the prime coat cures to the drytotopcoat as defined in the manufacturers Product Data Sheet .
Remain within the maximum DFT limits as defined by the manufacturer .
Provide epoxy intermediate coat in a color that will contrast between the inorganic zincrich primer and the polyurethane topcoat .
Apply the intermediate paint coat to prime coated surfaces exposed in the completed structure .
Apply the intermediate paint coat per .. E hold point .
F. Finish Coats Apply the finish coat to a DFT of at least .
mils remain within the maximum DFT limits as defined by the manufacturer after the intermediate cures to the drytotopcoat as defined in the manufacturers Product Data Sheet .
Ensure the finish coat color matches the color standard required by the contract .
Assure the supplied product meets the requirements of Basic Requirements for Paints .
Per provide a color draw down sample on a Leneta chart per ASTM D Standard Test Method for Hiding Power of Paints by Reflectometry to the Engineer .
The Department requires an acceptable initial draw down sample prior to beginning any work because color testing is the initial control for the quality of the product .
Apply the finish paint coat to intermediate coated surfaces exposed in the completed structure .
Ensure the finished surface is uniform in color and free of visible lap marks and other blemishes .
Apply the finish paint coat per .. E hold point .
Fillet seal crevices and cavities along the edge of faying surfaces that are separated by inch or more with an approved sealant that is listed on the Approved Qualified Products List for Bridge Structural Steel Coating Sealants and apply per the coating manufacturer installation instructions .
Do not seal the bottom edge of faying surfaces allowing the juncture to release trapped moisture .
Ensure the sealant color is a match to the finish paint color by submitting a sample to the MnDOT lab for color approval .
F. Total Paint Thickness Ensure the total paint thickness of the entire paint system averages at least mils but remains in the maximum thickness limits defined by the manufacturer of the paint system .
If the Engineer finds total paint thickness deficient or excessive over any part of a structure and if the Engineer does not require additional paint applications or removal of paint the Department will reduce payment for the appropriate item of work .
G Markings for Identification Stencil the year of painting and the specification numbers of the prime intermediate and top coats in numerals inches high on the interior surface of fascia beams at the same corner displaying the bridge name plate and at the corner diagonally opposite that corner example . . Minnesota Standard Specifications G. Stenciling after Primer When the primer is applied in the shop ensure the fabricatorpainter stencils the name of the paint manufacturer and the primer product name applied in the shop on the inside web of both fascia girders in characters inches high and in a contrasting color compatible with the specified paint system .
H Fasteners H. Requirements for Coating Remove all organic or other material that would interfere with the adhesion of the coating .
The Contractor may use industrial cleaning solutions to remove fastener lubricants if the solutions do not contaminate or interfere with adherence of subsequently applied coating materials as approved by the QAI or the Engineer .
Adhesion tests may be required by the Engineer to prove that there is no interference at no additional cost to the Department .
H. Paint Thickness Requirements After installing fasteners and after removing lubricant and residuals from exposed parts of fasteners apply additional primer to meet the required primer thickness as defined in this section .
Provide the required thickness of the intermediate and finish coats to fasteners as defined in this section .
I Handling Storage and Shipping of Painted Steel Do not apply paint to members loaded for shipment except to apply touchup paint as approved by the QAI or the Engineer .
Do not damage the painted steel in the shop and field during shipping erection and construction of the bridge and components .
Do not move or handle the painted steel items until the coating cures in accordance with the manufacturers data sheet hold point .
Use nylon straps padded hooks slings or other nonmetallic lifting devices to protect coated components or products during handling and loading .
Use softeners and edge protection devices to protect the steel from binding chains .
Provide padded hooks and slings to hoist the painted components .
Store completed items in accordance with Storage of Materials and the following Tag or permanently mark items before final storage .
Include individual piece marks bridge number project number manufacturer number and the applicator job number in the identification markings and Locate the final storage area out of any traffic lanes and in an area capable of bearing the full weight of the members or items and stable enough to maintain bundles members or items within the supporting substrate .
Inspect and store bundles members or items in one general location before final acceptance unless otherwise approved by the QAI or the Engineer .
Support individual items or bundles of coated products in transit in a manner that will prevent damage to the coating .
Do not drop or drag individual items or bundles of coated products .
Pad when shipping bundling or banding materials to protect the components from direct contact with packaging materials that may damage the coated products finish .
Use softeners and edge protection devices in conjunction with highdensity foam or other acceptable packaging materials at all points of contact .
J Paint Repair The Contractor may use a Tooke Gauge to perform a destructive test to measure the DFT at no additional cost to the Department if it is not possible to satisfactorily determine the coating thickness of any paint coat after application .
Repair the destructively tested area as approved by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
Do not perform mechanical grinding to reduce paint thickness .
Completely remove and recoat the paint system with deficient or excessive paint thickness as defined in this section for prime intermediate or topcoat if directed by the Engineer .
Submit paint repair procedures to the Engineer in writing for acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will make area calculations .
The Engineer will not make allowance in area calculations for actual areas of rivets and bolt heads curved surfaces of welds radii or corners .
The Engineer will measure painting of the structural steel by the square foot based on the area of acceptable paint coverage on noncontact areas as computed from the dimensions as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will not include contact areas in the measurement for payment . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT A Shop Painting The contract square foot price for Inorganic ZincRich Paint System Shop includes the cost of providing paint product for the primer and applying the primer in accordance with this section and Steel Bridge Construction. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Field Painting The contract square foot price for Inorganic ZincRich Paint System Field includes the cost of providing and applying the paint product for the intermediate and finish coats of the approved paint system .
The Department will include the cost of paint repairs to correct damage from field storage or erection with the relevant contract unit price for structural steel .
C Shop and Field Painting The contract square foot price for Inorganic Rich Paint Systems Shop and Field includes the costs of surface preparation providing and applying shop and field coatings .
The Department will include the cost of paint repairs to correct damage from field storage or erection in the relevant contract unit price for structural steel .
D Payment The Department will pay for inorganic zincrich paint system on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Inorganic ZincRich Paint System Shop square foot .
Inorganic ZincRich Paint System Field square foot .
Inorganic ZincRich Paint System Shop and Field square foot WATERPROOFING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of waterproofing joints. . MATERIALS A ThreePly System Materials A. Asphalt Primer for Dampproofing and Waterproofing A .
Saturated Fabric for Waterproofing A. Asphalt for Dampproofing and Waterproofing B Membrane Waterproofing System .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Remove form ties fill cavities with mortar and remove all sharp protrusions before waterproofing .
Before applying the primer ensure the concrete has cured for hours and is clean dry smooth and free of voids .
Clear the concrete of dust and other loose material immediately before applying the primer .
Apply the waterproofing system in dry fair weather when the air temperature is above F. Protect waterproofing against damage during succeeding construction operations .
Repair damaged waterproofing as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
B Membrane Waterproofing System Provide a selfadhering strip of waterproofing membrane at least inches wide listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List for the membrane waterproofing system .
Prime the surface on the joint as recommended by the manufacturer .
Center the membrane on the joint .
Provide polyethylene sheeting with a thickness of mils and provide rubberized asphalt with a nominal thickness of .
inches for a total nominal thickness of .
inches .
Ensure the face of the rubberized asphalt opposite the face bonded to the sheeting includes a removable covering .
Allow the removable covering to remain on the membrane until placement of the membrane .
The Contractor may make splices in the joint waterproofing membrane using an overlap of at least inches at the splice .
For splices on vertical face joints ensure the upper strip overlays the lower strip .
C ThreePly Joint Waterproofing Heat and place asphalt used for waterproofing at a temperature from F to F. Frequently stir the asphalt while heating to prevent local overheating .
Apply the primers cold. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Center the waterproofing over the joint for its entire length .
After preparing the surface coat the surface with a uniform and continuous application of primer at least inches wider than the widest piece of fabric .
Allow the primer coat to dry before mopping the surface with an additional uniform coat of asphalt .
Place a layer of bituminized fabric inches wide with the selvedge removed from the fabric on the surface and immediately roll .
Coat the surface with a second layer of asphalt and place and roll a layer of bituminized fabric inches wide .
Coat the surface with a third layer of asphalt and place and roll a layer of bituminized fabric inches wide .
Mop asphalt over the last layer of fabric at a rate of at least gal per yd of joint .
If splicing fabric ensure the end splices lap at least inches .
Coat the lap with asphalt immediately before making the splice .
Do not make splices in the separate layers of fabric at the same location .
For splices in fabric covering vertical joints ensure the upper strip overlays the lower strip .
Perform joint waterproofing before applying surface protection courses as shown on the plans or special provisions . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure joint waterproofing by the length of the joints waterproofed . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for joint waterproofing only if the contract contains a specific pay item for waterproofing .
If the contract does not specify a pay item for waterproofing the Department will include the cost of joint waterproofing with other relevant contract unit prices .
The Department will pay for waterproofing on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Joint Waterproofing linear foot Miscellaneous Construction PIPE CULVERTS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of the construction of pipe culverts using plantfabricated pipe and appurtenant materials or using preformed structural plates fabricated for field assembly installed primarily for passage of surface water through embankments. . MATERIALS A Pipe Provide one of the following types of culvert pipe meeting the lowest strength class specified in the referenced specification unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
Provide special fabrication or jointing details as shown on the plans .
Provide culvert pipe with the coating type shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
A .
Corrugated Aluminum CA A .
Corrugated Steel CS A .
Corrugated Polyethylene CP A. Blank A. Blank A. Reinforced Concrete RC A. Polymeric CoatedCorrugated Steel PCCS A .
Corrugated Aluminized Steel CAS A. Polyvinyl Chloride PVC B Structural Plate .
Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Corrugated Aluminum CA B .
Corrugated Steel CS C Aprons Provide aprons of the type required by the contract .
The Contractor may provide and attach galvanized steel aprons to corrugated steel corrugated polyethylene polyvinyl chloride and polymeric coatedcorrugated steel pipe unless otherwise specified on the plans .
The Contractor may provide and attach galvanized steel aprons to corrugated aluminum and corrugated aluminized steel pipe if the Contractor applies geotextile Type II or other insulation material approved by the Engineer between the contact surfaces of the different materials .
C. Reinforced Concrete RC C. Galvanized Steel GS C. Aluminum Alloy AA C. Blank C. Blank C. Blank C. Blank C. Corrugated Aluminized Steel CAS D Flap Gates E Antiseepage Diaphragms F Pipe Joint Sealer Materials F. Preformed Rubber Type A F. Blank F. Bituminous Mastic G Granular Materials H Geotextile Type II I Blank J Reinforced Concrete Dissipator Ring .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Install pipe culverts in accordance with the following requirements A General Excavate construct foundations backfill and compact culverts in accordance with the plans Structure Excavations and Backfills and the following Remove and replace unsuitable foundation materials encountered at or below the foundation elevation using suitable replacement materials as directed by the Engineer .
Install the replacement material in layers inches thick per Excavation and Embankment .
Compact materials used for bedding and foundation backfill in accordance with the plans and Excavation and Embankment. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Entrance Culverts Remove and replace unsuitable foundation materials encountered at or below the foundation per .. A General .
The Contractor may install entrance culverts without special bedding unless shown in the plans .
Backfill using material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material and compact per Excavation and Embankment .
C Laying Pipe C. General Lay pipe to the line and grade shown in the plans .
Terminate pipes that connect with inlet structures flush with the inside of the structure wall .
Jack culverts through the existing earth structure into position as shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
Ensure the flow line elevation at the starting point for jacking is within .
ft of the staked grade .
Do not reverse the flow line grade at any point .
Ensure the line and grade at any point within the pipe does not vary by greater than ½ ft from the line and grade designated on the plans .
Provide any additional cover required to avoid damage to the pipe during construction .
Maintain adequate cover until paving is completed or until the installation is accepted by the Engineer if paving is not required .
Repair or replace pipe damaged by contractor operations to the satisfaction of the engineer at no additional costs to the Department .
C. Metal Culvert Lay corrugated metal pipes having circumferential joints with the outside laps pointing upgrade and with the longitudinal joints at the springlines .
Provide backfill material in accordance with the plan modified to percent passing the inch sieve within ft of the pipe .
Use metal connecting bands centered over the joint to join metal pipe sections .
Place the pipe sections so that the pipe ends are abutting .
Tighten the band to ensure a tight joint so that the soil does not infiltrate into the pipe and the sections do not pull apart .
Use approved fasteners as defined in the applicable materials specifications to assemble structural plate culverts as required by the manufacturer .
Tighten bolts after assembly to a torque of lbfft to lbfft .
Provide a calibrated torque wrench to demonstrate the adequacy of the bolt tightening as approved by the Engineer .
Where beveled ends on metal pipe are shown on the plans or standard plates cut the bevels at right angles to a vertical plane through the longitudinal axis of the pipe .
C. Concrete Culvert Lay concrete pipe with the female end of each section upgrade .
Tightly join the pipe sections so that the interior of the pipe sections abut each other .
Use preformed rubber or bituminous mastic elastic joint sealer material to provide flexible watertight joint seals for concrete pipe .
Where the pipe is designed to accommodate preformed gasket type seals seal the joints with the preformed gasket as shown on the plans and meeting the performance requirements of Preformed Plastic Type B .
Where the pipe is not required to accommodate preformed gasket type seals seal the joints with bituminous mastic and a full circumferential wrap of geotextile material extending at least ft on each side of the joint .
Secure the circumferential wrap against the outside of the pipe by metal or plastic strapping or by other methods approved by the Engineer .
Apply mastic joint sealer materials as recommended by the manufacturer .
Wipe joints clean on the inside after sealing .
Plug lifting holes with a precast concrete plug sealed and covered with mastic or mortar .
Use approved fasteners shown on Standard Plate to tie together concrete culvert sections unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
Provide backfill material in accordance with the plan modified to percent passing the inch sieve within ft of the pipe .
C. Plastic Culvert Follow minimum cover maximum cover bedding backfill and trench width requirements shown in plan details Standard Flexible Pipe Bedding and PLASTIC PIPE INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS .
Provide backfill material in accordance with the plan modified to percent passing the inch sieve within ft of the pipe .
Use the embedment material to provide ft minimum of fill over the pipe for a trench width as specified by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Place pipes and backfill in dry conditions by controlling the water conditions .
Dewater groundwater and divert surface runoff to keep the water level below the pipe foundation .
Place pipes on the bedding starting at the downstream end with the female end of each section upgrade .
Make connections with bell and spigot joints using an elastomeric rubber seal gasket to provide watertight joints that do not allow soil silt or water to migrate through the joint .
Install joints so connected pipe sections form a continuous surface free of irregularities in the flow line .
Tightly join the pipe sections so that the interior of the pipe sections abut each other .
Keep gaskets and joint surfaces clean and free from soil during installation .
Follow manufacturers recommendation for fitting or coupling assembly and installation .
Use a lubricant if required that will not deteriorate the gasket and pipe materials .
Before allowing vehicles or heavy construction equipment to travel over the pipe trench maintain a minimum cover depth of material above the pipe of at least ft and meeting the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section Table ..
Perform deflection testing of all plastic pipe at least days after installation .
Remove obstructions such as sediment standing water or safety grates that would interfere with deflection testing .
Dewatering and additional work associated with preparing for and performing deflection testing is included in the bid price of the pipe .
Evaluate the pipe to determine if the specific internal diameter of the barrel has deflected more than percent .
Use the following methods to perform the deflection test unless specified in the plan Visual inspection alone is not allowed for deflection testing .
Use a ninepoint mandrel approved by the Engineer to perform deflection testing for pipes .
Pull the mandrel through the pipe using nonmechanical means .
Direct measurements can not be used for deflection testing unless specified in the plans and approved by the Engineer .
Direct measurements can only be used on pipes with an inside diameter of inches or greater .
If the Department allows direct measurements the Engineer must take measurements at randomly select locations but at a minimum once every ft throughout the pipe length and at the pipe ends .
Visually inspect the pipe and take additional measurements at any location of observed anomaly or deflection .
Ensure personnel making direct measurements meet confined space entry requirements in accordance with Employee Health and Welfare .
Laser scan inspection laser ring can be used to perform deflection testing when specified in the plans and approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will not accept pipe that has a deflection of more than percent or is damaged .
Remove unacceptable pipe and reinstall new pipe or undamaged deformed pipe .
Retest the relaid pipe for deflection at least calendar days after embedment material is installed to grade .
Send deflection testing results to the State Hydraulic Engineer with the S.P .
number pipe location material type size date built date tested and results from the mandrel test or other deflection test .
C. Extending InPlace Culverts Clear inplace culverts of obstructions to water flow before placing the extension pipe .
The Engineer will only require the removal of sediment to the extent that improved flow is likely to be maintained .
Follow backfill and bedding requirements for culvert material type .
If the pipe ends differ because of changed design make the connection to the inplace culvert as shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
Extend castinplace concrete box culverts with plantfabricated pipe using the detailed connections as shown on the plans .
Use a transition section as shown on the plans if extending a boxtype concrete cattle pass with precast concrete sections .
Expose the ends of the inplace structure and remove concrete as shown on the plans .
Construct the castinplace portion of the transition in accordance with Minor Concrete Structures. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Backfilling Excavations Backfill excavations to the required extent shown on the plans and at the appropriate time .
Uniformly distribute suitable backfill materials in inch layers .
Compact backfill in accordance with the plans and Excavation and Embankment before placing successive layers .
Within the roadcore if the contract does not specify special backfill materials use materials meeting .. D. Granular Backfill placed within inches of the sides and inches above the top of the structure note that plastic culverts require inch minus material regardless of culvert location .
For the remainder of the backfill use embankment material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material .
If outside the roadcore use suitable material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material .
Do not place backfill material on a frozen foundation or when the material may freeze during the placement or compaction work .
Step the sides of the excavation if steeper than and if potential wedging action of the backfill may be detrimental to the structure .
If the contract does not require specific maximum dimensions for the excavation the Contractor may enlarge the excavation and flatten the side slopes for convenience of backfill and compaction operations at no additional cost to the Department .
Backfill uniformly in horizontal layers throughout the excavation area .
Maintain the sides of the excavation and prevent voids in the backfill when removing shoring or bracing from the excavation .
E Culvert Appurtenances Provide and install appurtenant items such as aprons safety aprons and grates diaphragms dissipator rings flap gates and safety grates including special grates for concrete pipe and large size pipe trash racks and other similar devices requiring a special design as shown on the plans or the special provisions .
F Induced Trench Installation Construct backfill over the culvert if shown on the plans and in accordance with the following Construct the embankment in accordance with Excavation and Embankment for a width on each side of the installed culvert at least equal to three pipe widths and to an elevation over the top of the culvert equal to the pipe height plus ft .
When using .. F. Specific Density method compact the embankment to a density not less than percent of maximum density .
Excavate a trench to a level ft above the top of the culvert for the width and length of the pipe and with vertical sides .
Loosely fill the trench with highlycompressible clay soil before constructing the remaining embankment in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
G Culvert Cleaning Clean sediment and debris from culverts before final acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Culvert Excavation If the contract contains separate items for culvert excavation as specified in .
Basis of Payment the Engineer will classify and measure excavations for culverts in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills .
B Culvert Pipe The Engineer will measure culvert pipe by length as determined by summation of the nominal laying lengths of the individual pipe sections incorporated in each structure .
The Engineer will separate measurements by size type kind and strength class in accordance with the item name .
The Engineer will measure elbow tee and wye sections as pipe along the centerline of the culvert barrel .
The Engineer will not measure the length of branch legs except as included in the measurements for a connecting structure .
The Engineer will measure transition sections as pipe of the larger or more costly size except for special sections designated by the contact for measurement as a unit .
The Engineer will measure the length of metal pipe installations requiring special fabrication such as skewed or sloped ends to the extreme ends including waste material unless otherwise shown on the plans .
C Culvert Appurtenances The Engineer will separately measure appurtenant items such as aprons safety aprons and grates diaphragms dissipator rings flap gates grates and other specially designed and identified units designated for payment on a per each basis by the number of units of each type and size incorporated in the culvert structures .
The Department considers a safety apron and grate as one unit .
The contract unit prices for pipe culverts will include the cost of castinplace concrete work. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Granular Materials The Engineer will measure granular materials for special backfill or bedding in accordance with .. B Granular Materials . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for culvert pipe of each size type kind and strength class includes the costs of providing and installing the pipe complete in place as required in the contract except as otherwise specified in this section .
The contract unit prices for plastic pipe culverts will include the cost of deflection testing dewatering and buoyancy protection as required by the plan but not designated under other items .
Payment will not be made until proof of adequate deflection test is provided .
The Department will separately pay for aprons safety aprons and grates safety grates flap gates dissipator rings diaphragms and other specially designed and identified appurtenant items by type size and number of units incorporated in the structures as shown on the plans .
The contract unit price for these items includes the cost of providing and installing the items complete in place .
The Department will separately pay for granular materials for special backfill or bedding in accordance .
Basis of Payment .
The Department will separately pay for culvert excavation at the contract unit prices included in the contract in accordance with .
Basis of Payment .
If not included in the contract the Department will include excavating costs in the contract unit prices for culvert pipe and appurtenant items .
Surplus excavated materials not used for backfill become the property of the Contractor .
Dispose of surplus material in accordance with the disposal form submitted to and approved by the Engineer .
The contract unit price for the relevant culvert contract item includes the costs associated with the disposal of surplus material .
The Department will provide additional compensation for culvert elbows tee or wye sections and additional connectors directed by the Engineer but not shown on the plans in the amount of the actual invoice cost of the materials involved .
The Department will pay for installing culvert materials provided by the Department under the applicable installation items shown in the contract .
The contract unit prices for installing culvert materials provided by the Department include the cost of work and additional materials required for the installation complete in place except for extra work or work designated under other items .
If the Engineer allows installation by the jacking method and the contract does not contain a relevant contract item the Department will pay for a jacking installation on the basis of contract unit prices relevant for the trenching method .
The contract unit price for the relevant pipe contract item includes the cost of culvert cleaning except when specifically designated under other items .
The Department will identify alternatives in the plans .
The Department will include the costs associated with using an alternative such as differences in installation requirements including deflection testing trench width or embedment material specifications and quantities in the contract unit prices of the relevant pipe pay items. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will pay for pipe culverts on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
___ in Pipe Apron each .
Antiseepage Diaphragm for Pipe each .
Flap Gate for Pipe each .
___ in Span PipeArch Apron each .
Antiseepage Diaphragm for PipeArch each .
___ in Elliptical Apron each .
___ in High Cattle Pass Transition Section each .
___ in High Cattle Pass Apron Culvert each .
___ in Safety Apron and Grate Design each .
___ in each .
Install each .
___ in RC Dissipator Ring each .
Install linear foot .
___ in Pipe Culvert linear foot .
___ in Span PipeArch Culvert linear foot .
___ in Elliptical Pipe Culvert linear foot .
___ in High Cattle Pass Culvert linear foot .
___ in Structural Plate Pipe Culvert linear foot .
___ in Span Structural Plate PipeArch Culvert linear foot .
___ in Pipe Culvert Design linear foot .
___ in Span PipeArch Culvert Design linear foot .
Culvert Excavation Class cubic yard Specify Class U E or R only See .. B .
Specify Kind See .
if alternatives are allowed do not specify kind Specify Strength Class if other than minimum requirement .
Specify size and kind Specify HE or VE and Strength Class if other than minimum requirement .
Give Standard Plate Number for special pipe or joint designs Specify item name SUBSURFACE DRAINS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing subsurface drains and installing plantfabricated pipe and appurtenant materials to perform the following Collect and discharge water infiltrating the pavement system pavement edge drain Collect and discharge water accumulated in the bottom of a granularbackfilled subcut cut off or intercept ground water flowing toward the roadway subcut drain and Collect and discharge water coming from a permeable aggregate base system permeable aggregate base drain .
Subsurface drains include materials used to collect ground water and conduct it to a discharge point at a structure or on a side slope .
The typical system includes a drain pipe radial connecting pipe discharge pipe and drain outlet. . MATERIALS Provide one of the following types of drain pipe as shown or allowed as an option on the plans .
Provide fittings connecting multiple lengths of drain pipe made of the same material as the pipe .
Provide nonperforated pipe except where the perforated type is shown on the plans .
The Contractor may use pipe meeting the lowest strength class listed in the referenced materials specification unless higher strength pipe is shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
Provide nonperforated Thermoplastic TP pipe for discharge pipe radial connecting pipe and associated fittings .
Provide special fabrication or jointing details if shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
Provide appurtenances geotextiles metal oversleeves with rodent screens and precast concrete headwalls with all subsurface drains for high bridge abutments to intercept and carry off underground water in accordance with this section Thermoplastic Pipe Geotextiles and as shown on the plans .
A Drain and Discharge Pipe A Thermoplastic TP A Corrugated Polyethylene PE Drainage Tubing B Precast Concrete Headwall Drain Outlet Standard Plate .
Minnesota Standard Specifications C Granular Materials D Geotextile Type E Erosion Blanket Category A F Seed G Marking Tape H Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe PE Pipe Drain Smooth .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Excavation Excavate the trench to the lines and grades as shown on the plans .
Provide a trench with a width as measured at the bottom of the excavation at least the nominal pipe width plus two times the pipe diameter .
The Contractor may use corrugated PE drainage tubing when placed in a narrow controlledwidth trench constructed by a chaintype or wheeltype trenching machine designed and used for this application and as approved by the Engineer .
Use other types of rigid pipe for other uses in narrow trenches where compaction is not controlled .
Do not install PE tubing by plowing .
Remove rock encountered within the excavation to a width of at least the nominal pipe width plus two times the pipe diameter and to a depth of at least one pipe diameter below the bottom of the pipe .
Except for locations shown on the plans or specified in this specification that require granular material the Contractor may backfill below the bottom of the pipe with material meeting .. A .
Select Grading Material compacted uniformly per .. F. Quality Compaction to provide a proper foundation as approved by the Engineer .
B Laying Drains Bed perforated pipe drains on fine filter aggregate .
Provide aggregate in accordance with .. J .
Fine Filter Aggregate with a thickness of at least one pipe diameter below the bottom of the pipe and extending upwards under the haunches for the full width and length of the trench to the elevation shown on the plans or specified in this specification for the specified foundation preparations .
The Engineer will not require granular bedding on nonperforated pipe installations unless otherwise shown on the plans however do not place stones greater than in in diameter in the trench .
Shape the foundation for drains in the required bedding material to fit at least the lower percent of the outside circumference of the pipe .
Lay drains to line and grade shown on the plans with uniform bearing along the drain and with the perforations down unless otherwise directed .
Wrap perforated pipe with factoryseamed or factoryproduced continuous knit weave geotextile .
Place the fabric seam at the top of the pipe opposite the perforations .
For seams at fittings or connectors mechanically fasten or overlap the adjoining geotextiles at least in .
Join pipe sections with the coupling bands or fittings .
Cement solvent type joints unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified in the specification .
Close upgrade ends of subdrain pipe with caps .
Use wyes or bends at junctions and turns suitable for cleaning and inspection .
Where a drain connects with a structure or catch basin make a connection that does not leak through the wall of the structure .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified in the specifications terminate drainage outfalls at a standard precast concrete headwall .
C Backfill and Compaction For Perforated Pipe Backfill drains while making the pipe installations .
Backfill with material as per the plan .
For perforated pipe installations if plan does not designate material type backfill with material meeting .. J .
Fine Filter Aggregate to an elevation to the bottom of the surface coarse .
Do not use stones greater than in for backfilling .
Compact material in accordance with .. F Compacting Embankments .
D Drain Outlets D. Precast Concrete Headwall Place precast concrete headwall outlet inverts at least in in preferred above ditch grades .
Place the uppermost point of the headwall flush with the inslope at a downward grade of at least percent to provide for drainage .
Shape the earthen .
Minnesota Standard Specifications side slopes adjacent to the headwall to conform to the sides and toe of the headwall .
Compact the soils around and under the concrete headwall outlet per .. F. Quality Compaction .
If headwalls are not placed during installation of discharge pipes mark discharge points to locate in the future .
Screen the drain opening and allow the drain to remain open and operational after installation .
Unless otherwise approved by the Engineer place concrete headwalls on discharge pipes before the end of the construction season .
For pipes without headwalls leave screened pipe ends open and freeflowing .
D. Discharge Pipe Provide nonperforated rigid TP pipe in accordance with Thermoplastic Pipe for discharge pipe and connections .
Use a in diameter TP discharge pipe for in and in PE subsurface drains .
Use a in diameter TP discharge pipe for in PE subsurface drains .
Use a in in TP adapter to make the connection between the in PE subsurface drain and the in diameter in straight length of TP pipe .
Connect the in PE subsurface drain to the in diameter in straight length of TP pipe with a TP connector .
Use a degree solventweld bell and spigot elbow with a radius of at least ft to make the connection between the in length TP pipe and the variable length straight TP discharge pipe .
The Contractor may use different configurations for similar size radius and pipe quality as approved by the Engineer .
Construct the discharge pipe to the drain outlet while constructing the drains .
Place the discharge pipe and the drains at right angles to the roadway centerline .
Fully couple the discharge pipe to the headwall as approved by the Engineer .
Make connections with one of the following A Grout Rubber gasket on the pipe Rubber or plastic gasket cast into the headwall or Solvent or gasket joint into a TP coupling cast into the headwall .
Ensure the coupling will secure the pipe and prevent separation caused by small movements of the headwall .
Provide a in straight length of TP connecting pipe to connect the PE subsurface drain to the TP discharge pipe .
Attach this connector pipe to the PE edge drain with a radius of at least ft to provide entry for probes cleaners or video cameras .
Secure connections and solvent joints to prevent soil intrusion and decoupling during backfilling .
At joints with the possibility for soil intrusion wrap connections with geotextile as directed by the Engineer .
Tape joints to prevent separation as directed by the Engineer .
Orient increasers with the smooth flow portion at the pipe invert .
Use connection and coupling methods as approved by the Engineer .
Connect two drain runs that come together at a low point with a TP Y connection .
Use a TP discharge pipe to outlet the Y connection to a single headwall .
Construct the discharge trench similar to the drains and backfill the discharge trench with the disturbed inplace soil .
Place discharge pipes at grades no less than the drain pipes and with at least percent fall .
The Engineer may approve trench widths greater than in for the discharge pipes if the Contractor meets the following requirements Cradle the pipe invert Compact soil adjacent to and above the pipe to prevent crushing the pipe and Compact the backfill soil in accordance with .. F Compacting Embankments .
Use compaction equipment capable of compacting the material in the drain trench without compacting the adjacent soils .
Use backfill layer uncompacted thicknesses no greater than in .
Correct shoulder settlement above the discharge pipe as directed by the Engineer and at no additional cost to the Department .
Replace crushed or deformed discharge pipes or connections at no additional cost to the Department .
If drains discharge to storm sewers rather than through headwalls place the drain invert from in to in above the sewer invert using a connection method approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
D. Turf Establishment Perform turf establishment per specification .. L Turf Establishment concurrent with drain outlet installation .
D. Marking Outlet Locations Permanently mark the locations of outlets with a in in strip of white marking tape in accordance with Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Permanent Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends .
Place the tape at the outside edge of the bituminous shoulder at right angles to the roadway and roll the tape into the shoulder while the bituminous pavement surface temperature is from F to F. If two runs of drain pipe come together at a low point and discharge via a Y to a single outlet place two markings sidebyside with a in spacing .
For locations with no bituminous shoulder place the tape on the .
Minnesota Standard Specifications bituminous pavement or spray a white paint strip on concrete pavements .
The Engineer may approve alternate methods to mark the edge drain outlets .
D. Inspection and Cleanout Once installed maintain the discharge pipe and headwalls to prevent trapping water in the pipe .
Inspect the discharge pipe and headwalls for proper grade cleanliness proper landscaping proper erosion control installation and maintenance and satisfactory operating condition .
Maintain the discharge pipe and headwalls until final inspection with the Engineer .
The Engineer will perform inspections using a probe mounted on the end of a flexible fiberglass rod in long and with a diameter of one nominal pipe size smaller than the drain pipe being inspected .
The Engineer will conduct the inspection through the discharge pipe radius connection and at least ft into the main drainage line .
Clean or repair inoperative discharge pipe and connections as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
E Permeable Aggregate Base Type Construct subsurface drains to collect and discharge water coming from the following permeable aggregate base systems Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Base PASB Open Graded Aggregate Base OGAB or Permeable Asphalt Stabilized Stress Relief Course PASSRC Drainable Stable Base DSB Provide geotextile for trench lining in accordance with Geotextiles Type I .
Provide perforated corrugated PE drainage tubing in accordance with Corrugated Polyethylene Drainage Tubing .
Provide aggregate in accordance with .. J .
Medium Filter Aggregate .
E. Trenching Use a machine trencher capable of cutting the trench and placing the pipe in a continuous operation to place the drains .
Do not plow .
If the offset between the tracks or tires of the trencher is greater than in use a selfleveling trenching machine .
Provide trenching equipment designed and operated to prevent the excavated material from falling back into the trench .
Construct a trench from in to in wide .
Shape the bottom of the trench to cradle the lower onethird of the pipe .
Place pipes in grades following pavement grades at the design depth shown on the plans .
The Contractor may place the geotextile pipe and medium filter aggregate while trenching or in a separate operation immediately after trenching .
When using separate operations to place the pipe and medium filter aggregate properly align the pipe in the cradle before placing the medium filter aggregate .
If the trench sides are sloughing or caving in use a shield to place the medium filter aggregate .
The Contractor may trench drains constructed in conjunction with stabilized PASB immediately adjacent to the placed pavement .
Place drains constructed in conjunction with unstabilized OGAB or DSB in away from the pavement edge to minimize undercutting .
The edge drain must intersect the PASB DSB or OGAB .
Place drains constructed in conjunction with PCC pavement after pavement placement .
Place drains constructed in conjunction with bituminous pavement after placement of the wearnonwear courses and before placement of the final wearing course to avoid damage to the finished pavement .
Construct drains before placing the additional aggregate base in the shoulder area .
Dispose of materials removed by the trenching operation off the rightofway unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Do not contaminate the permeable aggregate base the medium filter aggregate or the aggregate base .
Sweep trenching spoils off the bituminous pavement before placing the wearing course as approved by the Engineer .
E. Geotextile Trench Lining Line the bottom of the drainage trench with geotextile .
Do not wrap the PE pipe with geotextile .
On the pavement side of the trench terminate the geotextile within the aggregate base located below the permeable aggregate base .
Do not extend the geotextile up onto the permeable aggregate base or allow it to fall below the bottom of the aggregate base .
Do not allow the geotextile to lap up onto the permeable aggregate base .
On the side of the trench farthest from the pavement the Contractor may terminate the geotextile within or above the aggregate base but not below it .
E. Compaction Moisten the medium filter aggregate to allow easy placement and vibratory compaction as approved by the Engineer .
Do not use the tirerolling method to compact medium filter aggregate .
After placement and compaction ensure the top of the medium filter aggregate is at least as high as the top of the permeable aggregate base .
E. Maintenance After placing the drain and discharge pipe do not allow construction equipment to travel over the drain or discharge pipe until the system is protected as approved by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Place aggregate base in the shoulder area over the compacted drain and backfilled trench to avoid contamination .
Remove and replace contaminated materials at no additional cost to the Department .
Allow the drain to remain open and operative after installation to prevent water from collecting in the pipe .
F Subcut Drain Type Construct subcut drains in accordance with this section and the option details shown on the plan .
Use subcut drains to collect and discharge infiltration water that may accumulate in the bottom of granularbackfilled subcuts .
The Contractor may also use subcut drains to control high groundwater conditions .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions the Contractor may construct the drains using one of the following design options Place in perforated TP pipe in accordance with Thermoplastic Pipe in the bottom corner of the subcut and then backfill the subcut or Backfill the subcut and then use a machine trencher to place in perforated corrugated PE pipe in accordance with Corrugated Polyethylene Drainage Tubing .
For both design options wrap the pipe with geotextile in accordance with Geotextiles Type I .
Provide Fine Filter Aggregate in accordance with .. J .
Fine Filter Aggregate .
The Contractor may directly connect subcut drains to permanent drainage structures or outlet the drains to the ditch using a discharge pipe and headwall .
If shown on the plans make connections to drainage structures as approved by the Engineer .
The Department will include the cost of connections with other relevant contract pay items .
Place pipe as shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
Provide drain grades of at least .
percent and place ditch outlets at low points and spaced no greater than ft apart .
The Contractor may place structure outlets spaced no greater than ft apart if both ends of the pipe are tied to structures .
If pipe grades do not follow the roadway profile at a constant depth provide and use laser grade control equipment to place TP pipe and PE pipe .
F. Design Option One Place in perforated TP pipe in the bottom of the subcut in accordance with the design typical in the plans .
Place at least in of subcut backfill above the pipe before compacting .
The Contractor may provide pipe with either bell and spigot or sleeve couplings and either gasket or solvent joints .
Leave solvent joints uncemented unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Mark the depth on the ends of the bell or sleeve .
Place the perforations down .
Provide connections to drainage structures made of angle fittings no greater than ½ degrees .
F. Design Option Two Place in perforated corrugated PE tubing after partially or totally backfilling the subcut .
Use a machine trencher capable of performing the following functions to place the drains Cutting the trench Shaping the trench bottom to cradle the lower onethird of the pipe Laying the pipe and Backfilling with filter aggregate in one simultaneous and continuous operation .
Do not plow .
Equip the trenching head with a shield to prevent adjacent material from caving .
Trench to a width from in to in and center the pipe in the trench .
Backfill the trench with fine filter aggregate .
Provide free flowing filter aggregate and vibratory compaction as approved by the Engineer .
In addition to the required trench compaction make at least one pass of the roller as directed by the Engineer over the trench before placing the overlying pavement structure as shown on the plans .
Perform the trenching operation after placing and compacting at least in of subcut backfill .
If trenching after completely backfilling the subcut only backfill the lowermost in of the trench with Fine Filter Aggregate .
Backfill the remaining trench with the same material used for the subcut and compact to the compaction requirements in .. F Compacting Embankments .
G Pavement Edge Drain Type Construct in diameter edge drains .
Use pavement edge drains to collect and discharge water infiltrating into the pavement system from rain or snow melt and springthaw seepage .
Provide perforated corrugated PE tubing for edge drain pipe in accordance with Corrugated Polyethylene Drainage Tubing .
Wrap the pipe with geotextile in accordance with Geotextiles Type I to prevent infiltration of fine filter aggregate into the perforated pipe .
Trench backfill with fine filter aggregate in accordance with .. J .
Fine Filter Aggregate. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Place drains adjacent to new pavements after constructing the pavement to prevent damage to the drain or discharge pipe .
Use a machine trencher capable of cutting the trench and laying the pipe in a continuous operation to place the drains .
Do not plow .
Provide trenching equipment designed and operated to prevent excavated material from falling back into the trench .
Use a selfleveling trenching machine if the offset between tracks or tires of the trencher is greater than in .
Trench to a width from in to in .
Shape the bottom of the trench to cradle the lower onethird of the pipe .
If pipe grades do not follow pavement grades at a constant depth provide and use laser grade control equipment to place pipe .
Install the edge drains before pavement cracking when cracking inplace PCC pavement before overlay .
If placing drains in conjunction with pavement widening place the drains before excavating the wideningtrench .
Use an approved device on the trenching machine to ensure that the pipe is located at the design distance from the edge of the inplace pavement .
After compaction ensure the filter aggregate in the drain extends at least in above the bottom of the pavement widening trench .
For drains placed next to a PCC pavement run the trenching head tight against the pavement to completely excavate all adjacent soil .
If placing the drain next to a new bituminous pavement construct the drain after placing the pavement base and leveling courses but before placing the wearing course to avoid damage to the finished pavement .
For new and retrofit construction ensure the trenching head continuously intercepts and cutsoff the rollover portion of at least the lower bituminous pavement course .
Ensure the trenching spoils always show evidence of bituminous materials .
Clean spoils from the pavement before placing the wearing course for new pavements or the first bituminous lift for overlays as approved by the Engineer .
For bituminous shoulders remaining in place after drain placement use a coulter saw milling mandrel or other method by the Engineer on the bituminous shoulder to leave a smooth edge and to prevent disturbance to the bituminous pavement .
For new construction place the aggregate base before trenching except for bituminous pavements place the aggregate base to the height of the adjacent layer at the time of trenching .
Provide drains on grades at least .
percent and place outlets to the ditch at a spacing no greater than ft and at low points as shown on the plans .
The Contractor may place the filter aggregate backfill simultaneously with the pipe or in a separate operation immediately following the trenching activity .
If placing the pipe and filter aggregate in separate operations align the pipe in the shaped cradle before placing the filter aggregate .
If soil type or Contractor operations cause sloughing or caving from either side of the trench use a shield on the trenching head and place filter aggregate within the shield as directed by the Engineer .
Surplus excavated materials not used for backfill shall become the property of the Contractor .
Dispose of surplus material in accordance with the disposal form submitted to and approved by the Engineer .
Before beginning routine trenching and backfilling construct a test trench at least ft long that has the same requirements as the production work .
The Engineer will measure adequacy of compaction in the test trench with a Departmentsupplied Dynamic Cone Penetrometer DCP .
Compact the filter aggregate with equipment capable of achieving the following compaction requirement .
The Department defines successful compaction as penetration resistances no greater than in per DCP hammer blow .
The Engineer will base successful compaction on the average of three DCP readings for similar depths in three tests taken ft apart .
Do not compact greater than in of filter aggregate in any one layer .
After compaction and leveling extend the filter aggregate up onto the adjacent pavement as shown on the plans .
If capping filter aggregate trench with another type of granular material or bituminous mixture as shown on the plans place and compact the materials separately from the filter aggregate and do not compact with future placement of similar material .
Heap bituminous caps at least in and roll .
Place granular caps at least in high and roll .
Place caps to provide support for overlying material and to incorporate a second compaction effort in the trench .
Do not contaminate the filter aggregate .
Do not deposit or mix aggregates or other soils on the adjoining concrete or bituminous pavement .
Remove material spilled on the pavement surface by sweeping .
After placing the drain and discharge pipe do not allow construction equipment to travel over the drain or discharge pipe until the system is covered as approved by the Engineer .
Allow the drain to remain open and operational after installation to prevent water from collecting in the pipe. . Minnesota Standard Specifications H Interceptor Drains Install narrow aggregatefilled Interceptor Drains as described herein and as shown in the plan at the end of each pavement joint and at midpanel cracks or at other major cracks as designated by the Engineer .
These trenches connect into the Subsurface Drains Permeable Aggregate Base Type and permit water collecting in the joints and cracks to drain to the adjacent drainage system .
H. Materials Requirements A Provide Medium Filter Aggregate meeting .. J .. H. Installation Requirements Cut trenches for the interceptor drains to inches in width centered on the joint or crack cut normal to the pavement edge and installed prior to placing a stress relief layer or any other overlaying work .
Cut trenches inches deeper than the adjacent pavement and running the fulldepth from the in place pavement edge to at least inches beyond the edge of the unbonded concrete overlay .
This length will thus extend at least inches into the zone of the subsurface drain and will provide a connection once the drain is installed .
Clean all soil or debris from the exposed pavement crack or joint prior to backfilling the trench .
The Engineer will approve the method and extent of jointcrack cleaning .
Vibrate and compact to the requirements of .. F. Quality Compaction .
Backfill any void space at the top of the trench .
I Hold Point Any failure to meet a requirement creates a Hold Point whereby no additional material may be placed until Corrective action and passing retests have occurred or accepted by the Engineer .
All additional material placed before corrective action and passing retests occur constitutes Unauthorized Work per .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Subsurface Drains The Engineer will measure subsurface drains by the length of the provided and installed subsurface drain and discharge pipe approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will measure drain and discharge pipes by installed length along the centerline of the pipe .
The Engineer will begin and end measurement at the pipe end at free outlets at the point of junction with inplace pipe or at the center of structures catch basins or multiple junction points .
Where the contract requires subsurface drains the Engineer will separately measure the lengths of each size and type of pipe .
B Interceptor Drains Measurement will be by the number of Interceptor Drains satisfactorily installed .
C Precast Concrete Headwalls The Engineer will measure the number of provided precast concrete headwalls .
D CS Oversleeve with Rodent Guard CS oversleeves with rodent guards are incidental . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit prices for subsurface drains and outlets of each size type kind and strength class include the cost of providing and installing the item as shown on the plans except as otherwise specified in this subsection .
The Department will pay for subdrain elbow or wye sections and additional connectors directed by the Engineer but not shown on the plans at the invoice cost of the materials provided .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans the Department will separately pay for special bedding or backfill in accordance with .
Structure Excavations and Backfills Basis of Payment .
The contract unit price for contract item No. . includes the cost of connecting pipe footage and couplings .
The contract unit price for drain outlet consisting of precast concrete headwall and discharge pipe includes the cost of providing and placing the unit erosion control blanket and seed marking inspecting and all other associated work .
For required sodding the Engineer will include the cost of the sod with relevant contract pay items .
The contract unit prices for the relevant subsurface drain contract items include the cost of geotextiles and other joint wrapping or sealing materials .
The contract unit price for contract item No. . Precast Concrete Headwall includes the cost of providing and placing tape or paint for marking outlet locations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The contract unit price for the relevant subsurface drain contract item includes the costs associated with the disposal of surplus material .
The Department will pay for trench excavation required below an elevation greater than in below the bottom of the pipe or tile as shown on the plans as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans the Department will pay for the removal of ledge rock or rocks larger than ½ cu .
yd from the excavation as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
Granular Materials are incidental to the cost of the Subsurface Drains .
Payment for interceptor drains under the Contract bid item includes cutting the trench cleaning joint and crack face furnishing and compacting aggregate and all other associated work .
The Department will pay for subsurface drains based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Drainage System Type ____ lump sum . . ___ in Precast Concrete Headwall Interceptor Drain each each .
Install each .
___in Perforated Pipe Drain linear foot .
Install ___in linear foot .
___in Pipe Drain linear foot Specify item name .
Specify kind in accordance with .. A Drain and Discharge Pipe .
Specify strength class if other than the minimum requirement .
PIPE SEWERS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing pipe sewers using plantfabricated pipe and other appurtenant materials installed for conveyance of sewage industrial wastes or storm water .
Construct manholes and catch basins in accordance with Manholes and Catch Basins .
Provide aprons as shown on the plans and in accordance with Pipe Culverts. . MATERIALS A Pipe Provide one of the following types of sewer pipe as specified or allowed as an option on the plans or in the special provisions .
Use pipe meeting the lowest strength class specified or greater unless a higher strength pipe is shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
Perform special fabrication or jointing as shown on the plans .
Provide pipe sewers with the coating type shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
A. Blank A. Reinforced Concrete RC A .
Corrugated Aluminum CA A .
Corrugated Steel CS A .
Corrugated Aluminized Steel CAS A. Blank A. Blank A. Blank A .
Corrugated Polyethylene CP .
Minnesota Standard Specifications A. Blank A. Blank A. Polymeric CoatedCorrugated Steel PCCS A. Blank A. Polyvinyl Chloride PVC B Flap Gates C Pipe Joint Sealer Materials C. Blank C. Preformed Rubber Type A C. Blank C. Bituminous Mastic D Granular Materials .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Construct sewer installations in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills for excavation foundation construction and backfilling of prefabricated structures and in accordance with the following requirements B Excavation For locations with cover over the top of the pipe at least ft ensure the excavation dimensions meet the following For the portion of the required excavation below a point ft above the top of the pipe provide nearly vertical side slopes and Excavate the width of the trench meeting the requirements specified in Table Table Maximum Trench Width for Pipe Sewer Pipe Diameter inch Maximum Trench Width Outside diameter plus inches .
times outside diameter Outside diameter plus inches ft above pipe If the Contractor excavates the trench to a width greater than the values specified in Table the Engineer may direct the Contractor to provide a higher class of bedding a higher strength pipe or both than that required by the contract at no additional cost to the Department .
C Laying Pipe C. General Lay the pipe to the line and grade shown on the plans .
Use standard or specially manufactured fittings for pipe junctions and turns .
At sewer connections with an existing manhole or catch basin make a suitable connection as approved by the Engineer through the wall of the manhole or catch basin .
Use vitrified clay or concrete stoppers sealed in place to plug branch openings or service connections provided for future use .
C. Metal Sewer Pipe Lay corrugated metal pipes containing circumferential joints with the outside laps pointing upgrade and with the longitudinal joints on the sides. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Use approved metal connecting bands shown on the standard plate centered over the joint to join metal pipe sections .
Place the metal pipe joints as close together as possible .
Tighten the band to ensure a tight joint .
C. Concrete Sewer Pipe Lay concrete pipe with the female end of each section upgrade .
Tightly join the pipe sections so that the interior of the pipe sections abut each other .
Use preformed rubber or bituminous mastic elastic joint sealer material to provide flexible watertight joint seals for concrete pipe .
Where the pipe is designed to accommodate preformed gasket type seals seal the joints with the preformed gasket as shown on the plans and meeting the performance requirements of .
Where the pipe is not required to accommodate preformed gasket type seals seal the joints with bituminous mastic and a full circumferential wrap of geotextile material extending at least ft on each side of the joint .
Secure the circumferential wrap against the outside of the pipe by metal or plastic strapping or by other methods approved by the Engineer .
Apply mastic joint sealer materials as recommended by the manufacturer .
Wipe joints clean on the inside after sealing .
Plug lifting holes with a precast concrete plug sealed and covered with mastic or mortar .
Use approved fasteners shown on Standard Plate to tie together concrete pipe sections unless otherwise shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
Provide backfill material in accordance with the plan modified to percent passing the inch sieve within ft of the pipe .
C. Plastic Sewer Pipe Follow minimum cover maximum cover and installation requirements shown in detail PLASTIC PIPE INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS .
Provide embedment material in accordance with the plan .. D. Granular Backfill modify gradation to percent passing the inch sieve .
Use the embedment material to provide ft of fill over the pipe and fill for a trench width as specified by the contract .
Place pipes and backfill in dry conditions by controlling the water conditions .
Dewater groundwater and surface runoff to keep the water level below the pipe foundation .
Place pipes on the bedding starting at the downstream end of the pipe installation with the female end of each section upgrade .
Make connections with bell and spigot joints using an elastomeric rubber seal gasket to provide watertight joints that do not allow soil silt or water to migrate through the joint .
Install joints so connected pipe sections form a continuous surface free of irregularities in the flow line .
Tightly join the pipe sections so that the interior of the pipe sections abut each other .
Keep gaskets and joint surfaces clean and free from soil during installation .
Follow manufacturers recommendation for fitting or coupling assembly and installation .
Use a lubricant if required that will not have deteriorating effects on the gasket and pipe materials .
Before allowing vehicles or heavy construction equipment to travel over the pipe trench maintain a minimum cover depth of material above the pipe of at least ft and meeting the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Section Table ..
Perform deflection testing of all plastic pipe at least calendar days after installation .
Remove obstructions including sediment standing water or other obstructions that would interfere with mandrel testing prior to deflection testing .
Dewatering and additional work associated with preparing for and performing deflection testing is included in the bid price of the pipe .
Evaluate the pipe to determine if the specific internal diameter of the barrel has deflected more than percent .
Use the following methods to perform the deflection test unless otherwise specified in the plan Visual inspection alone is not allowed for deflection testing .
Use a ninepoint mandrel approved by the Engineer to perform deflection testing for pipes with an inside diameter ft or smaller .
Pull the mandrel through the pipe using nonmechanical means .
Direct measurements can not be used for deflection testing unless specified in the plans and approved by the Engineer .
Direct measurements can only be used on pipes with an inside diameter of inches or greater .
If .
Minnesota Standard Specifications the Department allows direct measurements the Engineer must take measurements at randomly select locations but at a minimum once every ft throughout the pipe length and at the pipe ends .
Visually inspect the pipe and take additional measurements at any location of observed anomaly or deflection .
Ensure personnel making direct measurements meet confined space entry requirements in accordance with Employee Health and Welfare .
Laser scan inspection laser ring can be used to perform deflection testing when specified in the plans and approved by the Engineer .
The Engineer will consider pipe that has a deflection of greater than percent in the pipe or is damaged .
Remove unacceptable pipe and install new pipe or undamaged deformed pipe .
Retest the relaid pipe for deflection after at least five calendar days after installation .
Send deflection testing results to the State Hydraulic Engineer with the S.P .
number pipe location material type size date built date tested and results from the mandrel test or other deflection test .
D Backfill Backfill sewer installations as shown on the plans and in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills .
Surplus excavated materials not used for backfill shall become the property of the Contractor .
Dispose of surplus material in accordance with the disposal form submitted to and approved by the Engineer .
E Installation by Jacking Install pipe by jacking in accordance with .. C. Laying Pipe General .
F Cleanout Clean sediment and debris from sewers before final acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Excavation The Engineer will measure excavation specified or directed as extra work in accordance with .
Structure Excavations and Backfills Method of Measurement for prefabricated structures .
B Sewer Pipe The Engineer will separately measure each type of pipe by length along the center line of the sewer .
The Engineer will begin and end measurements at the following locations Pipe end at free outlets Point of junction with inplace pipe or Center of manholes catch basins or multiple junction points .
The Engineer will measure pipe transition sections as the larger size of pipe .
The Engineer will classify sections of metal pipe at the outlets of clay or concrete sewers as metal sewers .
The Engineer will measure Departmentprovided sewer materials required by the contract by the length of installed sewer separated by type but not by size .
C Sewer Appurtenances The Engineer will separately measure flap gates and other specially identified appurtenant items designated for payment on a per each basis by the number of units of each type and size incorporated in the sewer structures .
D Granular Materials The Engineer will measure granular materials for special backfill and bedding in accordance with .. B Granular Materials .
The Engineer will measure compacted volume of granular materials based on the maximum trench widths specified in accordance with .
Construction Requirements . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for the contract items for sewer pipe of each size type kind and strength class include the costs of providing and installing the pipe completeinplace as required by the contract except as otherwise specified in this section .
The contract unit prices for plastic pipe sewers will include the cost of deflection testing and buoyancy protection as required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will pay for elbow tee or wye sections and additional connectors directed by the Engineer but not shown on the plans by the invoice cost of the materials .
The Department will pay for installing Departmentprovided sewer materials including all work and additional materials used to complete the sewer installation by the relevant install only contract pay item except for Extra Work or work included in other relevant contract pay items .
The Department will include the cost of granular materials for special bedding or backfill with relevant pay items in accordance with .
Structure Excavations and Backfills Basis of Payment .
The contract unit prices for excavation contract items include the cost of disposing of surplus excavated material .
If the Engineer approves of sewer pipe installation by the jacking method and contract item does not exist the Department will pay for a jacking installation on the basis of contract unit prices relevant for the trenching method .
The Department will include the cost of aprons required in connection with the sewer construction with relevant pay items in accordance with .
Pipe Culverts Basis of Payment .
The Department will pay for required excavation greater than ft below the bottom of the pipe as shown on the plans as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
If the plans do not include a contract pay item the Department will pay for the removal of ledge rock or rocks larger than ½ cu .
yd in volume from the excavation as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will include the cost of alternatives as shown on the plans including cost differences in installation requirements deflection testing trench width or embedment material specifications and quantities in the contract unit price of the pipe .
The Department will include the cost of trench excavation with the relevant contract pay item for sewer installation .
The contract unit price for the relevant pipe contract item includes the cost of pipe cleaning except when specifically designated under other items ..
The Department will pay for sewers on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Flap Gate for Pipe each .
Install each .
Install linear foot .
___ in Pipe Sewer linear foot .
___ in Span PipeArch Sewer linear foot .
___ in Span Elliptical Pipe Sewer linear foot .
___ in Pipe Sewer Design linear foot Specify kind in accordance with .. A Pipe .
Specify strength class if other than minimum requirement Specify size and kind Specify HE or VE and strength class if other than minimum requirement Specify pipe or joint designs and provide standard plate number Special item name MANHOLES AND CATCH BASINS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing or reconstructing brick or concrete block masonry castinplace concrete precast sectional concrete or pipe structures for access and drainage into underground drainage or other systems .
The Department defines precast concrete median drains as casting assemblies. . MATERIALS A Concrete Use G concrete .
B Mortar .
Minnesota Standard Specifications B. Mortar Type S or M B. Masonry Cement Type S or M B. Mortar Sand C Clay Brick D Concrete Brick E Concrete Masonry Units F Sectional Concrete Manhole and Catch Basin Units G Blank H Blank I Blank J Reinforced Concrete Pipe K Corrugated Steel Pipe L Metal Drainage Castings M Concrete Drainage Castings N Granular Materials O Blank P Corrugated Aluminum Pipe Q Corrugated Aluminized Steel CAS .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General A .
Combination Construction The Engineer may allow a combination of castinplace and prefabricated concrete construction if the contract does not specify the type of construction for a structure and if the Contractor maintains the structural strength and continuity .
A. Intercepting Existing Facilities Where the new structure will intercept an existing underground facility incorporate the existing facility into the new structure to the extent required including any necessary removal replacement or special connections without detriment to the planned function of the facility .
A .
Abandoned Pipes When abandoning a pipe that enters a structure that will not be abandoned detach the pipe from the structure wall and permanently plug the wall opening and the upgrade end of the abandoned pipe with concrete or masonry .
A. Excavation Bedding and Backfill Excavate bed and backfill in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills .
A .
Inspection Before Construction Do not place mortar in any unit or section of work before the Engineer has inspected and approved the foundation preparations materials and provisions for cold weather protection .
A .
Temperature Restrictions Do not place mortar on a frozen foundation or against any surface with a temperature below freezing .
Do not start or continue production of concrete or mortar when the ambient air temperature at the construction site away from artificial heat is less than F. The Engineer may otherwise approve in accordance to the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications When the air temperature is rising and has reached F or If the Contractor makes provisions for cold weather protection in advance as approved by the Engineer .
Do not use masonry units or aggregate in temperatures F or less except as directed by the Engineer .
Maintain concrete and mortar mixes at a temperature from F to F until incorporated into the work .
The Engineer may approve heating of masonry units mix materials or mortar .
Do not spot heat these materials using steam jets or direct application of combustion heating devices as the work progresses .
B CastinPlace Concrete C Masonry Provide masonry in accordance with the requirements in this section if at least part of the structure is constructed using clay brick or concrete masonry units .
The Department defines unit as the brick or concrete block unless otherwise qualified in this section .
Do not moisten concrete masonry units before placement in the work .
Moisten all other types of masonry units before placement .
Place units in a full mortar bed in horizontal courses using the shove joint method as described in this section .
Fill joints with mortar .
Strike joints on the inside of the structure providing a joint width no greater than .
in wide .
Plaster the outside of the structure with mortar to a smooth surface .
Install steps pipes or other fixtures required by the contract as the work progresses .
Fit the units around pipes that penetrate the structure using only part of the unit to form a neat juncture at the pipe as approved by the Engineer .
Bond attachments to the structure using mortar to fill voids .
For manholes or catch basins constructed of brick meet the following additional requirements In circular type structures lay the bricks flat and radially with the ends exposed on the inside of the structure .
Where the thickness of the wall is greater than the length of one brick the Contractor may lay the outside bricks circumferentially using full header construction in at least each sixth course .
In rectangular type manholes lay the bricks in regular courses of stretchers using full header construction in at least each sixth course .
Do not use bats or spalls except for shaping around openings or for finishing out a course .
When shaping around openings or finishing out a course place full bricks in the corners and the bats in the interior of the course .
Ensure the least dimension of the exposed faces of bats is at least percent of the width of a brick .
When using the alternate method of constructing the tapered portion of a manhole with concrete block as shown on the plans use concrete units specifically shaped to transition between the vertical and the sloped walls .
D Sectional Concrete Set the bottom precast section in a full mortar bed and fill the joints between sections and around pipes with mortar or a plastic cementing compound approved by the Engineer .
Install cover for a structure on a full mortar bed according to Standard Plate .
E Pipe Construct metal or concrete pipe manholes as shown on the plans .
F Castings Set the frame or ring castings to the designated elevation on a full mortar bed .
If using metal pipe construction set casting as shown on the plans as specified in the specifications or as approved by the Engineer .
Place a inch thick concrete encasement around the outside of the manhole or catch basin as detailed in MnDOT Standard Plate .
Place this encasement at the time of final casting placement .
If the plans show castings not bonded to the manhole or catch basin finish the mortar bed to the required grade and allow the mortar bed to set .
After the mortar bed sets apply a lubricant approved by the Engineer to the bed and install the casting .
G Adjusting Frame or Ring Castings Provide vertical adjustment of access castings made to the planned elevation on the structure .
Meet the criteria that full support for the casting is obtained above the cone section and ensure that structure construction above the cone does not exceed .
Minnesota Standard Specifications in not including the frame .
Use no more than adjusting rings .
Limit thickness of each adjusting ring to inches or less .
If these criteria can not be met by vertical adjustment work reconstruct the structure .
For upward adjustment of castings the Contractor may use any of the structure materials or applicable construction methods specified in this subsection provided they are compatible with the inplace construction .
The Contractor may use auxiliary ring castings and adjusting rings as shown on the plans .
H Reconstructing InPlace Structures If the plans require reconstructing the manhole or catch basin or if raising or lowering the frame or ring casting beyond the limits specified in .. G Adjusting Frame or Ring Castings reconstruct the structure as shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Perform reconstruction to be consistent with the type of construction used for the inplace structure meeting the requirements specified in this section for new construction .
The Contractor may use salvaged material if approved by the Engineer .
Thoroughly bond new work to the inplace structure .
I Blank J Construction in Conjunction with Pavement Construction If constructing reconstructing or adjusting manholes and catch basins in connection with the construction of a concrete pavement or base use the telescoping type of ring unless otherwise shown on the plans .
If using the telescoping type of ring set the frame or ring casting to the proper elevation before placing the pavement .
K Backfilling If the structure consists of castinplace concrete or of bricks or blocks laid in mortar do not place the backfill until the concrete or mortar has cured for at least calendar days .
Excavated materials not required for backfill shall become the property of the Contractor .
Dispose of the excavated material off the rightofway in accordance with Excavation and Embankment at no additional cost to the Department .
L Cleaning Clean sediment and debris from manholes and catch basins before final acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure manholes and catch basins as drainage structures .
A Constructing Drainage Structures If the plans specify measurement by length for vertical structures constructed on a concrete base the Engineer will measure the height as the difference in elevation between the bottom of the casting and the invert elevation of the outlet pipe plus an allowance of .
ft for the depth of the concrete base regardless of its actual thickness .
If the plans specify measurement by length for pipe structures designed with a tee section in the sewer or culvert line the Engineer will measure the length as the difference in elevation between the bottom of the casting and the flow line elevation of the sewer or culvert pipe for vertical construction or as shown in the plans for other special designs not constructed vertically .
The Engineer will measure the run of the pipe structure tee section as culvert or sewer pipe .
If the plans specify the measurement of each structure complete in place the Engineer will separately measure drainage structures of each design as individual units complete in place including any castings provided and installed .
B Reconstruction The Engineer will measure reconstruction to the nearest .
ft of the height from the bottom of the reconstructed portion to the bottom of the newly set casting regardless of type .
C Castings The Engineer will measure casting assembly by the number of casting assemblies provided and installed .
The Engineer will measure install casting by the number of castings installed .
The Engineer will not measure castings for structures measured as a unit .
The Engineer will consider all castings required for an individual structure as one assembly .
D Adjusting Castings The Engineer will measure adjusting castings by the number of casting assemblies adjusted .
The Engineer will consider all castings required for an individual structure as one assembly. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for constructing or reconstructing drainage structures includes all costs for completing the work including the cost of excavation except for the cost of specific contract items in accordance with the following The Department will pay for excavation in ledge rock and the removal of boulders or detached rocks with a volume greater than .
cu .
yd as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions unless the existence of the rock is shown on the plans .
The contract unit price for reconstructing drainage structures includes the cost of removing the existing casting but does not include placement of a casting on the reconstructed structure .
The contract unit price for reconstructing drainage structures includes the costs of removing and replacing all or a portion of the structure as shown on the plans adjacent pavement aggregate base and excavation if except for the structure construction the surface would not otherwise have been disturbed .
The Department will pay for the cost of this work at the contract unit price based on the area to the nearest .
sq .
yd within a rectangle with sides that lie .
ft outside the structure limits .
The Department will include the cost of removing and replacing pavement outside of these limits or for replacing any other type of surfacing with other applicable pay items .
The contract unit price for drainage structure construction by the structure as individual units complete in place includes the cost of providing and installing any castings required .
The contract unit price for adjust frame and ring castings will include the cost of the removing and replacing concrete surfacing in connection with the item of adjust frame and ring castings .
The casting encasement detailed in Standard Plate will be placed at the time of final casting placement with no additional cost to the Department .
The Department will pay for granular materials for special bedding or backfill in accordance with .
Structure Excavations and Backfills Basis of Payment .
The contract unit price for Adjust Frame and Ring Casting includes the cost of salvaging and installing the in place casting removing deteriorated rings and providing and installing all sewer blocks bricks rings and grout necessary to raise or lower inplace castings to the elevation shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
The Department will pay for manholes and catch basins as drainage structures based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Construct Drainage Structure Design ___ each .
Casting Assembly each .
Install Casting each .
Adjust Frame and Ring Casting each .
Construct Drainage Structure Design ___ linear foot .
Reconstruct Drainage Structure linear foot CULVERT LINER .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of lining culvert pipe by inserting a polyethylene PE liner inside an inplace culvert. . MATERIALS A Pipe Provide one of the following types of liner as shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions A .
Polyethylene PE Liner A. Blank .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General The Department will specify the diameter or span of the inplace pipe to be lined in the contract item .
Follow liner dimensions as shown on the plans and as specified by the special provisions .
Use a liner and grout method that has adequate space between the inplace pipe and liner to grout the annular space .
Use slings boomtype trucks or an equivalent approved by the Engineer to unload liners at the project .
Do not dump liners from the truck or use chains or wire rope for handling .
The Contractor may use a winch truck or equivalent equipment approved by the Engineer to install the liner. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will consider any damaged liner to be unacceptable .
Unacceptable liner includes but is not limited to liner that is damaged during handling or installation or rejected because it does not meet plan requirements .
B Installing Liner B .
General Inspect the interior of the inplace pipe to identify conditions which may prevent proper installation and to confirm that the liner and installation method proposed by the contractor are adequate for existing site conditions .
Use jet rodding equipment hydromechanical methods or other methods approved by the Engineer to clean and dry the inplace pipe before inserting the liner .
Remove or repair all obstructions that would prevent installation or damage the liner during installation .
Remove debris or other materials from the inplace pipe to prevent the inserted liner from resting on or against or be irregularly supported by these materials .
The Contractor may use a flange connector or a full encirclement with neoprene connects and stainless steel clamps to make final connection .
Allow the liner to stabilize from h to h before tying the last joint or pressure grouting the annular space between the inplace culvert and the inserted liner .
Use fasteners blocks or multiple grout layers to secure liners equal to or greater than ft in diameter to the invert of the inplace pipe to prevent the liner from floating during the grouting operations .
B. Inserting Liner The Contractor may pull or push prefused lengths of solid wall PE liner into place .
The Contractor may combine the push and pull techniques to insert the liners .
B .. a Pull Technique Use a cable or winch arrangement to pull the liner into place .
Feed the cable from the winch through the inplace pipe .
Fasten the cable to the liner to allow the liner to be pulled through the inplace pipe and into place .
The Contractor may fabricate the pulling head out of a few extra feet of the liner by cutting out evenly spaced wedges from the leading edge collapsing the fingers towards the center and fastening the cable to the fingers .
B .. b Push Technique Place a choker strap around the liner outside the access point .
Use a tractor mounted backhoe backhoe or an equivalent piece of equipment approved by the Engineer to pull the choker thus pushing the liner through the inplace pipe .
Ensure that with each stroke of the backhoe the choker grips the liner and pushes the leading edge of the liner further into the inplace culvert .
The Contractor may use a frontend loader or bulldozers to simultaneously push on the trailing end of the liner segment .
B .
Pipe Joints Use heat fusion or grooved presson joints approved by the Engineer to join PE liner meeting requirements of ASTM F DR .. Heat fuse liner joints as recommended by the liner manufacturer using an experienced operator of the heat fusion equipment .
Use a threaded joint to join liner segments of closedprofile PE liner with an ASTM D cell classification of C as approved by the Engineer .
C Grout Block off culvert ends before filling the annular space between the liner and the inplace pipe .
Provide CLSM Low Density or CLSM High Density grout in accordance with Cellular Concrete Grout Controlled Low Strength Material CLSM and as shown on the plans or as required by the contract .
Use CLSM High Density grout if the plans or the contract do not specify the grout type .
Do not allow grouting pressure to exceed the external hydrostatic collapse resistance of the liner .
D Culvert Cleaning Clean sediment and debris from lined pipe before final acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Pipe Liner The Engineer will measure liner by length as determined by summation of the nominal laying lengths of the individual liner sections incorporated in each lined pipe .
The Engineer will separately measure culvert pipe liner by size type and kind in accordance with the contract items .
The size is the diameter or span of the inplace pipe being lined B Culvert Appurtenances The Engineer will separately measure aprons or other appurtenances required to the installation of the liner in accordance with Pipe Culverts. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Grout The Engineer will measure grout in accordance with Cellular Concrete Grout Controlled Low Strength Material CLSM . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract linear foot price for Lining Culvert Pipe will include the cost of excavating cleaning inserting the liner backfilling and providing liner fittings seals and joint system .
This cost includes cleaning and repair activities required to prepare the inplace pipe prior to inserting the liner and cleaning the lined pipe before final acceptance .
The Department will pay for grouting with the contract unit price for contract item No. . CLSM Low Density or No. . CLSM High Density as shown on the plans and in accordance with Cellular Concrete Grout Controlled Low Strength Material CLSM .
The Department will pay for culvert appurtenances in accordance with Pipe Culverts .
The Department will pay for lining culvert pipe on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Lining Culvert Pipe ___ inches linear foot Specify kind in accordance with .
Culvert Liner Materials .
If the contract allows alternatives do not specify kind .
RIPRAP .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and placing stone riprap with or without grouting as a protective covering on earth slopes piers abutments walls or other structures where the soil is susceptible to erosion .
The Department classifies riprap by type as random riprap or handplaced riprap depending on the method of placement and the stone size specified. . MATERIALS A Riprap Materials B Filter Materials B. Granular Filter B. Geotextile Filter C AGrout .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Provide and place stone riprap as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Excavate and shape the foundation for the riprap with or without filter material to the crosssections as shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Compact loose foundation material before placing the riprap or filter material .
If the contract requires place a layer of riprap at least a ft thick on a filter material unless otherwise required by the contract or directed by the Engineer .
Grout riprap as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer .
Place the riprap on a filter layer consisting of granular material or geotextile .
Fully grouted riprap is not allowed in public waters .
B Filter Material Place filter material under the riprap unless otherwise required by the contract .
The Contractor may choose the type of filter material except as required by the contract .
B. Granular Filter Spread granular filter material to a minimum thickness of at least inches over the prepared foundation or as required by the contract .
Deposit granular material placed under water directly on the foundation using a bucket or similar container .
Do not discharge the granular material above the water surface. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B. Geotextile Filter When placing geotextile filter material ensure that the foundation surface is relatively smooth and free of stones sticks and other debris or irregularities that might puncture the fabric .
Place the filter material and conduct construction operations without tearing puncturing or shifting the fabric .
Place the fabric with the longest dimension parallel to the direction of water flow .
If using fabric that is not seamed overlap splices and joints at least inches except overlap splices and joints placed under water inches .
Provide shingled joint laps in the flow direction and from top to bottom of a slope to direct water flow over the joint without undermining the geotextile filter .
The Contractor may sew multiple fabric pieces together as specified in Geotextiles in lieu of joint overlapping .
Bury the upgrade edges of the fabric a minimum of inches to direct water flow over the fabric and prevent undermining .
If not seamed place washered steel pins edge stakes stones or other material at locations and in quantities as approved by the Engineer to prevent movement of the geotextile filter during placement of the riprap .
Do not dump stone at the top of the slope and roll stone down the slope .
If placing stones directly on the geotextile filter without a granular cushion do not operate equipment on top of the stones after placement .
Do not operate construction equipment directly on top of the geotextile .
Do not use geotextile filter material under hand placed or grouted riprap unless otherwise required by the contract .
The Contractor may place geotextile filter on slopes no steeper than .
For slopes steeper than retrench the geotextile at least every ft or as required by the contract .
Do not use geotextile filter on slopes steeper than .
C Riprap Stone Do not drop stones on the fabric from a height greater than ft unless the fabric is covered with a inch thick granular cushion course .
If covered the Contractor may drop riprap stones from a height no greater than ft .
When placing riprap start at the lowest elevations and work upwards .
Before placement of riprap stone on geotextile the Engineer may require the Contractor to demonstrate that the placement methods will not damage the fabric .
The Engineer may order the removal of at least sq .
yd of riprap to inspect for fabric damage in accordance with Inspection of Work .
C. Random Riprap Position random riprap to provide a uniform distribution of the various sizes of stone and produce a dense wellkeyed layer of stones with the least practical voids volume .
Level the surface flush with the surrounding ground to produce a reasonably uniform appearance and the thickness required by the contract .
Wash riprap clean before placing underwater .
C. HandPlaced Riprap Embed the stones for handplaced riprap in the foundation material with the axis of the stone that most nearly approximates the contractrequired thickness of riprap laid perpendicular to the foundation slope .
Lay stones with the least practicable space between them .
Position the stones to stagger the joints up the slope .
Place each stone to allow the foundation material and adjacent stones to carry its mass .
Use selected stones set to line and grade to define the ends and edges of each riprap area .
After laying the larger stones fill the spaces between the stones with firmly seated smaller stones to produce a uniform surface .
Wash riprap clean before placing underwater .
D Grouting For fully grouted riprap ensure that grout fills the spaces between stones throughout the entire thickness of the riprap .
Immediately before placing the grout for grouted riprap thoroughly wet the stones with water .
Do not pour grout over stones that have become surface dry .
Sweep the surface of the grouted riprap with a stiff broom to finish .
E Thickness Requirements Ensure the riprap placed on each separate area has a minimum thickness of at least percent of the thickness required by the contract and an average thickness of at least percent of the thickness required by the contract when measured at right angles to the face. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Riprap If measuring riprap of each type and class by volume the Engineer will calculate the volume based on the actual surface dimensions as staked and the thickness shown on the plans or specified in the special provisions .
If measuring riprap of each type and class by mass the Engineer will calculate the mass based on scale tickets of materials delivered and placed within the staked areas .
B Filter Materials If measuring filter materials by weight the Engineer will calculate the weight based on scale tickets of material delivered and placed within the staked areas .
If measuring filter materials by volume the Engineer will calculate the volume based on the actual surface dimensions as staked and the thickness as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will measure geotextile filter material by area based on the actual surface dimensions as staked with no allowance for overlaps or seams . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for riprap of each type and class includes the cost of providing the materials excavating and preparing the foundations and placing the riprap stone grouting and filter materials as required by the contract .
The Department will pay for filter materials of the type specified if included in the contract .
The Department will pay for riprap and filter material based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Geotextile Filter Type ___ square yard .
Random Riprap Class ___ cubic yard .
Handplaced Riprap cubic yard .
Grouted Riprap cubic yard .
Granular Filter cubic yard .
Random Riprap Class ___ ton .
Granular Filter Material ton GABIONS AND REVET MATTRESSES .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing gabions and revet mattresses at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer. . MATERIALS A Riprap Materials B Filter Materials B. Granular Filter B. Geotextile Filter C Gabions D Revet Mattresses .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General .
Excavate shape and compact the foundation to the elevation and alignment as required by the contract .
Provide and place filter material unless otherwise required by the contract .
Provide and place gabions and revet mattresses. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Filter Material Place filter material over the entire area before placing the gabions and revet mattresses .
B. Granular Filter .
B. Geotextile Filter .
The Contractor may place geotextile filter material under gabions and revet mattresses on slopes without stepping if specified by the contract or approved by the Engineer .
C Baskets and Fasteners C. Documentation Provide the following Certification that the baskets and fasteners meet the requirements of this section Manufacturers drawings of the baskets and fasteners and Manufacturers assembly recommendation and instructions for the baskets and fasteners .
C. Construction Install the baskets to the dimensions profile and alignment as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer .
Assemble the baskets in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations unless otherwise specified in this section Gabions and Revet Mattresses Materials or as shown on the plans .
Place and fasten the diaphragms in the baskets to the side and bottom mesh to create cell dimensions no greater than ft. Fasten adjoining empty baskets together at their perimeters .
Place stones in the cells of baskets in a manner that will minimize voids does not allow sharp edges to protrude through the mesh and maintains the basket dimensions as shown on the plans .
Hand place stones as necessary .
Fill cells in ft layers .
Fill cells no greater than ft in one layer .
Fill cells no greater than inches in two equal layers .
Do not fill cells greater than ft higher than stone layers in adjacent cells or baskets .
For twisted wire gabions place horizontal connecting wires on top of the stone layer in both directions if no supporting basket exists to prevent the sides from bulging .
For welded wire gabions install preformed stiffeners across the corners of the gabions before filling .
Provide two rows of stiffeners four per cell for the front face and the side faces .
Provide a single row of stiffeners two per cell on the back face .
The Department will not require stiffeners in interior cells .
Provide preformed stiffeners with a nominal length of inches .
Hook the stiffeners at crossing wires .
The Contractor may use lacing wire as a stiffener .
After filling the basket fold the top of baskets shut and fasten to the ends sides diaphragms and adjacent baskets .
Stack empty baskets on filled baskets and fasten to the filled baskets at front exposed sides and back before filling .
Stagger the vertical joints between the baskets of adjacent rows and layers unless otherwise required by the contract .
Backfill behind a gabion structure simultaneously with the cell filling operation .
C. Fasteners The Contractor may use lacing wire an alternative fastener approved by the Engineer or a combination to fasten the baskets .
C .. a Lacing Wire Place lacing wire at each joint alternating single and double loops every inches to inches .
C .. b Alternative Fastener Place alternative fasteners at each joint at every mesh opening .
Adequately secure spiral binders at the ends to prevent unwinding .
D Acceptance The Engineer may consider the work unacceptable if visible baskets vary by greater than inches from the profile or alignment as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Gabion and Revet Mattress The Engineer will measure gabion and revet mattress construction by volume based on the nominal basket dimensions and the number of baskets incorporated into the work .
B Filter Materials . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for both Gabions and for Revet Mattresses include the cost of providing the materials as required by Riprap Material and Gabions and Revet Mattresses Materials excavating and preparing the foundations providing and installing filter materials and constructing and filling the gabions and revet mattresses .
The Department will separately compensate for filter materials if the contract contains the relevant contract items as listed in Riprap .
The Department will pay for gabions and revet mattresses based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Gabion cubic yard .
Revet Mattress cubic yard SLOPE PAVING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of paving embankment slopes and waterways with Portland cement concrete or crushed aggregate to provide erosion protection. . MATERIALS A Concrete Provide concrete meeting the requirements for Mix Designation F except that the Contractor may adjust the slump requirement as approved by the Engineer .
B Reinforcement Bars Provide reinforcement bars meeting the following requirements Either Grade or Grade Deformed billet steel and Meeting the requirements of ASTM A .
C Preformed Joint Filler D Bituminous Material Provide liquid asphalt Grade MC MC or emulsified asphalt Grade CSS CSSH RS or CRS for bituminous material for stabilizing aggregate slope paving .
E Aggregate Provide aggregate for stabilized slope paving in accordance with Table for gradation class CA CA or CA and in accordance with the quality requirements in .. D Quality .
Table Coarse Aggregate Fraction Size percent by weight passing square opening sieves Aggregate Designation CA CA CA inch ½ inch ¼ inch inch ¾ inch ⅝ inch ½ inch ⅜ inch No. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Foundation Preparations Prepare the foundation to the dimensions and elevations shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Excavate the high spots and fill and compact low spots of the foundation to meet the elevation and slope requirements .
Prepare the foundation with a uniform density meeting .. F. Quality Compaction .
For rough grading performed by others under another contract if the Engineer determines that a material shortage or excess exists to construct the planned foundation elevations the Engineer may require one of the following to achieve acceptable foundation elevations Make minor adjustments to the grade to balance out the available material Order the placement of additional material from other sources or Order the removal and outside disposal of excess material .
B Stabilized Aggregate Slope Paving Use mechanical or hand methods to deposit spread consolidate and shape the aggregate to provide a uniform depth and density and to produce a uniform surface appearance .
Apply liquid asphalt at a rate of .
gal per sq .
yd and only when the ambient air temperature is at least F. Apply emulsified asphalt at a rate of .
gal per sq .
yd and only when the ambient air temperature is at least F. Ensure bituminous materials penetrate to a depth of at least half the thickness of the aggregate slope paving as shown on the plans .
Protect adjacent structure surfaces from bituminous splatter .
C Concrete Slope Paving Construct concrete slope paving in accordance with Concrete Bridge Construction .
Place consolidate strikeoff and hand float the concrete to provide a dense pavement relatively free of voids and cavities and to produce a uniform surface appearance .
Set and support side forms and finish the concrete so surfaces do not deviate from a true plane and the grade shown on the plans by greater than ½ inch .
Place metal reinforcement and preformed filler material as shown on the plans .
Support the metal reinforcement and preformed filler material as shown on the plans to maintain correct position during concrete placement .
Form and cast toe walls and side walls before placing concrete for contiguous slope paving .
Moisten the subgrade at the time of concrete placement .
Take care to prevent subgrade displacement and contamination of the concrete .
Place the slope paving either in equally spaced alternate strips running in the direction of maximum slope or in full width sections with mechanical equipment capable of placing and finishing the slope paving .
Immediately after placing consolidate and strike off the concrete .
When the concrete is capable of maintaining shape perform the following to the concrete Strike off the surface again Hand float with a cork or wood float to provide a final finish and Broom to produce a uniform texture and appearance .
After the final floating finish edges not formed with vstrip inserts with an edging tool and cut panel lines with grooving tools .
The Contractor may saw the panel lines as directed by the Engineer .
Float edging and grooving flange trails to secure uniform surface appearance .
Provide curing protection to exposed surfaces after completing the concrete finishing operations in accordance with .. G Concrete Curing and Protection and maintain until the concrete attains a strength gain of at least percent . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will separately measure slope paving of each type by area of top surface bounded by the outside edges of abutment faces toe walls side walls or timber planks as constructed and accepted for payment . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for slope paving of each type includes the cost of constructing the work complete in place .
The Department will pay for the cost of providing and placing additional material or the removal and outside disposal of excess material requiring loading and hauling directed by the Engineer as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
The Department will include the cost of excess material disposed on areas adjoining the slope paving without loading and hauling as directed by the Engineer with the contract unit prices for slope paving .
The Department will pay for slope paving based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Concrete Slope Paving square yard .
Stabilized Aggregate Slope Paving square yard .
Minnesota Standard Specifications REVETMENT SYSTEMS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and placing a protective covering for earth slopes river channels vehicle accesses spillways and susceptible soil erosion areas. . MATERIALS A Precast Articulated Concrete B Geotextiles C Bedding Material D Concrete E Concrete Armor Units .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Excavate the foundation for the revetment systems with geotextile filter using toe terminal and upper bank trenches .
Shape the foundation excavation to the crosssections as shown on the plans unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Grade and compact termination trenches embankment crests and toes to prevent water from migrating under the block and geotextile material .
Grade final subgrade smooth before placing the base course material to allow uniform contact with the geotextile and articulated concrete .
B Subgrade Preparation Prepare the subgrade per Subgrade Preparation .
Provide subgrade material free of stones sticks and other debris or irregularities that might puncture the geotextile fabric or create other system failures .
If the system is subject to vehicle loading install a geogrid for extra support as shown on the plans .
C Bedding Material Provide bedding material consisting of at least in spread evenly over the compacted subgrade made from one of the following materials Select Grading Material per .. A. Granular Material per .. B. or Granular Bedding per .. F. Compact the Bedding Material per .. F. Quality Compaction .
D Geotextile Filter Place Type geotextile per Geotextiles as a filter under the revetment systems unless otherwise required by the contract .
Place the geotextile filter material on the entire area supporting the revetment system .
Secure the geotextile material with in .
steel pins or staples unless otherwise shown on the plans .
If installing anchors cut the geotextile to allow the anchors to penetrate the geotextile .
Place and compact prepared subgrade and bedding material and place geotextile material without tearing puncturing or shifting the fabric .
Place a in .
sand layer on the geotextile fabric before placing the block .
Place the required multiple fabric widths or lengths with the longest dimension parallel to the direction of water flow .
Place unseamed fabric with splices and joints overlapped at least in .
except overlap splices and joints underwater at least in .
Shingle the joint laps in the flow direction and from top of slope to bottom to direct water flow over the joint without undermining .
As an alternative to joint overlapping the Contractor may sew multiple fabric pieces together to meet the seam breaking strength requirements of Geotextiles .
Bury upgrade edges of the fabric area to direct water flow over the fabric without undermining .
For unseamed geotextile place steel pins with washers or staples at locations and in quantities as approved by the Engineer to prevent movement of the geotextile during placement of the articulated concrete revetment system .
Do not operate construction equipment directly on top of the geotextile. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E Precast Articulated Concrete E. Articulated Block Mat Place the mats in accordance with the appropriate manufacturer recommendations .
Place the mats no greater than in .
apart .
After cable clamping and anchoring use Type A grout per Structural Concrete to close gaps greater than in mm .
Entrench and bury the outside edges of the mat system at least one block into the ground filled with compacted fill .
Do not allow mats to overlap and blocks to project vertically greater than in .
beyond the adjacent block .
Fasten the protruding longitudinal and transverse cable connections together along the adjacent sides of the mats .
E. Articulated Interlocking Block Install articulated interlocking blocks by hand .
Do not overlap blocks and allow blocks to project vertically by greater than in .
beyond the adjacent blocks .
Place anchors through cuts in the geotextile and position the anchors on the concrete block to maximize the pull out resistance .
E. Clamps Use wire rope clamps to join cable loops of horizontal and vertical adjoining concrete revetment mats as specified by the manufacturer unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
E. Anchors Install anchors at ft. intervals at lead edge and around perimeter of the revetment system and as shown on the plans as specified by the manufacturer or as directed by the Engineer .
Embed anchors at least ½ ft deep .
Fasten the exposed cables of the concrete mats to the anchors driven into the anchor trench .
F Concrete Armor Units Place concrete armor units so not to tear the geotextile .
Embed and entrench at least one block into the ground at the toe with compacted fill material .
Begin placement of the system at the toe termination trench and proceed up the slope and as per manufacturer recommendations .
G Filling and Vegetation If vegetating is shown on the plans fill voids of the revetment system with screened common topsoil borrow per Topsoil Borrow seed mix per Seed and category Erosion Control Blanket per Rolled Erosion Control Products unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Perform filling and vegetation after the Engineer completes inspection of any required clamping and anchoring systems . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure precast articulated concrete of each type by area on the basis of actual surface dimensions as staked .
The Engineer will measure geotextile filter material by area on the basis of actual surface dimensions as staked .
The Engineer will not include allowance for overlaps or seams in the measurement for geotextile filter .
The Engineer will measure concrete armor units by surface area covered by each size provided installed and accepted by the Engineer including the buried portions using the outermost extremity of the units as required by the contract .
On small projects the Engineer will accept concrete armor units by the number of complete units assembled and installed as required by the contract . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit prices for revetment systems include the cost of excavating and preparing the foundations providing system materials geotextile filter base and bedding materials grouting clamping and anchoring .
The Department will pay for revetment systems on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Concrete Armor Units ____ size Each .
Articulated Block Mat Open Cell Type ___ square yard .
Articulated Block Mat Closed Cell Type ___ square yard .
Articulated Interlocking Block Open Cell Type ___ square yard .
Articulated Interlocking Block Closed Cell Type ___ square yard .
Concrete Armor units ____ size Square yard .
Minnesota Standard Specifications CELLULAR CONCRETE GROUT CONTROLLED LOW STRENGTH MATERIAL CLSM .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of pressure grouting the area and voids between the existing pipe culvert and the inserted liner pipe. . MATERIALS A Cement B Fly Ash C Fine Aggregate D Blank E Water F Admixtures .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Mix Design Submit a mix design on the MnDOT Concrete Mix Design Submittal Sheet to the Engineer for review and approval in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer at least days before placing the grout .
Design the CLSM in accordance with Table or Table and meeting the requirements of ASTM C . A. CLSM Low Density Use the CLSM low density design when no water is present and no water intrudes during the setting process based on the following proportions per unit batch Table CLSM Low Density Design Materials Proportions per unit batch and mix parameters Portland cement lb Total cementitious portland cement and Class C fly ash lb Watercementitious ratio .
Preformed foam cu .
ft Grout cast density lb lb per cu .
ft Slump in in day compressive strength psi psi Provide foaming agent meeting the requirements of ASTM C when tested in accordance with ASTM C . The Contractor may use other admixtures if approved by the mix designer and the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
Provide cementitious material from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will review the concrete mix design submittal and approve if the concrete mix design meets contract requirements .
The Engineer will base final approval for payment on satisfactory field placement and performance .
A. CLSM High Density Use the CLSM high density design when it is not possible to dewater keep water out of the annular space during grouting or both based on the following proportions per unit batch .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table CLSM High Density Design Materials Proportions per unit batch and mix parameters Portland cement lb Total cementitious portland cement and Class C fly ash lb Fine aggregate lb Watercementitious ratio .
Preformed foam .
cu .
ft Grout cast density lb lb per cu .
ft Slump in in day compressive strength psi psi Provide foaming agent meeting the requirements of ASTM C when tested in accordance with ASTM C . The Contractor may use other admixtures if approved by the mix designer and the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
Provide cementitious material from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will review the concrete mix design submittal and approve if the concrete mix design meets contract requirements .
The Engineer will base final approval for payment on satisfactory field placement and performance .
B Grouting Procedure Selected grouting pressures external to the liner pipe may collapse the liner pipe .
Design a grouting procedure to fill voids between the existing culvert and the liner pipe but will not collapse the liner pipe .
Provide a pressure gauge to measure the grouting pressure and a method to measure the volume of injected grout .
Submit a grouting plan to the Engineer for approval .
C Placement Use grout to fill voids between the existing culvert and pipe liner including breaks or holes in the existing culvert .
Secure the pipe liner to the invert of the existing culvert by fasteners or blocks or construct multiple grout lifts to prevent the pipe liner from floating during the grouting operations .
After grouting the liner to the in place culvert encapsulate the remaining length of liner with Mix No .
G concrete at least in thick .
Finish the inlet end with a mitered fillettransition between the in place culvert and the inside of the liner .
Use cylindrical wooden plugs or other equivalent material approved by the Engineer to plug grout holes .
After the grout has set remove the plugs and fill with concrete . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure by the volume of grout injected into the void between the existing pipe culvert and the liner pipe .
The Engineer will deduct accountable waste from the quantities measured for payment . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract cubic yard price for CLSM includes the cost of dewatering cement for securing the pipe liner to the existing culvert and inlet bevel construction .
The Department will pay for CLSM on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
CLSM Low Density cubic yard .
CLSM High Density cubic yard LEAN MIX BACKFILL .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of placing a lean cementitious controlleddensity backfill into utility and culvert trenches or other excavations where the use of conventional compacting equipment is impractical. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS A Concrete The Department will provide mix proportions for lean mix backfill in accordance with .
Submit mix designs in accordance with .. F. Concrete Mix Design Requirements. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Job Mix Proportioning After adding the specified quantities of cement fly ash and water provide the remaining volume consisting of fine aggregate and coarse aggregate .
The Contractor may use admixtures in accordance with .. E Concrete Admixtures .
Adjust the mix at any time to maintain the consistency and strengths specified in Table .
The Engineer will base final approval for payment on satisfactory field placement and performance .
B Batching and Mixing Requirements Provide readymixed lean mix backfill in accordance with Structural Concrete except replace the word concrete with lean mix .
C Lean Mix Backfill Placement Plug openings below the level of the desired backfill that would allow the mix to escape .
Place the lean mix so that it flows around and beneath footings foundations walls pipes or other structures that it was designed to support .
The Department will not require compaction or mechanical vibration when lean mix backfill is placed as approved by the Engineer .
Vent or eliminate air pockets that water would normally fill to preclude voids remaining in the completed backfill .
C. Curing and Protection Maintain the air in contact with lean mix backfill surfaces at temperatures above freezing for at least h. The Department will not require additional curing after the evaporation of the substantial water gain on the surface . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT If the contract specifies Lean Mix Backfill as a contract item the Engineer will measure lean mix backfill as the computed theoretical volume based on the weight of the individual batch ingredients .
The Engineer will deduct the volume of accountable waste from the measurement of lean mix backfill . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will include the cost of lean mix backfill and common backfill with other relevant contract items unless otherwise shown on the plans .
The contract cubic yard price for Lean Mix Backfill includes the cost of providing the lean mix backfill and the cost of forming plugging placing venting and protecting .
Item No .
Item Unit .
Lean Mix Backfill cubic yard WALKS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing concrete or bituminous walks .
Concrete walks include concrete median walk and concrete truck aprons. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS A Concrete A .
Concrete Walk Mix No .
F A .
Concrete Walk Exposed Aggregate Finish Mix No .
FEX or FEX A .
Concrete Walk Colored Mix No .
FCO B Preformed Joint Filler C Bituminous C. Bituminous Walk Mix No .
SPWEBB D Curing Materials D. Burlap Curing Blankets D. PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound D. Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound D. Plastic Curing Blankets E Granular Materials .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Foundation Preparations Excavate shape and compact the foundation to a firm uniform bearing surface to the dimensions and grade as shown on the plans and in accordance with Excavation and Embankment Subgrade Preparation and Aggregate Base .
B Sawing Concrete Walk Saw existing concrete walk to produce a neat line for the new work .
C Forms Provide forms made of nonreactive metal or wood or other material in accordance with Method and Equipment capable of maintaining the concrete until the concrete can retain the molded shape .
Provide forms with a height at least equal to the walk thickness of the formed concrete shown on the plans .
Support the forms on the foundation to maintain the line and grade shown on the plans .
Before placing the concrete coat the contact surfaces of the forms with an approved form treating material in accordance with Form Coating Material .
Leave forms in place for at least h after placing the concrete unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
D Placing and Finishing Concrete The Concrete Contractor or Subcontractor shall have at least two people with a current ACI concrete flatwork technician or flatwork finisher certification and at least one of them must be onsite for all concrete pours .
Wet the foundation and forms before placing the concrete .
Prevent segregation of the concrete during placement .
Consolidate the concrete to fill voids using internal vibration .
Strikeoff the concrete to the grade shown on the plans and float the surface smooth .
After the water sheen disappears edge the joints and lightly brush the surface to a uniform texture .
D .. a Exposed Aggregate Finish Provide concrete Mix No .
FEX or FEX with multicolored rounded stone modified for exposed aggregate construction. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Use surface retardation meeting the Type B requirements in Admixtures for Concrete to produce a medium to deep exposure on the aggregate finish making the aggregate the dominant surface feature .
Do not embed or top seed the aggregate .
Apply retardant coating immediately after completion of the concrete surface screeding edging and jointing .
Apply retardant as recommended by the manufacturer to produce a ¼ in ⅛ in etch of mortar removal after final concrete set .
Use pressurized water to remove surface mortar .
Do not loosen individual aggregate particles with the pressurized water .
After the Engineer approves the exposed aggregate finish apply a percent muriatic acid solution to the exposed aggregate surfaces .
Allow the acid solution to interact with the exposed aggregate surface for min to min before flushing the surface with water .
Cover the concrete with white polyethylene sheeting to continue curing .
Before applying sealer remove staining or streaking from the exposed aggregate surface resulting from the moist curing .
Seal the exposed aggregate finish with two coats of a clear acrylic based compound with at least percent solids meeting the requirements of ASTM C . D .. b Colored Concrete Provide concrete Mix No .
FCO with approved color additive for colored concrete walk construction .
For color verification provide sample chips of specified colors indicating color additive numbers and required dosage rates .
Samples indicate general color and may slightly vary from concrete finished in the field .
One week prior to first placement of the colored concrete on the project hold a preconstruction meeting with the Agency Prime Contractor Concrete Contractor ReadyMix Concrete Representative Testing Agency and Colored Admixture Manufacturer Representative to discuss the proposed colored concrete placement and application materials .
D .. b Colored Concrete ContractorInstaller Qualifications Prequalified Colored Concrete ContractorsInstallers shall meet the following requirements Minimum of five years of experience with work of similar scope and quality .
A minimum of five projects including references completed in the last five years by ContractorInstaller .
Listed on the MnDOT Prequalified colored concrete contractorinstallers vendor list available from the MnDOT website .
D .. b Test Panels Prior to placing any colored concrete demonstrate workmanship by constructing test panels of the colored concrete in accordance with the following For each color a separate test panel is required .
At a location approved by the Engineer .
Using the same processes techniques personnel materials concrete supplier and concrete plant intended for use on permanent work including stamping and curingsealing procedures .
The minimum size of the test panels shall be x x unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Retain and protect Engineer accepted test panels as the visual standard for the work of this section and quality standard for permanent work .
D .. b Placing Finishing and Curing Colored Concrete Construct colored concrete in accordance with products processes and techniques used on approved test panels .
Do not add water at any time to the slab surface while finishing .
Do not over finish the concrete edges .
After completing final finishing operations cure and seal all exposed concrete surfaces meeting the following requirements and methods Use a curingsealing compound conforming to ASTM C Liquid MembraneForming Compounds Having Special Properties for Curing and Sealing Concrete Type Class A acrylate polymer .
Apply the curingsealing compound within minutes of concrete placementform removal or once the bleed water has dissipated unless the Engineer directs otherwise in accordance with .. E .. a Membrane Curing Method .
Ensure that the curingsealing compound is applied homogeneously to provide a uniform coverage on all exposed colored concrete surfaces including the edges. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Apply an additional application of curingsealing compound a minimum of days after placement of the colored concrete .
Cover adjacent finished surfaces to protect from splatters and excess materials during colored concrete installation and curingsealing .
D. Joint Construction Divide the walk into square panels of uniform size no greater than sq .
ft and outlined with contraction or expansion joints as shown on the plans .
Provide vertical and straight joints parallel with or at right angles to the walk centerline .
Align the joints with joints in adjoining work unless isolated by a ½ in preformed joint filler .
The Contractor may form or saw the joints in walking surfaces as approved by the Engineer .
If forming the joints round joints within the walking surface with a ¼ in radius grooving tool and round edges of the walk with an edging tool having a radius no greater than ½ in .
Extend contraction joints to a depth of at least percent of the walk thickness .
If saw cutting provide ⅛ in wide contraction joints .
Provide joint filler in accordance with Preformed Joint Fillers that is ½ in wide and equal in depth to the full thickness of the walk .
Modify joint construction if a fixed object or structure extends through the walk as directed by the Engineer .
Place preformed joint filler material ½ in thick adjacent to fixed objects to separate the object from the abutting concrete edges .
D. Workmanship and Quality The Engineer will use a ft straight edge to measure surface tolerance .
The Department considers vertical deviations in the surface greater than in .
and line deviations greater than ½ in .
from the required location as unacceptable work .
Remove and replace unacceptable work as directed by the Engineer .
E Concrete Curing and Protection After completing final finishing operations cure all exposed concrete surfaces .
Use one of the following curing methods In accordance with .. E .. a Membrane Curing Method place the membrane curing compound conforming to PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound or Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound within minutes of concrete placement or once the bleed water has dissipated unless the Engineer directs otherwise .
Place the membrane curing compound on the edges within minutes after permanent removal of the forms or curing blankets unless the contract requires otherwise .
Place plastic curing blankets or completely saturated burlap curing blankets as soon as practical without marring the surface in accordance with .. E .. b Curing Blanket Method .
For exposed aggregate placement cure in accordance with .. D .. a Exposed Aggregate Finish .
For colored concrete placement cure in accordance with .. D .. b Colored Concrete .
Failure to comply with these provisions will result in the Engineer applying a monetary deduction in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the contract does not contain a separate contract item for Structural Concrete the Department will apply a monetary deduction of .
per cubic yard or percent of the Contractorprovided invoice amount for the concrete in question whichever is less .
Whenever weather conditions are such as to cause unusual or adverse placing and finishing conditions expedite the application of a curing method or temporarily suspend the mixing and placing operations as the conditions require .
If necessary to remove the coverings to saw joints or perform other required work and if the Engineer approves remove the covering for the minimum time required to complete that work .
E. Curing Methods E .. a Membrane Curing Method Before application agitate the curing compound as received in the shipping container to obtain a homogenous mixture .
Protect membrane curing compounds from freezing before application .
Handle and apply the membrane curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Apply the curing compound with an approved airless spraying machine in accordance with the following At a minimum rate of gal per sq .
ft of surface curing area .
Apply homogeneously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces equal to a white sheet of typing paper at the time of application .
Some MnDOT approved curing compounds .
Minnesota Standard Specifications may have a base color i.e .
yellow that can not comply with the above requirement .
In this case provide a uniform solid opaque consistency meeting the intent of the above requirement .
If the curing compound is damaged during the curing period immediately repair the damaged area by re spraying .
The Engineer will approve the airless spraying machine for use if it is equipped with the following A recirculating bypass system that provides for continuous agitation of the reservoir material Separate filters for the hose and nozzle and Multiple or adjustable nozzle system that provides for variable spray patterns .
If the Engineer determines that the initial or corrective spraying may result in unsatisfactory curing the Engineer may require the Contractor to use the blanket curing method at no additional cost to the Department .
E .. b Curing Blanket Method After completion of the finishing operations and without marring the concrete cover the concrete with curing blankets .
Install in a manner that envelops the exposed concrete and prevents loss of water vapor .
After the concrete has cured apply membrane curing compound to the concrete surfaces that will remain exposed in the completed work .
E. Protection Against Rain Protect the concrete from damage due to rain .
Have available at the site of the work materials for protection of the edges and surface of concrete .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the raindamaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
E. Protection Against Cold Weather If the national weather service forecast for the construction area predicts air temperatures of F or less within the next h and the Contractor wishes to place concrete submit a cold weather protection plans .
Protect the concrete from damage including freezing due to cold weather .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
E .. a Cold Weather Protection Plan Submit a proposed time schedule and plans for cold weather protection of concrete in writing to the Engineer for acceptance that provides provisions for adequately protecting the concrete during placement and curing .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer accepts the cold weather protection plans .
F Bituminous Place the bituminous mixture in accordance with .
G Backfill Construction Protect newly placed concrete from damage by adjacent vibratory or backfilling operations for a minimum of hours .
Perform vibratory operations and backfilling h after placing the concrete or after the concrete reaches a compressive strength of at least psi .
The Engineer will cast cure and test the concrete field control specimens in accordance with .. G .. b Field Control Strength Cylinders .
If damage results from any of these operations the Engineer will suspend all operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and obtains the Engineers approval of a new method .
The Engineer may require removal and replacement of the damaged concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Contractor may use handoperated concrete consolidation equipment and walk behind vibratory plate compactors h after placing the concrete and other equipment as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
After the curing is complete and without subjecting the concrete work to damaging stresses perform the backfill or embankment construction to the elevations shown on the plans .
Use suitable grading materials from the excavation for backfill material in accordance with Excavation and Embankment unless otherwise required by the contract .
Place and compact the backfill material in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
Dispose of surplus excavated materials in accordance with Excavation and Embankment . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure each uniform thickness item separately by top surface area. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for concrete walk colored at the contract price per unit of measure is full compensation for all cost to providing concrete walk and concrete truck aprons to the specified lines grade and minimum thickness specified in the Plans including but not limited to Forming joint filler material colored concrete test panels furnishing and placing concrete concrete compaction by vibration concrete curing and protecting the completed work from damage .
The Engineer will measure and pay for concrete truck aprons colored as ___ in Concrete Walk .
The Contract Unit Price for concrete or bituminous construction includes furnishing the materials and placement of the Work to the lines and grade of the Plan as specified .
The Department will pay for walk construction on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
___ in Concrete Walk square foot .
___ in Colored Concrete Walk square foot .
___ in Bituminous Walk square foot CONCRETE CURBING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing castinplace concrete curbs curb and gutter solid medians driveway pavement and other similar traffic delineation or service items. . MATERIALS A Concrete For each method of placement use the following mix designations A. Manual Placement Mix No .
F A. Slipform Placement Mix No .
F B Reinforcement Bars C Steel Fabric D Preformed Joint Filler E Curing Materials E. Burlap Curing Blankets E. PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound E. Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound E. Plastic Curing Blankets F Granular Materials .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Foundation Preparations Excavate shape and compact the foundation to a firm uniform bearing surface that conforms to the dimensions and grade shown on the plans and in accordance with Excavation and Embankment Subgrade Preparation and Aggregate Base .
B Forms Provide forms made of metal wood or other materials in accordance with Methods and Equipment capable of maintaining the concrete until the concrete can retain its molded shape .
Provide side forms with a depth at least equal to the edge thickness of the concrete being formed .
Support the forms on the foundation and restrain at the line and grade as shown on the plans .
For radius less than ft use flexible or curved forms approved by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Before placing concrete coat the contact surfaces of forms with an approved form treating material in accordance with Form Coating Material .
Keep side forms in place for at least h after casting the concrete .
C Placing and Finishing Concrete The Concrete Contractor or Subcontractor shall have at least two people with a current ACI concrete flatwork technician or flatwork finisher certification and at least one of them must be onsite for all concrete pours .
Immediately before placing the concrete wet the foundation and the forms .
Place the concrete in a manner that will prevent segregation .
Consolidate the concrete to fill voids using internal vibration .
The Engineer will allow hand tamping of stacked concrete during forming of the curb .
Strikeoff the concrete to the grade shown on the plans and float the surface smooth .
After the water sheen has disappeared round joints and edges to the radii shown on the plans .
Lightly brush concrete surfaces exposed to view to a uniform texture .
D Slipform Machine Placement Instead of using fixed forms the Contractor may use a slipform machine capable of placing and forming concrete to the dimensions quality workmanship and appearance as required by the contract .
Hand finish the surface to the finish and texture as required by the contract .
E Joint Construction Place transverse expansion joints filled with ½ in preformed joint filler material at the ends of curved sections and at the ends of the curved portions of entrance and street returns .
Place longitudinal expansion joints as shown on the plans .
Place expansion joints with preformed joint filler material at locations where the concrete surrounds or adjoins an existing fixed object such as a fire hydrant building foundation or other rigid structure .
Provide contraction joints at the following intervals except as otherwise shown on the plans Adjacent to bituminous mainline every ft maximum Adjacent to concrete mainline match the adjacent concrete pavement joints and In solid median construction where the width is at least feet wide install joints not to exceed a maximum of square feet .
Form or saw the contraction joints to a depth to prevent randomuncontrolled cracking .
Construct joints perpendicular to the subgrade .
Align joints with joints in adjoining work unless a ½ in preformed joint filler isolates the work .
Place transverse joints at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the work unless otherwise required by the contract .
Use an edging tool with a radius no greater than ½ in to round edges of longitudinal construction joints between a concrete median or gutter section and a concrete pavement .
Do not saw or seal longitudinal construction joints between a concrete median and concrete pavement or between a gutter section and concrete pavement unless specified otherwise in the plans .
F Metal Reinforcement Provide and place metal reinforcement as shown on the plans and in accordance with Metal Reinforcement .
G Concrete Curing and Protection After completing final finishing operations cure all exposed concrete surfaces .
Use one of the following curing methods In accordance with .. G .. a Membrane Curing Method place the membrane curing compound conforming to PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound or Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound within min of concrete placement or once the bleed water has dissipated unless the Engineer directs otherwise .
Place the membrane curing compound on the edges within min after permanent removal of the forms or curing blankets unless the contract requires otherwise .
Place plastic curing blankets or completely saturated burlap curing blankets as soon as practical without marring the surface in accordance with .. G .. b Curing Blanket Method. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Failure to comply with these provisions will result in the Engineer applying a monetary deduction in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the contract does not contain a separate contract item for Structural Concrete the Department will apply a monetary deduction of .
per cu .
yd or percent of the Contractorprovided invoice amount for the concrete in question whichever is less .
Whenever weather conditions are such as to cause unusual or adverse placing and finishing conditions expedite the application of a curing method or temporarily suspend the mixing and placing operations as the conditions require .
If necessary to remove the coverings to saw joints or perform other required work and if the Engineer approves remove the covering for the minimum time required to complete that work .
G. Curing Methods G .. a Membrane Curing Method Before application agitate the curing compound as received in the shipping container to obtain a homogenous mixture .
Protect membrane curing compounds from freezing before application .
Handle and apply the membrane curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Apply the curing compound with an approved airless spraying machine in accordance with the following At a minimum rate of gal per sq .
ft of surface curing area .
Apply homogeneously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces equal to a white sheet of typing paper at the time of application .
Some MnDOT approved curing compounds may have a base color i.e .
yellow that can not comply with the above requirement .
In this case provide a uniform solid opaque consistency meeting the intent of the above requirement .
If the curing compound is damaged during the curing period immediately repair the damaged area by re spraying .
The Engineer will approve the airless spraying machine for use if it is equipped with the following A recirculating bypass system that provides for continuous agitation of the reservoir material Separate filters for the hose and nozzle and Multiple or adjustable nozzle system that provides for variable spray patterns .
If the Engineer determines that the initial or corrective spraying result in unsatisfactory curing the Engineer may require the Contractor to use the blanket curing method at no additional cost to the Department .
G .. b Curing Blanket Method After completion of the finishing operations and without marring the concrete cover the concrete with curing blankets .
Install in a manner that envelops the exposed concrete and prevents loss of water vapor .
After the concrete has cured apply membrane curing compound to the concrete surfaces that will remain exposed in the completed work .
G. Protection Against Rain Protect the concrete from damage due to rain .
Have available near the site of the work materials for protection of the edges and surface of concrete .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the raindamaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G. Protection Against Cold Weather If the national weather service forecast for the construction area predicts air temperatures of F or less within the next h and the Contractor wishes to place concrete submit a cold weather protection plan .
Protect the concrete from damage including freezing due to cold weather .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
G .. a Cold Weather Protection Plan Submit a proposed time schedule and plans for cold weather protection of concrete in writing to the Engineer for acceptance that provides provisions for adequately protecting the concrete during placement and curing .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer accepts the cold weather protection plans .
H Backfill Construction Protect newly placed concrete from damage by adjacent vibratory or backfilling operations for a minimum of hours .
Perform vibratory operations and backfilling at least h after placing the concrete or after the concrete reaches a compressive strength of at least psi .
The Engineer will cast cure and test the concrete field control specimens in accordance with .. G .. b Field Control Strength Cylinders .
If damage results from any of these operations the Engineer will suspend all operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and obtains the Engineers approval of a new method .
The Engineer may .
Minnesota Standard Specifications require removal and replacement of the damaged concrete in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Contractor may use handoperated concrete consolidation equipment and walk behind vibratory plate compactors h after placing the concrete and other equipment as approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
After the curing is complete and without subjecting the concrete work to damaging stresses perform the backfill or embankment construction to the elevations as shown on the plans .
Use suitable grading materials from the excavations in accordance with Excavation and Embankment unless the contract requires otherwise .
Place and compact the backfill material in accordance Excavation and Embankment .
Dispose of surplus excavated materials in accordance with Excavation and Embankment .
I Workmanship and Finish Ensure the surface contour and texture of the completed concrete work is uniform and meets the lines and grades as shown on the plans .
Finish the flow line surface of gutters to eliminate low spots and avoid entrapment of water .
The Engineer will use a ft straightedge to measure the surface .
The Engineer will consider concrete work with deviations in or greater in any ft length of finish curb and gutter either horizontal or vertical as unacceptable work .
Remove and replace unacceptable work as directed by the Engineer .
If the Engineer does not direct the removal and replacement of unacceptable work the Engineer will reduce the contract unit price for the unacceptable concrete work in accordance with the following For deviations from ⅜ in to in payment at percent of the contract unit price and For deviations greater than in payment at percent of the contract unit price .
Repair or replace concrete with random or uncontrolled cracks as directed by the Engineer .
Submit the intended repair technique to the Engineer for approval .
Perform repairs at no additional cost to the Department .
If the repair fails replace the concrete at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will accept repairs in accordance with .
Project Acceptance . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will not make measurement deductions for castings or minor fixtures in the work .
A Length For curbs and curb and gutter including the curb cuts and curb returns the Engineer will measure the lineal length along the face of the curb at the gutter line .
In the case of transitions from one size or design to another the Engineer will measure the entire transition for payment under the item with the higher contract unit price .
For solid medians and other construction with uniform widths and symmetrical cross sections the Engineer will measure the length along the center of the longitudinal axis .
B Area For solid medians and other construction with nonuniform widths and nonsymmetrical cross sections the Engineer will measure by the square yard area .
The area is based on the width at grade by the exposed length .
The Engineer will disregard variations in concrete thickness caused by integral construction .
The Engineer will separately measure driveway pavement of each specified thickness . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for concrete curb and gutter concrete curb concrete medians and concrete driveway pavement at the contract price per unit of measure is full compensation for all cost of providing concrete curb and gutter concrete curb concrete medians and concrete driveway pavement to the specified lines grade and minimum thickness specified in the Plans including but not limited to Forming joint filler material furnishing and placing concrete concrete compaction by vibration concrete curing and protecting the completed work from damage .
The Department will pay for concrete curbing median and driveway construction on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Concrete Curb and Gutter Design linear foot .
Concrete Curb Design linear foot .
Concrete Median square yard .
___ in Concrete Driveway Pavement square yard Minnesota Standard Specifications CONCRETE MEDIAN BARRIERS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing or reconstructing castinplace or precast median barriers for traffic lane separation. . MATERIALS A Concrete A .
Fixed Form CastInPlace Mix No .
M A. Slipform Placement Mix No .
M A. Precast Mix No .
M B Reinforcement Bars C Dowel Bars D Precast Concrete Median Barrier E Curing Materials E. Burlap Curing Blanket E. PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound E. Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound E. Plastic Curing Blankets F Granular Materials .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General The Contractor may combine castinplace and precast concrete construction as approved by the Engineer if the plans do not specify the construction type and if the construction maintains structural strength continuity or both .
Use a tongue and groove joint with tied dowels or reinforcement bars or other positive connection to interlock the connection between a new median barrier and an existing barrier to prevent movement as approved by the Engineer .
Excavate shape and compact the foundation to a firm uniform bearing surface and grade as shown on the plans and in accordance with Excavation and Embankment Subgrade Preparation and Aggregate Base .
B CastInPlace Fixed Form Construction Provide forms made of nonreactive metal wood or other material in accordance with Methods and Equipment capable of maintaining the concrete until the concrete can retain the molded shape .
Provide side forms with a depth at least equal to the edge thickness of the formed concrete .
Support the forms on the foundation to maintain the concrete line and grade as shown on the plans .
Before placing the forms coat the contact surfaces of the forms with an approved form treating material in accordance with Form Coating Material .
Wet the foundation and forms immediately before placing the concrete .
Prevent segregation during placement of concrete .
Use internal vibration to consolidate the concrete and fill voids .
Strikeoff the concrete to the grade as shown on the plans and float the surface smooth .
When the concrete can retain the molded shape remove the forms from the roadway face of the median barrier .
Keep nonroadway face forms in place for at least h after casting the concrete .
Round concrete edges to the radii as shown on the plans after removing the roadway face forms .
C CastInPlace Slipform Construction Rather than using fixed forms the Contractor may use a slipform machine capable of placing and forming concrete to the dimensions quality workmanship and appearance as required by the contract .
Hand finish the concrete surface to the finish and texture as required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Surface Finishes D. CastInPlace Apply an ordinary surface finish in accordance with .. F Finish of Concrete on castinplace concrete median barriers .
D. Precast Place the barrier in its final location .
Obtain the Engineers approval of the surface condition of the barrier before applying the special surface finish treatment on precast concrete median barrier in accordance with .. F Finish of Concrete .
E Concrete Curing and Protection When the contract requires additional surface finishing i.e .
painting cure in accordance with .. E .. b. Curing Blanket Method .
After completing final finishing operations cure all exposed concrete surfaces .
Use one of the following curing methods In accordance with .. E .. a Membrane Curing Method Place the membrane curing compound conforming to PolyAlpha Methylstyrene AMS Membrane Curing Compound or Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound within min of concrete placement or once the bleed water has dissipated unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Place the membrane curing compound on the edges within min after permanent removal of the forms or curing blankets unless the contract requires otherwise .
Place plastic curing blankets or completely saturated burlap curing blankets as soon as practical without marring the surface in accordance with .. E .. b Curing Blanket Method .
Failure to comply with these provisions will result in the Engineer applying a monetary deduction in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the contract does not contain a separate contract item for Structural Concrete the Department will apply a monetary deduction of .
per cubic yard or percent of the Contractorprovided invoice amount for the concrete in question whichever is less .
Whenever weather conditions are such as to cause unusual or adverse placing and finishing conditions expedite the application of a curing method or temporarily suspend the mixing and placing operations as the conditions require .
If necessary to remove the coverings to saw joints or perform other required work and if the Engineer approves remove the covering for the minimum time required to complete that work .
E. Curing Methods E .. a Membrane Curing Method Before application agitate the curing compound as received in the shipping container to obtain a homogenous mixture .
Protect membrane curing compounds from freezing before application .
Handle and apply the membrane curing compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Apply the curing compound with an approved airless spraying machine in accordance with the following At a minimum rate of gal per sq .
ft of surface curing area .
Apply homogeneously to provide a uniform solid white opaque coverage on all exposed concrete surfaces equal to a white sheet of typing paper at the time of application .
Some MnDOT approved curing compounds may have a base color i.e .
yellow that can not comply with the above requirement .
In this case provide a uniform solid opaque consistency meeting the intent of the above requirement .
If the curing compound is damaged during the curing period immediately repair the damaged area by re spraying .
The Engineer will approve the airless spraying machine for use if it is equipped with the following A recirculating bypass system that provides for continuous agitation of the reservoir material Separate filters for the hose and nozzle and Multiple or adjustable nozzle system that provides for variable spray patterns .
If the Engineer determines that the initial or corrective spraying result in unsatisfactory curing the Engineer may require the Contractor to use the blanket curing method at no additional cost to the Department. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E .. b Curing Blanket Method After completion of the finishing operations and without marring the concrete cover the concrete with curing blankets .
Install in a manner that envelops the exposed concrete and prevents loss of water vapor .
After the concrete has cured apply membrane curing compound to the concrete surfaces that will remain exposed in the completed work .
E. Protection Against Rain Protect the concrete from damage due to rain .
Have available near the site of the work materials for protection of the edges and surface of concrete .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the raindamaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
E. Protection Against Cold Weather If the national weather service forecast for the construction area predicts air temperatures of F or less within the next h and the Contractor wishes to place concrete submit a cold weather protection plan .
Protect the concrete from damage including freezing due to cold weather .
Should any damage result the Engineer will suspend operations until the Contractor takes corrective action and may subject the damaged concrete to Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
E .. a Cold Weather Protection Plan Submit a proposed time schedule and plans for cold weather protection of concrete in writing to the Engineer for acceptance that provides provisions for adequately protecting the concrete during placement and curing .
Do not place concrete until the Engineer accepts the cold weather protection plans .
F Finish and Workmanship Produce concrete barrier to the dimensions and height shown in the plans .
Finish concrete barrier to a neat uniform surface finish with a light vertical broom texture prior to applying the curing medium .
The Engineer may use a ft straightedge to measure the barrier surface for irregularities .
The Engineer will consider surface irregularities greater than the following as unacceptable work .
Top barrier surface with high or low spots elevation irregularities greater than ¼ inch. . Slipformed placed barrier faces with high or low spots convexconcave irregularities greater than ½ in . .
Fixed form placed barrier faces with high or low spots convexconcave irregularities greater than in. . Vertical transitions of barrier faces with high or low spots convexconcave irregularities greater than in .
The Engineer will evaluate unacceptable work in accordance with the Table .
Table Monetary Adjustments for Workmanship Amount of Surface Irregularities Measured by Length Corrective Action Monetary Adjustment of median barrier length Monetary Adjustment The Engineer will reduce payment for the length of outoftolerance barrier by up to percent of the Contract Unit Price .
of median barrier length Remove and Replace or Monetary Adjustment If the Engineer does not direct removal and replacement the Engineer will reduce payment for the length of outoftolerance barrier by percent of the Contract Unit Price .
Based on the measured length for each separate barrier pay item on the project . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will lineally measure each Type A and Type AA concrete median barrier on the top of the barrier measured along the midpoint of the top width .
The Engineer will lineally measure Type A barrier with glare screen in accordance with Type A and Type AA barrier or measured along both sides the barrier with a computed average of both measurements .
The Engineer will take both measurements at the interface of the barrier and adjacent pavement .
The Engineer will lineally measure transitions and special and modified barriers by the length on the top of the barrier measured along the midpoint of the top width .
The Engineer will separately measure each type of concrete median barrier .
When portable median barrier is removed from the Project roadway and the Engineer directs stockpiling the portable median barrier on or near the Project site for use again in a later phase of the work the Engineer will separately measure the stockpiled length of barrier and also the length of barrier reinstalled on the Project roadway .
The Engineer will only measure the stockpiled barrier when the contract unit price for double payment of Relocate Portable Precast Concrete Barrier Design .
Minnesota Standard Specifications andor Relocate Portable Precast Concrete Barrier Design Anchored would equate to lower price than furnishing Portable Precast Concrete Barrier Design . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Contract Unit Price for concrete median barrier construction includes furnishing the materials placement of the Work to the lines and grade on the plans and surface finish as specified .
The Contract Unit Price for portable precast concrete barrier includes all costs of installation and removal once .
The Contract Unit Price for relocating portable precast concrete barrier includes all removing stockpiling and reusing as directed by the Engineer .
The Department will pay for concrete median barrier on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Concrete Median Barrier Design ___ Type ___ linear foot .
Concrete Median Barrier and Glare Screen Design ___ Type ___ linear foot .
Concrete Median Barrier Single Slope Design ___ Type ___ linear foot .
Portable Precast Concrete Barrier Design ___ linear foot .
Relocate Portable Precast Concrete Barrier Design ___ linear foot Current standard plate Type A Type AA Type AL Transition A Step or AA Step Current standard plan BITUMINOUS CURB .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing a curb using bituminous material. . MATERIALS Use the same type of bituminous mixture for the curb as the type specified for the pavement wearing course in accordance with Plant Mixed Asphalt Pavement. . CONSTRUCTION A Tack Apply a tack coat as specified in Bituminous Tack Coat on the pavement wearing course beneath the curb .
B Equipment Place bituminous curb using an automatic curb machine that shapes and compacts the mixture to the profile shown on Standard Plate .
The Contractor may only manually place the bituminous curb in locations unreachable by the machine if approved by the Engineer .
C Finishing Place curb uniform in appearance and texture and true to line and grade . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure bituminous curb by length along the face of the curb at gutter line . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract linear foot price for Bituminous Curb includes the cost of construction and providing the bituminous mixture .
The Department will pay for bituminous curb on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Bituminous Curb linear foot LIGHTING SYSTEMS .
DESCRIPTION A General This work consists of constructing lighting systems and electrical systems as specified in the Contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Qualifications of Workers The provisions of are hereby supplemented with the following Signal and Lighting Certification When the Contractor is working on Traffic Signal Systems or Lighting Systems provide at least one Contractor employee on the site who is MnDOT Signal and Lighting Certified to perform or directly supervise the installation and testing of any MnDOT Traffic Signal System or Lighting System .
MnDOTs Office of Traffic Safety and Technology OTST provides Signal and Lighting Certification .
For information contact OTST at phone number .
C Definitions Refer to Abbreviations and Definitions and this section for the definitions of abbreviations words and phrases pertaining to lighting systems and related work .
Refer to the National Electric Code article for the definition of the term Listed .
Refer to the National Electric Code article for the definition of the term Labeled .
Refer to the National Electric Code article for the definition of the term Service .
Use a National Recognized Testing Laboratory NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor .
Ensure the testing laboratory is listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests conducted as required by this section .
Use the definitions in this section unless otherwise defined elsewhere in the Contract .
Bell End The end of a piece of rigid PVC conduit that flares out to allow connection of an additional piece of conduit .
Cut Sheet Catalog Sheet or Specification Sheet A document showing a finished product including part numbers and an ordering matrix if required .
Lighting System A complete lighting system consisting of lighting units lighting service cabinet conductors and other components required for complete and operational lighting system .
End Bell The rigid PVC conduit fitting that is glued on at the end of a conduit to protect the conductors during pulling operations .
Feed Point The lighting service cabinet which includes the point of connection between the service conductors and the circuitry of the lighting system .
HPS High Pressure Sodium .
LED Light Emitting Diode .
Lighting Service Cabinet A NRTL listed enclosure containing electric power distribution components and control circuitry for lighting systems .
Light Pole The light pole which may include other external attachments such as transformer base and a mast arms or davits .
Lighting Unit Includes the light pole internal wiring with fuse holder and fuse to the luminaire above ground splices wire holder stainless steel woven wire cloth and luminaire .
Underpass luminaires are lighting units even though they do not include some of these components .
The foundation is not considered as part of this definition .
Shop Drawing A detailed document showing how a specific product will be fabricated and constructed .
This document will also include required material specifications and requirements .
Source of Power SOP The electric utility transformer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Electrical Distribution System Provide a distribution circuit of the lighting system consisting of three conductors plus an equipment grounding conductor EGC .
Configure the conductors to constitute a photoelectric controlled V or V circuit as shown on the Plans .
Install branch circuit conductors or cables with equipment grounding to each lighting unit. . MATERIALS A General A .
Regulations and Code Provide electrical equipment in accordance with .
Traffic Control Signals Materials and meeting the applicable requirements of IES ANSI ICEA AASHTO or ASTM .
Provide conductors as specified in the Contract .
A .
Materials and Electrical Equipment List A .
Material Samples for Testing A .
Tests A .
Warranties Guarantees and Instruction Sheets In addition to the individual warranties provided by product manufacturers provide warranties guarantees and instruction sheets in accordance with .
Traffic Control Signals Materials warrant and guarantee inservice operation of all materials and equipment for year beginning with the turnon of the lighting system .
The Department defines turnon as the time when the complete and operational lighting system meets all installation operational and testing requirements as specified in the Contract .
A. MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List Access lighting system materials listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List .
A .
Shop Drawing Submittals Prepare shop drawing submittals in accordance with for all products not on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List APL .
Submit products as specified in the Contract .
Review shop drawings for accuracy and completeness before submittal .
A. MnDOT Approved Products Materials List Before performing the Work submit to the Engineer in accordance with a Signals and Lighting product materials list of the products selected from MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List to be used on the Project for Signals and Lighting .
Ensure the products selected meet the requirements of this section .
For MnDOTs approved products see MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products website .
In the Signals and Lighting product materials list submitted to the Engineer provide the following information Title the document MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List for Signals and Lighting centered at the top of the document Directly under the title include the Trunk Highway County and State Project number and For each product listed from MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List provide a separate line that includes the following .
Name of the manufacturer .
Name of the product .
Catalog number and .
Quantity ordered for the Project .
This submittal and the Engineers review of the submitted list do not relieve the responsibility for providing products that comply with MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List .
A .
Cut Sheets Catalog Sheets or Specification Sheets Provide cut sheets catalog sheets or specification sheets for MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List products to the Engineer upon request. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Hardware Galvanize ferrous metal hardware except stainless steel in accordance with Galvanized Hardware .
B .
Fasteners B .
Lighting System Anchorages B .. a Lighting Service Cabinet CastInPlace Equipment Pad Anchorages B .. b Lighting Service Cabinet Precast Equipment Pad Anchorages B .. c Bolt Anchorages for Light Pole Foundations B .. d Bolt Bridge and Barrier Pole Anchor Bolt Clusters B .. e Light Pole Steel ScrewIn Foundation and Fasteners B .
Cap Screws Set Screws and Tap Bolts Provide commercial brass or bronze cap screws set screws and tap bolts .
Provide galvanized steel or commercial brass washers .
C Conduit and Accessories C. Rigid Steel Conduit RSC C. Intermediate Metal Conduit IMC C. Nonmetallic Conduit Rigid PVC and HDPE C. Liquid Tight Flexible NonMetallic Conduit LFNCB C. PVC Coated Hot Dipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit PVC Coated RSC C. Junction Boxes C. Conduit Expansion and DeflectionExpansion Fittings D Cables and Conductors D. Direct Buried Lighting Cable D. Conductors D. Overhead Lighting Cable E Light Poles F Luminaires F. Lamps .. G Concrete E H Service Equipment I Blank J Blank K Type B Service Cabinet L Type L Service Cabinet M Type L Service Cabinet N Type Rural Lighting and Flasher RLF Service Cabinet .
Minnesota Standard Specifications O Blank P Blank Q Wood Poles R Handholes S Pulling Vaults T Photoelectric Control U Miscellaneous Materials If the Contract does not specify requirements for materials and electrical equipment provide these materials and equipment as approved by the Engineer .
V Safety Switch W Lighting Units Provide lighting units which include the following Light poles in accordance with .
Luminaires and lamps if required in accordance with .
Wire holders and fuse holders in accordance with .
Miscellaneous equipment required for installation as specified in the Contract .
X Stainless Steel Woven Wire Cloth Y Air Obstruction Lights Z Navigation Lanterns AA Luminaire Wire Holders BB Insulated Wire Splice Connector Blocks CC Fuse Holders DD Grounding Electrodes Ground Rods and Plate Electrodes EE Power Cable Splice Encapsulation Kits Only use Departmentapproved power cable splice encapsulation kits on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
FF Sponge Rubber Expansion Joint GG AntiSeize and Lubricating Compound Bridge Grease HH Labels II Blank JJ Underground NonDetectable Marking Tape .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General The Plan shows approximate locations of component parts .
The Engineer will establish the exact locations on the Project .
Do not perform work on the Project until all underground utilities have been located in accordance with Utility Property and Service. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If damage due to Contractors negligence occurs to direct buried lighting cable within h replace the entire run of cable at no additional cost to the Department .
A run is defined as a segment of direct buried lighting cable from lighting unit to lighting unit or lighting unit to lighting service cabinet .
If damage due to Contractors negligence occurs to individual conductors in conduit and to the conduit or only to the conduit within h replace all the individual conductors in the conduit and the conduit at no additional cost to the Department .
Do not splice direct buried lighting cable and bury underground .
Do not splice damaged conductors and place back in conduit .
Keep highways streets and roads open to traffic during construction in accordance with Maintenance of Traffic .
Protect any openings or uncompleted work that may cause a hazard to vehicle or pedestrian traffic as approved by the Engineer .
A .
Compliance with Electrical Codes and Standards A .
Permits and Inspections A .
Utility Property and Service A .
Installation Requirements A .
Removal Requirements A. Calibration Requirements for Precision Measurement Tools and Test Equipment B Existing Lighting Systems Maintain and keep in operation the new and existing lighting systems within the limits of the project in accordance with Maintenance During Construction but not including .
Winter Suspension until the Engineer accepts the Project in writing as specified in Contractors Responsibility for Work .
Maintain and keep in operation new and existing lighting systems during periods of suspension at no additional cost to the Department .
Maintenance of the new and existing lighting systems includes the following Lighting units Lamps after at least percent of the lamps burn out Lighting service cabinets Photoelectric controls Foundations and equipment pads Lighting cable and conductors Conduit and Damage and knockdowns resulting from Contractor operations .
The Department considers maintenance of the lighting system as incidental work included in the unit prices of the pay items that are part of the lighting system .
If the Engineer determines that others not the Contractor have damaged the lighting system maintain and repair damage as directed by the Engineer .
The Department will pay for the maintenance and repair the damage as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
Provide the Department with the names and phone numbers of contact personnel for both day and night operation for the maintenance of the existing lighting system .
C Excavation and Backfill D Conduit Fittings and Junction Box Installation E Handhole Installation Install a handhole within a direct buried lighting cable run if shown on the Plans .
Install a PVC conduit stubout with the following characteristics for each cable entering and exiting the handhole in At least in long and Nonmetallic end bells on each open end to prevent damage to the direct buried lighting cable .
Conduits entering handholes or pulling vaults must enter thru the barrel or side wall of the enclosure .
Install the approved power cable splice encapsulation kit for direct buried lighting cable and individual conductors for splices in handholes and pulling vaults as specified in the Contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications When pulling vaults are required adjust the compacted aggregate drain bed to match the size and shape of the pulling vault .
Make the drain bed in wider than the base on all sides of the pulling vault .
F Light Foundation and Equipment Pad Installation F. General Construct light foundations and equipment pads in accordance with .
Traffic Control Signals Construction Requirements and as specified elsewhere in the Contract .
F. Light Foundations Orient roadway light foundation anchor rods so that mast arms or davits of light poles are perpendicular to the centerline of the roadway unless specified elsewhere in the Contract .
Install roadside light foundations located in the clear zone in accordance with the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and as follows Ensure foundations placed on roadside slopes do not allow impacting vehicles to snag on either the foundation or anchor rods .
Shape the terrain around the foundations to ensure anchor rods do not project more than a maximum of four in above a horizontal line between the straddling wheels of a vehicle on in centers .
The horizontal line from wheel to wheel connects any point on the ground surface on one side of the light standard foundation including anchor rods to a point on the ground surface on the other side of the light standard foundation including anchor rods .
The horizontal line is aligned radially or perpendicular to the centerline of the roadway .
F .. a Precast Concrete Foundations Install precast concrete foundations for poles as specified in the Contract and as follows Use an appropriate size earth auger bit to excavate a cylindrical drilled shaft into the ground in to in larger in diameter than the diameter of the foundation .
Use auger drilling equipment with adequate capacity including power torque and down thrust to auger a cylindrical drilled shaft to the depth specified in the Contract .
Level and firmly compact the bottom of the shaft so it is flat and horizontal while maintaining the required depth of the shaft Remove the forming tube from the foundation before placing the precast foundation in the shaft Center set and level the foundation in the shaft and maintain a in minimum to a in maximum continuous symmetrical annular void between the precast foundation and surrounding soil Before backfilling place in the annular void the ground rod electrode and ground rod electrode conductor if specified in the Contract and Completely backfill the annular void between the foundation and the surrounding soil of the shaft with firmly compacted fine filter aggregate in accordance with .J .. . Use a mechanical pole tamper to firmly compact each in layer of fine filter aggregate to uniform density . .
Substitution of lean mix backfill per specification instead of fine filter aggregate is permitted .
. .
Protect the conduit openings from lean mix backfill to ensure the conduits are accessible and free of debris if installing direct buried lighting cable and . . h after placing lean mix backfill install the direct buried lighting cable .
Test and verify the compaction of the filtered aggregate backfill material around the foundations in accordance with .F .
at a rate of one test per every ten foundations with a minimum of two tests per Project .
Install preformed joint filler in accordance with between the foundation and sidewalk or concrete area .
F. Equipment Pads Construct equipment pads as specified in the Contract and in accordance with following Install a ground rod electrode in the load side of the equipment pad .
Install a second supplemental ground round electrode outside of the equipment pad not less than ft from the outer edge of the equipment pad with the upper end of the ground rod electrode in to in below ground line or in to in if under sidewalk .
Provide a continuous grounding electrode conductor without a splice or joint terminating one end to the ground busbar in the service cabinet then connecting it to the ground rod electrode in the equipment pad and terminating the other end to the supplemental ground rod electrode .
Provide NRTL listed clamps or exothermic welded connections to connect or terminate the grounding electrode conductor to the ground rod electrodes .
If the equipment pad requires reinforcement bars as specified in the Contract provide a continuous grounding electrode conductor without a splice or joint terminating one end to the reinforcement bar in the pad then connecting it to the busbar in the .
Minnesota Standard Specifications lighting service cabinet as specified in the Contract .
Use NRTL listed clamps for concrete encasement or exothermic welded connections suitable to connect to the reinforcement bar .
Provide rigid PVC conduit raceway to carry the grounding electrode conductor as specified in the Contract .
Use RSC between a pole mounted transformer SOP and the lighting service cabinet .
Use rigid PVC conduit between a pad mounted transformer SOP and the lighting service cabinet .
Install threaded insulated grounding bushings with lay in ground lugs on all RSC ends .
Install end bells on all rigid PVC conduit ends .
G Wiring and Conductor Installation G. General Install wiring and conductors in accordance with .
Traffic Control Signals Construction Requirements and the following Run three AWG service conductors in a separate in RSC from other conductors .
The Contractor may place separate lighting branch circuits in a single conduit maintaining the independence of the circuits .
Run conductors of a lighting branch circuit in a single conduit .
G. Underground Wiring Direct Buried Lighting Cable and Conduit Trench or plow to install direct buried lighting cable to a depth of at least ft .
If plowing provide a vibratory plow with a feed blade that is capable of performing the following Breaking the ground Placing the cable to a predetermined depth Guiding the cable into the bottom of the break through the guide blade chute so that little or no stress is placed on the cable during installation to avoid damage Not pulling the cable in place Placing nondetectable marking tape in to in above the cable or conduit and Closing the break in the ground .
Feed the cable through the plow blade chute and ensure the plow blade does not pull the cable .
Obtain the approval of the Engineer for the plowing method before installing the cable .
If encountering solid rock or other obstructions install the cable in a in conduit at least in deep with a in thick concrete slab above conduit .
Install conduit underground when required in accordance with ..
Install direct buried lighting cable in rigid PVC or HDPE conduit if located under bituminous concrete or other material not considered a top soil .
Provide in conduit if the Contract does not specify size of conduit .
Install direct buried lighting cable or conductors in conduit at the same distance behind the bituminous shoulder or back of curb as the light foundations .
When an obstruction has been encountered in the path of the direct buried lighting cable or conduit reroute the direct buried lighting cable or conduit around the obstruction away from the roadway .
Install an additional ft of slack direct buried lighting cable near the light foundation in an S shape before the cable enters the foundation conduit .
Install underground nondetectable marking tape in to in above the direct buried lighting cable or conduit .
Extend direct buried lighting cable ft above the top of the light foundation .
Leave in place a minimum of in and a maximum in of the outer jacket extending above the conduit .
Pull single conductors directly from reels or spools .
Do not pull off and lay conductors on the ground before installation .
Install direct buried lighting cable from the reel or spool immediately into the ground .
Do not lay direct buried lighting cable for the new lighting system on the ground and use as temporary .
Install conductors in conduit with sufficient slack to allow for contraction. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Run an equipment grounding conductor through conduit as shown in the Plans .
Electrically bond the equipment grounding conductor to all metal poles and equipment .
Install conduit expansion and deflectionexpansion fittings with an internal grounding jumper in sections of conduit raceway shown on the Plans and in accordance with Conduit Expansion and DeflectionExpansion Fittings .
Pull conductors through conduit or raceways by hand to prevent damage to the conductors or their covering .
Provide end bells on PVC conduit openings and prevent damage to the end bells when pulling conductors .
Provide threaded insulated grounding bushings with lay in ground lugs for RSC .
Ensure the conduit is clean and dry when installing the conductors .
Ensure the cable or conductors are clean and dry .
Use a liquid wire pulling lubricant when placing conductors or cable assemblies .
Mark the location of the newly installed direct buried lighting cable and conduits with red flags and red paint immediately after installation .
Throughout the course of the Project protect and preserve the locate flags and paint on the newly installed underground lighting facilities .
In the event the locate marks have been obliterated or are obscured or missing refresh and remark the area .
G. Above Ground Wiring G .. a Light Pole Wiring Provide one continuous length without splice with ground UF cable within the light pole from the required terminations in the light pole base to the luminaire .
Provide an approved luminaire wire holder listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified List under Roadway lighting that supports the luminaire cableconductors within the end of the light pole tenon near the connection point of the luminaire .
Provide a fuse holder listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified List under Roadway lighting with fuse and position the fuse holder inside the light pole base where it can be easily seen and removed when the access door is removed .
Use a A . in X . in fast acting fiber tube cartridge fuse .
Connect the UF cable at one end by properly terminating the individual conductors to their designated tunnel lug terminals in the luminaire .
At the other end of the UF cable properly terminate the individual conductors to the correct circuit conductors located in the light poles base in accordance with the following The individual black Hot conductor to the Load side terminal of the fuse holder Strip insulation from conductor as far back as needed for the connection Before terminating apply an oxide inhibiting compound to the conductor Terminate in accordance with the fuse holder manufacturers recommendations .
After the conductor has been terminated to the fuse holder apply two layers of protective vinyl electrical tape over the terminal and extend the wrap at least in over the incoming conductor insulation The individual white neutral conductor to above ground white neutral circuit conductor and Bare grounding conductor to the equipment grounding conductor splice .
Provide a continuous without splice short piece of AWG stranded insulated conductor and terminate one end to the Hot branch circuit conductor splice located in the light pole base .
Properly terminate the other end of the conductor to the Line side terminal of the fuse holder .
Cover any uninsulated portion of the fuse holder barrel and extend the wrap at least in over the incoming conductor insulation .
G .. b Temporary Overhead Lighting Cable The Contractor may use quadruplex aluminum conductor steel reinforced ACSR cable meeting the requirements of Cables and Conductors to provide temporary power distribution through aerial lines .
Do not support overhead light cable by the luminaires .
G. Splices Do not splice unless specified in the Contract or approved by the Engineer .
If specified in the Contract or approved by the Engineer only splice in handholes pulling vaults service cabinets junction boxes and pole bases .
G .. a Above Ground Splices Provide splices for conductors and cables as specified in the Contract and the following Electrically and mechanically secure splices without solder except loop detector splices .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Use split bolt connectors or other connector types with splices as specified in the Contract Do not use pressure spring type connectors Unless otherwise specified in the Contract use selffusing electrical insulation putty tape to insulate spliced conductors except grounding wires to a thickness of at least .
times that of the original insulation Apply two layers of protective vinyl electrical tape over the selffusing electrical insulation putty tape and extend at least in over the regular conductor insulation and Use waterproof electrical coating to waterproof the entire splice .
If specified in the Contract for a temporary system provide NRTL listed connectors designed to prevent direct contact between the aluminum and copper conductors for splices between aluminum and copper conductors .
Provide NRTL listed terminals for use with aluminum wire for terminals used on aluminum conductors .
Tighten the connections to the manufacturer recommended torque .
Approved insulated wire splice connector blocks listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting may be used in light pole bases instead of split bolt connectors .
Apply two layers of protective vinyl electrical tape over the insulated wire splice connector block in the area where the conductors enter the block .
Extend the wrap at least in over the incoming conductor insulation .
G .. b Under Ground Cable Splices Unless specified in the Contract or approved in writing by the District Traffic Engineer do not use underground splices .
Provide power cable splice encapsulation kits listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting if the Contract specifies or the Engineer approves the use of underground direct buried splices .
Direct Buried Underground Cable Splice Provide and install a direct buried underground cable splice as shown on the Plan and as follows .
Splice each individual cable together using a NRTL listed compressiontype butt splice barrel connector that is rated for the size of conductor being spliced. . Crimp the barrel connector to the conductors using the manufacturer specific compression tool. . Cover the entire wire splice with appropriately sized shrink tubing .
The shrink tubing must also cover a minimum of ¼ in of the conductor insulation on both sides of the splice .
After the tubing is slid into position heatshrink to form a tight seal around the splice and the insulation of the conductor on both sides of the splice. . Wrap each conductor splice after compression and installation of the shrink tubing with at least two layers of electrical tape to insulate individual conductors before encapsulation. . Splice together the shielding by drilling a hole in each piece of shield and then bolting the pieces together using brass nuts bolts and flat washers to form an electrical bond between the two pieces .
The bolt head faces the cables and the shaft of the bolt faces outward. . Assemble all splices per the manufacturers installation instructions. . Place the entire cable splice inside the approved power cable splice encapsulation kit ensuring that when the encapsulating material is poured in the mold it seals up the conductor splices cable shield and the outer jacket of the direct buried lighting cable and forms one complete assembly .
Ensure that no individual conductor insulation or cable shield is exposed when the splice is complete . .
Provide Power Cable Splice Encapsulation Kits listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products list under Roadway lighting .
Assemble the power cable splice encapsulation kit per the manufacturers installation instructions and as follows .. Wrap electrical insulating tape around the end of each epoxy resin mold where it meets the outer jacket of the cable assembly to prevent epoxy from leaking out of the mold before curing .
..
Allow the resin to harden and cool .
.. Test all conductors of the splice to ensure compliance with MnDOT .K .
Two Way Underground Handhole Cable Splice Provide and install a two way underground handhole cable splices as shown on the Plan and as follows .
Provide adequate slack in the cable assembly to allow each individual cable to extend at least ft above the top of the handhole before stripping the cable . .
Strip off the outer jacket of the cable assembly to within in of where the cable enters the handhole . .
Unwind the copper shield to within in of where the cable enters the hand hole. . Splice together the shielding by drilling a hole in each piece of shield and then bolting the pieces together with brass nuts bolts and flat washers to form an electrical bond between the two pieces of copper shielding . .
Apply pole base terminal block coating to the entire shield splice point. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide Pole Base Terminal Block Coatings listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Splice each individual conductor of the conductor cable assemblies separately . .
Maintain proper circuit color identification within each splice. . Splice each conductor pair together using a NRTL listed compressiontype butt splice barrel connector that is rated for the size of cable being spliced. . Crimp the barrel connector to the conductors using the manufacturer specific compression tool . .
Separately encapsulate each individual conductor splice using a MnDOT approved loop detector splice encapsulation kit .
Provide Loop Detector Splice Encapsulation Kits listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals Assemble the loop detector splice encapsulation kit per the manufacturers installation instructions and as follows Wrap electrical insulating tape around the end of each epoxy resin mold where it meets the outer jacket of the cable assembly to prevent epoxy from leaking out of the mold before curing .
Allow the resin to harden and cool .
Test all conductors of the splice to ensure compliance with MnDOT .K .
Three Way Underground Handhole Cable Splice Provide and install a three way underground handhole cable splices as shown on the Plan and as follows .
Provide adequate slack in the cable assembly to allow each individual cable to extend at least ft above the top of the hand hole before stripping the cable . .
Strip off the outer jacket of the cable assembly to within in of where the cable enters the handhole . .
Unwind the copper shield to within in of where the cable enters the handhole. . Splice together the shielding by drilling a hole in each piece of shield and then bolting the pieces together with brass nuts bolts and flat washers to form an electrical bond between the three pieces of copper shielding . .
Apply pole base terminal block coating to the entire shield splice point .
Provide Pole Base Terminal Block Coatings listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Splice each individual conductor of the conductor cable assemblies separately . .
Maintain proper circuit color identification within each splice. . Splice the three conductors together using a NRTL listed split bolt splice connector that is rated for the size and number of the conductors being spliced . .
Ensure the split bolt is adequately tightened . .
Separately encapsulate each individual conductor splice using a MnDOT approved way power cable splice encapsulation kit .
Provide way power cable splice encapsulation kit listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting Assemble the way power cable splice encapsulation kit per the manufacturers installation instructions and as follows Wrap electrical insulating tape around the end of each epoxy resin mold where it meets the outer jacket of the cable assembly to prevent epoxy from leaking out of the mold before curing .
Allow the resin to harden and cool .
Test all conductors of the splice to ensure compliance with MnDOT .K .
H Pole Installation Unless otherwise specified in the Contract install poles and high mast light towers poles in accordance with the manufacturers pole erection drawings and installation instructions and the current edition of the AASHTO LRFD Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
H. General Set poles plumb on foundations .
Lift and safely move poles without damage .
Avoid abrasion during lifting operations .
Do not drag poles on the ground .
Repair surface finish damage in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Use natural or synthetic fiber slings and chokers or prevent the pole surface finish from coming in direct contact with metal chains and hardware when lifting poles to protect factory surface finish from mars blemishes or scratches .
Before standing poles on foundations .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Verify the anchor rod pattern matches the base plate bolt hole pattern for a properly fitted connection Verify the required anchor rod grade by locating the steel die stamped grade identification on the end of the anchor bolt projecting above the concrete Verify anchor rods meet projections for a properly secured pole and meet AASHTO stub height requirements when breakaway is mandated Verify anchor rods are clean not damaged and plumb Verify nuts can be turned down on the anchor rods to the foundation and backed off by hand or by one worker using an ordinary wrench without a cheater bar Verify the base plate opening accommodates conduits and ground rod electrodes Ensure the pole and base are free of dirt or other foreign material and Inspect poles for damage .
Replace damaged poles or pole accessories with new .
Before replacing obtain the Engineers approval .
Do not install poles or accessories from previous electrical systems .
Immediately after standing the pole on the foundation complete the entire pole installation process .
The pole installation process is from the time the pole is set on the foundation to the completion of final tightening of anchor rod connections in accordance with the Contract .
Do not stop midway through the installation process .
Do not stand poles on foundations without completion of final anchor rod connection tightening .
Provide a rodent intrusion barrier in accordance with .
W. H. Anchor Rods Connections Ensure the required anchor rods bolts nuts washers and pole base plate fit solidly together .
Assemble threaded portions of anchor rods and nuts and faying surfaces of nuts and washers to ensure threads and surfaces are free of the following Scale except tight mill scale Dirt Loose Scale Burrs Other foreign material and Other defects preventing solid seating of connections .
Use anchor rods nuts and washers in accordance with the Contract and manufacturers installation instructions .
Use the amount of washers and nuts for each connection as specified in the Contract and pole manufacturers installation instructions .
Do not remove required nuts or washers from the connection .
Do not add extra washers spacers or other hardware to the connection other than what is required .
Place nuts washers and pole base plate on anchor rods in the installation order as specified in the Contract and manufacturers installation instructions .
Do not use lock washers unless the pole manufacturer requires otherwise .
Ensure the top of the anchor rod extends at least one thread beyond the top surface of the top nut .
An anchor rod end inside the top nut where no threads extend beyond the top surface of the nut and the top nut is not fully engaged on the anchor rod after tightening is not acceptable .
Clean and lubricate the exposed threads of all anchor rods leveling nuts and the faying surfaces of nuts and washers just before setting the pole base on the foundation .
Use antiseize and lubricating compound in accordance with to lubricate .
If more than h has elapsed since earlier lubrication or if the anchor rods and nuts have become wet since they were first lubricated then clean and relubricate exposed threads of anchor rods nuts and the faying surfaces of nuts and washers .
Use wrenches designed for turning nuts to tighten anchor rod connections .
Do not use pipe wrenches to turn nuts .
Use wrenches sized specifically for the nut being turned .
Do not use adjustable wrenches .
H .. a SingleNut Anchor Rod Connections Light poles requiring singlenut anchor rod connections are set directly on the foundation .
Leveling nuts are not used in the connections .
One heavy hex nut for each anchor rod is used to fasten the pole base to the foundation anchor rods .
Use washers in the connections in accordance with the pole manufacturers installation requirements and the Contract .
Use leveling shims in accordance with Standard Plate when shims are required by the pole manufacturer for leveling poles installed on singlenut anchor rod connections .
If the pole manufacturer provides a specified torque value requirement for tightening mounting nuts on anchor rod connections use a calibrated torque to tighten to the specified torque value .
Check for loose nuts h h after tightening anchor rod connections .
If nuts move retighten the connection using the required tightening method .
If more than two of the anchor rod connections nuts move per pole remove the pole and disassemble the connections .
Reinstall the pole and connections. . Minnesota Standard Specifications H .. b DoubleNut Anchor Rod Connections Poles requiring doublenut connections use two heavy hex nuts for each anchor rod to fasten the base plate to the foundation anchor rods .
A bottom nut also called a leveling nut is positioned under the base plate to level and support the pole and a top nut is located above the base plate .
Two hardened flat washers are required for each connection .
Place one washer directly above the leveling nut and the other washer directly under the top nut .
Use additional washers or spacers if required by the pole manufacturer .
For poles designed to be installed using a doublenut anchor rod connection use the standoff distances provided by the distance of less than in if the anchor rod diameter is greater than or equal to in .
For anchor rods with a diameter less than in use a standoff distance of less than one anchor rod diameter .
Fully tighten the connections in accordance with the pole manufacturers installation instructions .
If the pole manufacturer does not provide anchor rod connection tightening methods or refers to MnDOT Specifications for final tightening tighten the connections in accordance with the following After snugtight condition has been met for top nuts and leveling nuts fully tighten the anchor rod connections by turning the leveling nuts to the required rotation specified in Table Table Leveling Nut Rotation for Tightening DoubleNut Anchor Rod Connection Anchor Rod Diameter in Nut Rotation beyond SnugTight ½ turn ½ turn Before turning the leveling nuts to the required rotation mark the top of the foundation showing the before and after rotation positions of each leveling nut .
Incrementally turn the leveling nuts using a crisscross or star pattern until the required nut rotation shown in this table has been achieved .
Turn the nuts in at least two full tightening passes .
Verify the nut rotation after tightening .
Check for loose nuts h h after tightening anchor rod connections .
If nuts move retighten the connection turning the nut to the required rotation specified in Table .
If more than half of the anchor rod connections nuts move per pole remove the pole and disassemble the connections .
Reinstall the pole and connections .
Install rodent intrusion barrier in accordance with .W .
I Blank J Sign Lighting Installation J .
General Provide sign lighting as specified in the Contract .
Use direct buried lighting cable to provide power distribution to the sign structure unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Use PVC Coated HotDipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit and conduit fittings in accordance with and install in accordance with .
D. J .
Safety Switch Provide a safety switch in accordance with .A .
and install in a vertical upright position .
J .
Safety Switch Wiring Install AWG conductors with a AWG equipment grounding conductor in ¾ in conduit .
Extend direct buried lighting cable or conductors from conduit at least ft above the top of the sign pole foundation .
Remove the outer jacket of the cable to access the individual conductors and the copper shield .
Leave in place a minimum of in and a maximum in of the outer jacket extending above the conduit .
Splice the existing or new direct buried lighting cable in the sign pole base to the conductors from the safety switch in accordance with .G ..
Provide bonding and grounding in accordance with .R .
J .
Lighting System Identification Plate Overhead Sign Provide and install a lighting system identification plate as shown on the Plans and in accordance with Traffic Signs and Devices. . Minnesota Standard Specifications J .
Safety Cable Provide and install brackets aircraft cable and hardware required to assemble and attach a safety cable as shown on the Plans in accordance with Traffic Signs and Devices .
K System Testing and Acceptance K. Megohm meter test Test for unwanted grounds Perform a megohm meter test at VDC indicating the insulation resistance of each circuit .
Energize the megohm tester for s on the circuits to check for breakdown of the circuits .
Submit a written report of the megohm meter readings for the permanent record with the following information to the Engineer Project number .
Project location .
Feedpoint number as shown in the Plans .
Branch circuit that identifies each lighting branch circuit being tested by indicating the number of the first light connected to that circuit as shown on the Plans .
Phase conductor insulation resistance .
Determine the phase conductor insulation resistance by measuring the resistance between the phase conductors and the resistance between each phase conductor and the equipment ground bar in the service cabinet .
Remove the fuses from the inline fuse connectors in the lighting poles before measuring .
The Engineer will not allow a resistance less than MΩ .
Neutral conductor insulation resistance .
Determine the neutral conductor insulation resistance by measuring the resistance between each neutral conductor and the equipment ground bar in the service cabinet .
Remove the fuses from the inline fuse connectors in the lighting poles before measuring .
The Engineer will not allow a resistance less than MΩ .
Circuit insulation resistance .
Determine the circuit insulation resistance by measuring the resistance between each phase conductor and the equipment ground bar in the service cabinet .
Leave the fuses in place in the lighting poles when measuring .
The Engineer will not allow a resistance less than MΩ .
Perform tests at the service cabinet in the presence of the Engineer with all grounding connections in place .
Disconnect the phase and neutral conductors at the service cabinet for the insulation resistance tests .
If the tests indicate faulty insulation or a faulty connection within the circuit correct and retest circuits at no additional cost to the Department .
Replace circuits or circuit parts to make the circuits meet the test requirements at no additional cost to the Department .
K. Hour Burn Test After completing the feed point and before the Department pays for greater than percent of the feed point cost energize the service cabinet and ensure the entire system can successfully operate without interruption for h during daylight .
The Department considers the cost of power as incidental and will not separately pay for power costs to energize the system for the hour burn test .
L Lighting Service Cabinet Installation Install components of each lighting service cabinet and include miscellaneous hardware required for a complete lighting service cabinet installation .
Coordinate the connection of power to each lighting service cabinet with the electric utility company to perform a visual inspection before making the service connection .
Ensure the Contractors electrician is present when the electric utility company makes the visual inspection .
Position the photoelectric control to face north .
The photoelectric control may face east or west only if facing it north is not an option due to service cabinet orientation .
Position the cabinet door from degrees to degrees to the roadway away from traffic .
L. Type B Service Cabinet Attach service cabinet Type B to wood poles or mounting bracket assemblies as required by the Contract .
Provide and install service equipment including the following Meter socket in accordance with Electrical Service Equipment Mounting brackets as shown on the Plans Conduit fittings Wiring as shown on the Plans and Other items incidental to a complete meter socket installation .
L. Type L Type L and Type Rural Lighting and Flasher RLF Service Cabinets Securely fasten lighting service cabinets to the equipment pads specified in the Contract .
Install the supplied rubber gasket sections between the bottom of each cabinet base and the top of the equipment pad. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Leave one ½in gap in the gasket to ensure proper water drainage .
M Painting Paint nongalvanized ferrous metalwork in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System .
All painting must be done at the manufacturer .
The Department will not require the Contractor to paint the inside of light pole shafts .
Provide anodized aluminum service cabinets meeting the requirements of MILA for Type II Class I Coating except The outer surface coating is .
in The coating weighs mg per mm² Immerse the coating in a F aqueous percent nickel acetate solution for min or submerge the coating in a room temperature fluoridebased sealant for at least min and then immediately dip in water at a temperature of at least F for min to seal the coating Protect the factory applied finish when erecting a painted pole .
Provide a felt lined collar to handle the pole and leave the protective wrapping on the pole at the lift point area to protect the painted finish .
Repair and restore damage to the finish as directed by the Engineer .
N Restoration and Cleanup O Blank P Lighting System Component Labeling and Numbering P. Lighting System Numbering Number lighting units and lighting service cabinets as shown on the Plans with labels in accordance with .
Verify that the lighting units to be reinstalled are numbered as shown on the Plans .
If the lighting units to be reinstalled are not correctly numbered number the lighting units in accordance with this Specification .
P .. a Lighting Service Cabinet Numbering Number the service cabinets ft above the concrete pad with the feed point numbers and letters as shown on the Plan on the outside of the front door and the side of the cabinet that faces traffic .
P .. b Light Pole Numbering Number the lighting unit pole with feed point numbers and letters and lighting unit number as shown on the Plans .
Place the feed point numbers and letters and lighting unit number ft above the foundation on the pole at degrees facing oncoming traffic .
Lightly sand the pole shaft to remove oxidation .
Wipe the pole shaft with isopropyl alcohol before applying numbers and letters .
Heat the surface of the pole with a propane torch to ensure the label sticks to the pole when the outside temperature is less than F. Avoid overheating the surface to prevent damage to the label .
P.c Underpass Luminaire Numbering Number underpass luminaires with the last letter of the feed point and with the assigned lighting unit number as shown on the Plans .
P. Lighting System Labeling P .. a Labeling Branch Circuit Breakers in Lighting Service Cabinets Label branch circuit breakers on the interior of the lighting service cabinets with the color of the circuit conductor and the lighting unit number .
Use machine printed labels suitable for use in damp locations .
Do not use labels made of paper .
P .. b Labeling Lighting Cable and Conductors Label all cable or conductors in conduit in service cabinets and light pole bases indicating the next termination point .
For example in the lighting service cabinet the label would read TO POLE in pole No .
the label would read TO LIGHTING SERVICE CABINET and TO POLE .
Provide labels that consist of white vinyl adhesive tape wrapped around the cable or conductors .
Hand write the labeling on the vinyl adhesive tape or produce with a label maker .
If label marking is handwritten accomplish the labeling by using a black .
Minnesota Standard Specifications permanent marker in such a manner that the markings are legible to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
If labels are produced from a label maker ensure labels are suitable for use in wet locations and wrap the label around the cable one complete revolution with some overlap .
P .. c Labeling Luminaires Installation Date Label the luminaire with the installation date as follows Provide labels for the date of installation meeting the following requirements .
Record the installation date on white selfadhering label. . Use machine printed numbers. . Black text which is ½ in tall .
MonthYear numeric format and .
Suitable for placement in wet locations. . Paper based labels are not acceptable. . Place inside of the luminaire housing and on the luminaire access door so the label showing the date can be read from ground level .
Luminaire Classification Label the bottom outside of pole mounted luminaires access door with the number for a luminaire listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting titled LED Luminaires For Roadway Use Mounted at Feet Label the bottom outside of pole mounted luminaires access door with the number for a luminaire listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting titled LED Luminaire For Roadway Use Mounted at Feet .
Position this label so it is easily viewed from the ground directly underneath the luminaire .
Installation Date Labeling HPS Lamps If HPS lamps are required label the month and year of installation on the lamp socket base by etching or using a blackoilbased paint marker .
Q Luminaire Installation Obtain the Engineers approval before installing luminaires .
Install and level luminaires in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions and as approved by the Engineer .
Install a MnDOT approved wire holder that supports the luminaire cables and conductors within the end of pole tenon near the luminaire slipfitter connection .
After the light pole has been installed on the foundation Place the luminaire on the pole tenon Place a level on the area provided on top of the luminaire or if provided use the luminaire internal leveling bubble Level the luminaire sidetoside and front and fronttoback and Tighten the luminaire fitter connection bolts to the recommended torque level provided by the manufacturer .
Use a calibrated torque wrench or other method that ensures manufacturer recommended torque levels have been met when tightening luminaire fitter connection bolts .
Demonstrate to the Engineer for approval if using a method other than a calibrated torque wrench to meet recommended torque levels before installing luminaires .
If a photoelectric control or lighting control node smart lighting control is required to be installed on a luminaire install the unit in accordance with the manufacturers installation requirements and the following Install the control or node window facing north If possible mount the control or node in a position so the photoelectric window is clear of surrounding light sources and shadowing of structures and vegetation If facing the photoelectric window north interrupts normal operation of the luminaire then face the window east or west and Test each photoelectric control or node once installed .
Q. Underpass Luminaire Installation Install and level underpass luminaires in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions as approved by the Engineer and the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Install the luminaire ft above the driving surface Install the luminaire a maximum of ft horizontally away from either the most left or right edge of the driving lane or lanes and Install AWG stranded green insulated equipment grounding conductor from the underground handhole cable splice to the luminaire without any intermediate splices in the conductor run .
Install components required for a complete and operational underpass luminaire which includes hardware for mounting .
Provide liquid tight flexible nonmetallic conduit in accordance with .
R Bonding and Grounding Provide bonding grounding grounding electrodes grounding electrode conductors equipment grounding conductors grounding electrode systems and grounding connections in accordance with .
Traffic Control Signals Construction Requirements the NEC and the following Provide mechanically and electrically secure metal poles conduit service cabinets service equipment and other noncurrentcarrying metal surfaces to form a continuous bonded grounded system and to provide a low impedance path from exposed metal surface to the system ground at the service cabinet or service equipment .
Bond the following to the system equipment grounding conductor as specified in the Contract Equipment grounding electrode conductor Copper tape shield of the direct buried lighting cable Metal Raceways Grounding lug of the light pole or sign post and Aluminumconductor steelreinforced cable ACSR equipment ground messenger of overhead light cable .
Use NRTL listed stainless steel copper tin plated copper brass or bronze connectors for bonding and grounding unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Use a lug type connector or bolt to connect the grounding and bonding jumper to the copper shield .
Use cast clamps or grounding bushings with an integral lug to accommodate the jumper to attach other grounding and bonding jumper attachments .
Provide at least AWG solid bare bonding jumpers and grounding electrode conductors .
Bond light poles to ground as specified below Drill the shield for each cable assembly in each pole base with a in drill bit for stainless steel poles or ½ in hole for aluminum poles for placement under the active clamping grounding lug .
Place a Reusable screw type active clamping ground lug with a tang on top of the shield .
Insert a in or ½ in stainless steel bolt thru the grounding lug and then thru the copper shield .
Non breakaway pole bases may have a in stud welded in place for terminating the ground lug. . Securely fasten to the pole base .
Provide a AWG solid bare grounding jumper and terminate one end to the equipment grounding conductor splice .
Terminate the other end of the jumper to the pole base in grounding stud by using a NRTL listed Reusable screw type active clamping ground lug with a tang that connects to the in or ½ in pole base grounding bolt .
Tighten the entire assembly shield and the grounding lug to form an electrically bonded and grounded connection .
Apply anti oxidant joint compound to conductor ends and connectors before terminating and to the entire connection after final connection and assembly .
Install the supplemental ground rod electrodes at the locations specified in the Contract .
Provide ground rod electrodes at every other light foundation and at the light foundations located at both ends of a run unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Provide a direct grounding connection to a ground rod electrode for all main switch cabinets control cabinets or service cabinets .
For bridges or buildings bond each cabinet or metal structure to the bridge or building grounding electrode system .
Make grounding conductor runs as short as possible .
Apply antioxide joint compound on all bonding and grounding conductors and connectors before final termination .
S Service Equipment Installation .
Minnesota Standard Specifications T Existing Materials and Electrical Equipment Remove salvage reinstall or stockpile existing materials and electrical equipment as specified in the Contract or as directed by the Engineer in accordance with .Traffic Control Signals Construction Requirements .
U Wood Pole Installation V Lighting Units Install components of lighting units and include hardware required for a complete lighting unit installation .
W Rodent Intrusion Barrier Provide Stainless Steel Woven Wire Cloth in accordance with in doublenut connection pole bases as follows Insert and wind around the transformer base opening to prevent rodent entry .
Cut even and smooth and secure flush with .
Selftapping screws to the upper edge of steel transformer base openings or .
round head screw end stainless steel bolts and nuts in all equally spaced factory supplied punched holes along the upward lip of the base plate in stainless steel transformer base openings .
Ensure the top edge of the woven wire cloth is smooth flush with the top edge of the transformer base plate and the bottom edge of the woven wire cloth is tight against the top of the concrete foundation .
Overlap the ends of the woven wire cloth at least two in and secure in a manner that prevents movement .
Bond the entire woven wire cloth assembly as required by the National Electrical Code NEC .
Fill voids between the stainless steel woven wire cloth and the pole base plate with clear silicone .
For aluminum light pole bases fill any gaps as a result of using leveling shims that exceed a in between the foundation and the aluminum light pole base with clear silicone sealant .
Do not completely seal around the perimeter between the foundation and aluminum light base .
X Available Fault Current Calculations Provide available fault current calculations as required by Article .
of the NEC and in accordance with .
CC . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Complete Systems The Engineer will measure separate items listed in the Contract for various types of complete electrical systems .
The Engineer will measure the separate systems in accordance with the following A .
Lighting System The Engineer will measure each separate Lighting System as a single unit complete in place and operating .
It will also include if present removing salvaging and disposal of miscellaneous structures conduit wiring and lighting equipment of existing system as required by the Contract .
A .
Sign Lighting System ___ Luminaires The Engineer will measure each separate Sign Lighting System ___ Luminaires as an integral unit complete in place .
A .
Sign Lighting System Bridge Mounted ___Luminaires The Engineer will measure each separate Sign Lighting System Bridge Mounted ___ Luminaires as an integral unit complete in place .
A. Conduit System The Engineer will measure each separate Conduit System as an integral unit complete in place .
B Electrical System Components The Engineer will measure separate items listed in the contract for the various component parts of an electrical system in accordance with the following B .
Lighting Units The Engineer will separately measure lighting units of each type of mounting and luminaire design by the number of units of each type complete in place .
B. Luminaires The Engineer will separately measure luminaires of each type and wattage by the number of luminaires complete in place .
B .
Light Foundations The Engineer will separately measure concrete foundations of each design for lighting units as integral units complete in place. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B. Conduit The Engineer will separately measure conduit of each kind and diameter by the length between end terminals along the centerline of the conduit as installed .
B .
Underground Wire The Engineer will separately measure underground wire of each kind and size by the length between end terminals along the centerline of the wire as installed .
B .
Direct Buried Lighting Cable The Engineer will separately measure direct buried lighting cable of each kind and size by the length between end terminals along the centerline of the cable as installed .
B .
Overhead Light Cable The Engineer will separately measure overhead light cable of each kind and size by the length between end terminals along the centerline of the wire as installed .
B .
Service Cabinets The Engineer will separately measure service cabinets of each type by the number of cabinets complete in place .
B .
Equipment Pads The Engineer will separately measure equipment pads of each type by the number of equipment pads complete in place .
B. Junction Boxes The Engineer will measure junction boxes by the number of junction boxes complete in place .
B. Handholes The Engineer will separately measure handholes of each design by the number of handholes complete in place .
B. Underpass Luminaires The Engineer will separately measure underpass luminaries of each design by the number of underpass lighting luminaires complete in place .
B .
Wood Poles The Engineer will separately measure wood poles by the number of wood poles complete in place .
B .
Service Equipment The Engineer will separately measure service equipment by the number of service equipment complete and in place and fully operational .
B .
Underground Cable Splice The Engineer will separately measure underground cable splices by the number of splices complete and in place . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Contract unit price for lighting systems sign lighting systems modify sign lighting systems and conduit systems is full compensation for the cost of furnishing and installing the complete system as required by the Contract .
The Contract unit price for lighting system is full compensation for the cost of furnishing and installing the complete lighting system as required by the Contract .
It will also include if present the cost of removing salvaging and disposal of miscellaneous structures conduit wiring and lighting equipment of existing system as required by the Contract .
The Contract unit price for Conduit Systems includes the cost of conduit trenching jacking augering conduit sleeves couplings weatherheads elbows bushings sealing around the conduit where it enters a pull box sealing conduit ends in concrete foundations and in pull boxes grounding and bonding of conduit backfilling and restoring sod sidewalks pavements and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the conduit .
The Contract unit price for Lighting Unit includes the cost of lamps if required luminaire pole base pole and bracket inline fuse wiring between pole base and luminaire luminaire wire holder splice to power circuit numbering of the light pole luminaire labeling stainless steel woven wire cloth and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the lighting unit .
The Contract unit price for Air Obstruction Light includes the cost of the light mounting bracket if required wiring between pole base and luminaire splice to power circuit luminaire labeling and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the air obstruction light. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contract unit price for Luminaire includes the cost of the complete luminaire assembly mounting mounting hardware wiring connections numbering of the luminaire if not installed on a light pole and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the luminaire .
The Contract unit price for Underpass Luminaires includes the cost of the complete underpass luminaire assembly mounting mounting hardware wiring connections luminaire labeling and miscellaneous items required for the complete installation of underpass luminaires .
The Contract unit price for Light Foundation includes the cost of excavation concrete reinforcement anchor rods ground rod ground lead grounding connections conduit elbows and bushings and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the light foundation .
The Contract unit price for Expansion Fitting includes the cost of the expansion fitting grounding connections hangars wrapping with sponge rubber and all other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of an expansion fitting .
The Contract unit price for DeflectionExpansion Fitting includes the cost of the deflectionexpansion fitting grounding connections hangars wrapping with sponge rubber and all other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of an expansion fitting .
The Contract unit price for Service Cabinet includes the cost of panel board enclosure circuit breakers switches relays photoelectric control internal wiring service entrance circuit service entrance conduit and weatherhead for wood pole mounted cabinets mounting hardware grounding painting sealing around cabinet base numbering of the service cabinet and miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the lighting service cabinet .
The Contract unit price for Wood Pole includes the cost the class of wood pole surface restoration and other miscellaneous items required for the complete installation of wood poles .
The Contract unit price for Underground Cable Splice includes the cost of splice kits and miscellaneous items required for a complete underground cable splice .
The Contract unit price for Service Equipment includes the cost of meter socket and mounting brackets conduit and power conductors on wood pole wiring connections ground rod electrode bonding and grounding materials and connections and incidental items required to a complete meter socket installation .
The Contract unit price for Equipment Pad includes the cost of excavation concrete reinforcement anchoring hardware within the pad conduits within the pad ground rods grounding connections mounting brackets mounting hardware surface restoration and miscellaneous items required for the complete equipment pad installation .
The Contract unit price for Junction Box includes the cost of junction boxes bushings covers gaskets and miscellaneous items required for the complete installation of junction boxes .
The Contract unit price for Handhole includes the cost of the handhole frame and cover excavation aggregate drain bed backfilling sealing conduit entrances surface restoration and miscellaneous items required for the complete installation of handholes .
The Contract unit price for Grounding Electrode includes the cost of grounding electrode and splicing of grounding conductors to the grounding electrode and miscellaneous items required for a complete bonded and grounded electrical system .
The Contract unit price for Rigid Steel Conduit includes the cost of conduit conduit sleeves couplings elbows bushings sealing around the conduit where it enters a pull box grounding and bonding and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the conduit .
The Contract unit price for Intermediate Metal Conduit includes the cost of conduit conduit sleeves couplings elbows bushings sealing around the conduit where it enters a pull box grounding and bonding and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the conduit .
The Contract unit price for NonMetallic Conduit includes the cost of conduit conduit sleeves couplings elbows bushings sealing around the conduit where it enters a pull box grounding and bonding and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the conduit .
The Contract unit price for Flexible NonMetallic Conduit includes the cost of conduit conduit sleeves couplings elbows bushings sealing around the conduit where it enters a pull box grounding and bonding and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the conduit .
The Contract unit price for Underground Wire includes the cost of wire pulling splicing terminals making required connections testing and other miscellaneous items required for complete installation of underground wire. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contract unit price for Direct Buried Lighting Cable includes the cost of cable trenching shield bonding connections fittings fastenings hangers backfilling and surface restoration testing and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the direct buried lighting cable .
The Contract unit price for Overhead Light Cable includes the cost of cable grounding of the messenger wire connections fastenings hangars testing and all other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of overhead light cable .
The Contract unit price for Sign Lighting System is full compensation for the cost of furnishing and installing the complete sign lighting system as required by the Contract .
The Contract unit price for Sign Lighting System Bridge Mounted is full compensation for the cost of furnishing and installing the complete sign lighting system bridge mounted as required by the Contract .
The Department will pay each pay item at the Contract unit price per the specified pay unit as follows Item No Item Unit .
Lighting System lump sum .
Conduit System ____ lump sum .
Lighting Unit Type ___ each .
Air Obstruction Light each .
Luminaire ____ each .
Underpass Luminaires Type ___ each .
Light Foundation Design ___ each .
___in Expansion Fitting each .
___in DeflectionExpansion Fitting each .
Service Cabinet Type ___ each .
___ft Wood Pole Class ___ each .
Underground Cable Splice each .
Service Equipment each .
Equipment Pad ____ each .
Junction Box each .
Handhole each .
Grounding Electrode each .
___in Rigid Steel Conduit linear foot .
___in Intermediate Metal Conduit linear foot .
___in Nonmetallic Conduit linear foot .
___in Flexible NonMetallic Conduit linear foot .
Underground Wire ___ Conductor __ AWG linear foot .
Direct buried lighting Cable ___ Conductor ___ AWG linear foot .
Overhead Light Cable ___ Conductor ___ AWG linear foot .
Sign Lighting System system .
Sign Lighting System Bridge Mounted system TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SYSTEM .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing and installing Intelligent Transportation System ITS and Traffic Management System TMS components including electrical service for communications traffic control surveillance and motorist information .
Acronyms and Definitions BD TWP Twisted Pair Distribution Pedestal Splice Cabinet BD TWP Twisted Pair Distribution Pedestal Splice Cabinet DMS Dynamic Message Sign EIA Electronics Industry Association FCPC Field ConnectorPhysical Contact FDF Fiber Distribution Frame FO Fiberoptic JB Junction Box LCS Lane Control Signal LED Light Emitting Diode .
Minnesota Standard Specifications MM Multimode NRTL Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory as defined by the US Department of Labor OTDR Optical Time Domain Reflectometer PTZ Pan Tilt and Zoom RCS Ramp Control Signal RUS Rural Utilities Service SM Singlemode Cable ST Straight Tip TIA Telecommunication Industry Association TWP Twisted Wire Pair ZDW Zero Dispersion Wavelength .
MATERIALS A General Provide materials and equipment and perform work meeting the requirements of the National Electrical Manufacturers Association the Electronic Industries Association NRTL NEC local codes and ordinances these specifications and as required by the contract .
Each component is designed for years of industrial use .
Warrant Furnish and Install FI materials and workmanship as well as workmanship on materials paid as Install items for a minimum of months after completion and acceptance of the contract .
The Department may require longer warranty periods for specific items .
The Engineer will begin the warranty period on the date all construction obligations of the Contractor are completed as documented by the final completion date on the Certificate of Final Acceptance per Acceptance .
During the warranty period make repairs to all equipment and devices provided and installed during the project .
The Engineer will notify the Contractor that a warranted item needs repair .
Acknowledge the notification within hours and provide the repair within hours to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
B Rigid Steel Conduit C NonMetallic Conduit D Electrical Junction Boxes E Electrical Cable and Conductors E. Power Conductors E. Loop Detector Conductor E. Armored Underground Cables E. Signal Control Cable E. Loop Detector Leadin Cable E. Telephone Cable F Signal Pedestal Plan .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Before starting work submit a written statement that identifies all subcontractors performing the work contained in this section .
A Cable Installation Place conduit and direct buried cables in the same trench only if installing the cable in mm deep if adding in mm of fill and if installing the conduit on the fill .
A .
Cable Installed In Conduit If pulling cable into conduit by hand or machine use a limiting device to prevent exceeding the pulling tension specified by the manufacturer .
If pulling cable apply a material compatible industry accepted lubricant to the cables to reduce pulling tension .
Install each cable with slack in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to prevent disconnection or damage from contraction .
Do not use damaged cable .
Remove abandoned cables from each conduit .
Ensure the operating TMS remains active while removing the cables. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Direct Buried Cables Trench or plow direct buried cables at least in mm deep .
Install direct burial cable by trenching or by plowing .
Install direct burial cable in conduit if it is located under bituminous or concrete surfaces .
Install warning tape meeting the following requirements between in mm above the cable to in mm below the surface .
in mm wide Stretchable Orange and Bears the permanent legend CAUTION MnDOT CABLE BELOW .
A .
Copper Cable Installation Repair Contractor damaged TMS cable as approved by the Engineer .
Do not use buried splices .
Splice telephone cables in BD and BD cabinets with a weather resistant crimp connector designed to splice three No .
conductors .
A. Fiberoptic Cable Installation Use manufacturerrecommended equipment to ensure the cable is not damaged by exceeding the maximum tensile strength and violating the minimum bend radius .
Make continuous and steady cable pulls between pull points .
Complete direction changes of fiberoptic cable before entering a HH or other conduit access point .
Do not pull fiberoptic cables through HH .
This applies to both the horizontal and vertical directions .
Install fiberoptic cable in orange colored split conduit through the HH .
Extend the conduit in mm beyond the wall of each HH and seal the conduit to the HH with duct seal .
Splice optical fibers only in outdoor fiber splice enclosures and fiber splice panels .
Do not splice between cabinets and splice vaults .
Continuously monitor the tensile load on the cable .
Prerip the fiber optic cable route to prevent harm to a plowed cable .
Place in mm of aggregate meeting the requirements of .. G Aggregate Bedding under cables placed in a trench .
Backfill the trench in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills .
The transition from one elevation to another shall not exceed ft vertical per ft horizontal if installing fiberoptic cable in existing conduits in HH .
Reinstall existing conduits if necessary to provide the transition for the cable installation at no additional cost to the Department .
B Cabinet Installation B .
Two Days Notice Notify the Engineer two days before removing an active cabinet from service .
B .
Secure and Seal Secure the cabinets to the concrete foundation with anchor rods nuts and washers .
Seal the cabinet base to the foundation with a ¼ in in mm mm one piece neoprene gasket .
B. Conduit Install conduits at the center of the cabinet base and extend .
in mm above the foundation .
C Dynamic Message Signs DMS Provide Dynamic Message Sign DMS structures and mounting hardware in accordance with Traffic Signs and Devices .
Ensure that the installation of DMS electrical equipment located on the sign structure does not protrude over the walkway or interfere with moving the walkway safety rail or with opening the sign door .
Install the VAC to the sign within one week after installation of the DMS to enable operating the ventilation units. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D LCS Provide LCS mounting hardware in accordance with Traffic Signs and Devices .
E Restore Shrubs and Bushes Restore shrubs and bushes damaged by Contractor activities in accordance with Protection and Restoration of Property .
F HH Make openings in the side of HH water tight with a compound that is compatible for adherence to both the PVC HH and the conduit material .
Fill HH abandoned in sodded areas with tamped granular material in accordance with .. E Aggregate Backfill .
Salvage useable HH covers from abandoned HH .
Provide the salvaged HH to the Departments Electrical Services Section .
Secure the Departmentprovided HH locator ball to an eye bolt with a ¼ in mm wide wire wrap .
Locate the Departmentprovided HH locator ball within ft . m of the HH cover .
G RCS Cover each installed RCS until starting the system operational test .
H Conduit Install conduit in accordance with .. D Conduit and Fittings and the following H. Conduit on Bridges Provide and install deflecting expansion joints meeting NEC requirements .
H. Factory Bends Factory bends in conduit in mm in diameter or greater require a minimum bend radius of in mm .
H. Foundation Locations The Engineer will stake the actual locations of the foundations outside the clear zone and as far from the paved portion of the roadways as practical .
I Blank J Bonding and Grounding .. J Include a ground rod with each foundation .
J .
Ground Cable Wrap ground cable with green electrical tape in cabinets and HH through which the cable passes .
J .
Shield Continuity Maintain the electrical continuity of the cable shields while terminating and splicing cables .
Install shield bonding meeting the requirements of RUS splicing Standard PC Section ..
Provide bonding connectors meeting the requirements of RUS Specification PE for Cable Shield Connectors .
Bond and ground the cable sheaths to a ft ⅝ in .
m mm diameter ground rod .
K Loop Detector Installation Install loop detectors as required by the contract and as follows K Loop Detector Conductors End loop detector conductors in the near HH .
Splice the conductors to the leadin cable with a soldered butt splice .
Wrap the splice with one wrap of electrical tape before placing into the splice encapsulator device .
L Fiberoptic System L. Blank L. Blank L. Outdoor Fiber Splice Enclosure Bond each outdoor fiber splice enclosure to the cable armor with a cable clamp and to the closest ground rod with a C No .
ground wire and clamp .
Provide outdoor fiber splice enclosures with nonoxidizing coating on the connections .
L. Fiber Splice Patch SplicePatch Panel Mount the fiber splice patch splicepatch panel as required by the contract .
Secure the fiberoptic cables and pigtails to the splice patch splicepatch panel .
Ground the shields by bonding them to the splice patch splicepatch panel ground lug. . Minnesota Standard Specifications L. Fiberoptic Splice Vault Place the fiberoptic splice vault on in mm of filter aggregate in accordance with .. H Coarse Filter Aggregate .
Seal and flash test the vault as recommended by the manufacturer .
Coil ft m of cable for each entrance and exit in each vault containing splices .
M CCTV Assembly Installation Do not degrade the existing CCTV signals during CCTV Assembly installation .
Orient the lightning rod away from the road at approximately degrees to centerline .
Install the horizontal lockout for the pan and tilt unit over the lightning rod support and set the vertical lockout to degrees above horizontal .
Ensure the housing mounting bolts do not hit the pan and tilt unit cover in any tilt position . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will only measure items for payment that are completed and accepted .
A Complete Systems The Engineer will measure ___ System separately .
B Traffic Management System Components The Engineer will measure the various system components by the units of measure required by the contract . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will Retain percent of the amounts payable on each partial estimate in accordance with Partial Payments .
Pay for material on hand .
Pay the remaining percentage retained upon completion of the work as approved by the Engineer .
The contract lump sum price for ___ System includes the cost of providing and installing the system required by the contract complete in place .
The contract lump sum price for System Integration includes the cost of performing the work and incorporating the material required by the contract into the existing system .
The Department will make payments based on the percent of the contract completed as indicated on the project progress chart .
When the Contractor completes percent of the contract as indicated by the chart the Department will pay percent of the systems integration contract pay item .
The contract unit price for ___ Foundation includes the cost of providing the material and providing and installing the foundation required by the contract .
For cabinet foundations included as part of a larger pad the cabinet foundation includes the concrete and conduit under and adjacent to the cabinet .
For service foundations included as part of a larger pad the service foundation includes the concrete conduit and conductors under and adjacent to the service equipment .
The contract unit prices for TMS contract pay items include the cost of providing and installing each item. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department will pay for TMS based on the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
___ System lump sum .
Systems Integration lump sum .
___ Foundation each .
Handholes Type ___ each .
Junction Box each .
Fiberoptic Splice Vault each .
Outdoor Fiber Splice Enclosure each .
Buried Cable Sign each .
Armored Fiberoptic Pigtail each .
Loop Detector Splice each .
Ramp Control Signal Design ___ each .
Flasher Signal each .
Lane Control Signal each .
Closed Circuit Television Assembly each .
Dynamic Message Sign Design ___ each .
___ Cabinet each .
Service ___ each .
___ in mm Rigid Steel Conduit linear foot .
___ in mm Non metallic Conduit linear foot .
___ in mm Pushed Conduit linear foot .
___ Cable ___ Pr .
No .
___ linear foot .
___ Cable ___ Conductor No .
___ linear foot .
___ Cable ___ linear foot .
Fiberoptic Trunk Cable ___ MM ___ SM linear foot TRAFFIC BARRIERS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of installing guardrail barrier end treatments transitions permanent barricades and other devices that protect or prohibit traffic at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
This work also consists of installing posts and guide posts and resetting existing barriers. . MATERIALS A Metal Posts A. Flanged Channel Sign Post A .
Structural Metal Posts B Blank C Wood Posts D Timber Plank SS E Wire Rope F Steel Beams Provide Wbeam thriebeam rail elements posts blocks soil plates reducer sections and end treatments meeting the requirements of A Guide to Standardized Highway Barrier Hardware published by AASHTO ARTBA and AGC .
F. Steel Plate Beams F. Rub Rail G Hardware and Fittings H Paints Provide paints as required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications I Blank J Concrete Provide concrete for anchor blocks and bearing blocks with a compressive strength of at least psi MPa within days .
The Department will not require air entrainment .
K Anchorage Rods Anchorage assemblies consist of the anchor and the fittings required to connect the anchor to the end post. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Excavation and Foundations The Contractor may dig post holes by hand or by using mechanical methods .
Excavate to the depth necessary to place the rail elements at the specified height above the ground surface and meeting the requirements for post top and side alignment as shown on the plans .
In excavating for anchorages ensure that anchorages bear on firm undisturbed earth at the depth shown on the plans .
Use the natural soil at the bottom of the excavation as the foundation of line guide and permanent barricade posts .
Tamp the natural soil at the bottom of the excavation to provide firm bearing .
Found end posts and posts at intermediate guardrail anchorages on concrete bearing blocks .
Provide concrete bearing blocks in the dimensions shown on the plans .
Firmly install concrete bearing blocks on a foundation prepared as required by the contract .
B Installing Posts Install posts of the size and type shown on the plans at the intervals shown on the plans and to the staked lines .
Install posts with post tops from ⅜ in mm of the elevation and grade shown on the plans .
Provide Type A guide posts meeting the following requirements ½ in mm nominal diameter Width from ¾ in to ¼ in mm to mm ft . m long and Made of treated wood in accordance with Wood Guardrail Posts .
Install Type A guide posts with the top of the post in mm above the shoulder P.I .
elevation unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
Provide flanged channel steel Type B guide posts as culvert markers weighing lb per ft . kg per m in the lengths specified in Flanged Channel Sign Posts .
Install Type B guide posts as shown on the plans .
Mechanically drive posts if required or allowed by the plans without damaging the posts .
Install and consolidate backfill materials specified on the plans to maintain the post plumb and in the correct position .
C Installing Barriers Install traffic barriers as shown in the plans .
Install proprietary barrier items as specified by the manufacturer .
Drill holes in wood posts with the same diameter as the bolts or fittings used .
In metal posts drill holes for bolts or other fittings with a diameter no greater than in .
mm of the diameter of the bolt or fitting .
Apply two coats of copper naphthenate or another preservative material meeting the requirements of AWPA Standard M to field cuts in treated wood .
Allow the first coat to dry for at least h before applying the second coat .
The Contractor may leave field bored holes untreated .
Provide bolts no longer than necessary to allow full nut contact after tightening at the overall nominal depth of the assembled parts plus reasonable allowance as required by the manufacturer for oversize components .
In locations of possible vehicle contact do not allow bolt ends to project beyond the rail contact face .
The Contractor may cut off the excess length of bolt to within in mm of the nut head .
C. Wire Rope Cable Guardrail Installations Except where cable clips are allowed by the manufacturer wire wrap free ends of wire rope to prevent unraveling .
At intermediate anchorages space the cables to prevent contact between the separate cables .
Install proprietary hightension cable barriers as specified by the manufacturer .
C. Steel Plate Beam Barriers Provide steel plate beam barriers including boxbeam guardrail Wbeam guardrail and Thriebeam guardrail. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If offset blocks are required by the plans or the manufacturer provide blocks made from treated timber or other material as listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Treat field cuts on treated wood in accordance with .. C Installing Barriers .
Install rail and end sections to overlap the adjacent section in the direction of traffic .
Install end treatments as shown on the plans and as staked in the field .
Install proprietary end treatments as specified by the manufacturer .
Install the guardrail end treatments and the guardrail concurrently .
C. Permanent Barricades Fabricate permanent barricades as shown in the plans .
D Painting and Field Repairs Apply two coats of paint as shown on the plans and in accordance with Inorganic ZincRich Paint System to steel above ground and not coated in accordance with Structural Metal Fence Posts .
Perform other field repairs as recommended by the manufacturer .
E Disposal of Surplus Excavated Material Dispose of surplus excavated material at no additional cost to the Department and as approved by the Engineer . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Traffic Barriers The Engineer will measure traffic barriers of each design by length to the nearest ft . m. The Engineer will measure between the centers of end posts in each continuous section including transitions .
The Engineer will not deduct expansion assemblies from the measurement .
B Permanent Barricades The Engineer will measure permanent barricades by length to the nearest ft . m from end to end of the planks of each unit .
C Guide Posts The Engineer will measure guide posts by the number of posts placed .
The Engineer will separately measure each type as shown on the plans .
D Anchorage Assemblies The Engineer will measure anchorage assemblies by the number of assemblies installed .
E End Treatments The Engineer will measure end treatments by the number of units of each type installed completeinplace . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract linear foot meter price for Traffic Barrier Design ___ includes the cost of providing all barrier appurtenances and installing the barrier as shown on the plans except the Department will separately pay for anchorage assemblies as shown in the plans .
The contract each price for End Treatment of each type includes the costs of providing and installing steel plate beam rail posts anchorage offset blocks hardware and other related materials .
The Department will pay for traffic barriers and barricades on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Guide Post Type ___ each .
Install Guide Post Type ___ each .
Anchorage Assembly each .
End Treatment Type ___ each .
Traffic Barrier Design ___ linear foot .
Permanent Barricades linear foot .
Install Traffic Barrier Design ___ linear foot .
Minnesota Standard Specifications FENCING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of constructing fences. . MATERIALS On contracts not specifying types of material for metal fencing products the Contractor may select the type of material .
Use the same type of metal fence components on the entire project .
Cap tubular metal posts .
If the contract requires coated metal posts use the same coating on posts post supports rails gate frames expansion sleeves and other hardware items or fittings in accordance with the following Zinc coating with zinc coated fence fabric Aluminum or zinc coating with aluminum coated steel fabric and Vinyl coating with vinyl coated fence fabric .
Provide black vinyl coated posts hardware and fabric with a low to medium gloss unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Use aluminum alloy posts rails frames and other hardware items with aluminum alloy fence fabric .
A brace assembly consists of a single wood or metal brace installed as a leg brace or as a horizontal brace between two consecutive posts including the required brace plate or concrete anchor post anchorages and guy wires or truss rods .
A brace assembly for a chain link fence consists of two brace bars and a truss rod .
A Fence Wire B Fence Gates C Fence Posts C. Rolled Steel Posts C. Structural Metal Posts C. Vacant C. Treated Wood Posts D Hardware and Fittings E Concrete Provide concrete in accordance with Structural Concrete Grade B Type concrete. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Remove and dispose of brush trees and other obstructions that interfere with construction of the fence in accordance with Use of Materials Found on the Project Clearing and Grubbing and .. C Removal Operations .
Provide a smooth ground profile at the fence line .
Ensure the bottom of the fence follows the contour of the ground .
At small stream crossings drainage ditches and other locations where the bottom of the standard size fence can not conform to the ground contour construct the fence to span the depression and use extra wire or fabric to close the space below the bottom of the fence unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed by the Engineer .
Provide and install longer posts with intermediate posts stakes braces extra fabric or wires to span the depression .
Perform field repairs to fence materials as recommended by the manufacturer .
B Installing Posts Rails and Braces B .
General Set posts plumb except set posts perpendicular to the slope of the ground at locations as directed by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Install corner posts pull posts end posts and gate posts at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Provide corner post assemblies at horizontal angle points with deflections greater than degrees .
Space pull posts to provide a braced post at points where the following occurs The vertical alignment deflects by greater than degrees The post anchorage is necessary to counteract wire uplift and An abrupt grade change on short runs that can not be avoided by shaping the ground to a uniform contour .
When driving fence posts protect the post tops from damage .
Remove and replace posts damaged during installation .
Anchor posts placed on concrete walls curbs or other concrete structures as shown on the plans .
If placing fence posts in solid rock set the post at least in mm into the rock or with the post bottom at the elevation shown on the plans whichever requires the lesser excavation into the rock .
Cut the post bottom to provide the height above the ground surface as shown on the plans .
Cut holes in rock to provide a clearance of at least in mm around the posts .
Fill the holes around the posts with grout consisting of one part portland cement two parts mortar sand and sufficient water to create the proper consistency .
The Contractor may add .
part hydrated lime in the grout .
Place and consolidate concrete around the posts and braces .
Allow the concrete to cure for at least calendar days before installing the fence wire .
The Contractor may pour the concrete into prebored holes without forming if no concrete contamination occurs during placement .
Except as otherwise required for posts and braces set in rock or concrete backfill the annular space around posts set in prebored holes in layers using selected material from the excavation with each layer thoroughly compacted to produce a rigid post setting .
Use other backfill material if required by the contract .
Dispose of surplus excavated material in low areas along the fence line or as directed by the Engineer .
Neatly finish the adjacent area .
B .
Metal Post Installations Set posts for chainlink fabric fencing in concrete as shown on the plans .
The Contractor may drive line posts if the post lengths provide a post embedment of at least ft . m into the ground .
Drive rolled steel line posts .
The Contractor may provide rolled steel end posts corner posts and pull posts including the required braces with anchor plates and brace plates .
Set the posts in dug holes .
The Contractor may omit the anchor and brace plates and set the posts and braces in concrete .
Backfill excavations around the posts and braces using the excavated material .
Thoroughly compact the backfill .
Set rolled steel gate posts in concrete .
Provide and install metal post extensions in the lengths directed by the Engineer at the locations shown on the plans .
If post splicing is necessary use a standard thread and coupling of the same material to thread and join the pipe ends at the splice .
Avoid splicing in the exposed upper portion of the post .
Provide a suitable plug in the bottom end of each extended post .
B .
Wood Post Installations The Contractor may drive posts or set wood posts in prebored holes .
Place the larger end of the post in the ground .
When driving posts place the square cut or pointed end in the ground .
Except for holes in rock cut post holes to a diameter providing a clearance of at least in mm around the post to allow backfill and compaction .
Provide wood braces in accordance with Wood Fence Posts Treated .
Provide wood braces with diameters at the small end equal to the minimum permissible diameter as shown on the plans .
Ensure the diameter at the small end does not exceed the top diameter of the smaller adjacent post .
C Installing Fence Wire Install and pull tight the fence wire as recommended by the manufacturer .
C. Chain Link Fabric Place chain link fabric in continuous runs between corner end and gate posts .
Install the fabric on the side of line posts that face away from the main road except as otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Ensure impacts from snow plowing stress the posts rather than the fasteners .
At ends of chain link fabric thread a stretcher bar through the fabric loops and use clamps to fasten the bar to the posts as shown on the plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Weave prebent wire of the same kind as the fabric to make splices in the chain link fabric .
C. Barbed Wire and Woven Wire Unless otherwise directed by the Engineer place barbed wire and woven wire installed on tangent alignment or on curves no greater than degree on the side of line posts that faces away from the main road .
If placing the fence on horizontal curves greater than degree place the wire on the side of line posts on the outside of the curve .
Offset posts at corners to the inside so that the wire will bear against the post .
Fasten fence wire to end corner gate or pull posts before fastening to intermediate line posts .
Stretch woven wire to make longitudinal wires taut and to remove percent of the factory fabricated fence crimp .
When required by the plans cut and splice woven wire at the pull posts to obtain and maintain uniform tension in horizontal wires .
The Contractor may use a wire crimping tool to increase the number or depth of tension curves to maintain tension in horizontal wires .
Use wire clips or clamps in accordance with Fence Wire to fasten wires to metal line posts .
Use galvanized staples to fasten wires to wood posts .
Where the wire loops around end corner or pull posts wrap the wire around the post at least four complete turns .
Use Ushaped wire staples at least ¾ in mm long in pine posts and at least in mm long in cedar posts .
The Contractor may use Lshaped staples with serrated barbed or ring shanks at least ½ in mm long .
Diagonally drive Ushaped staples across the wood grain to prevent both points from entering between the same grain .
Slope staples upward against the pull of the wire in depressions with wire uplift .
Slope staples downward on level ground and over knolls .
Staple the wires at corner end and pull posts .
On line posts drive the staples to the point that allows movement of the wire .
Do not damage the wire while driving the staples .
To splice wire between posts use an approved splicing sleeve as indicated in Fence Wire or wrap each wire end around the other wire from turns to turns to form a lasting connection .
Use a splicing tool in place of hand wrapping to obtain uniformly tight wraps as directed by the Engineer .
If using splicing sleeves on woven wire maintain the same horizontal distance between vertical wires as in the fabricated wire .
If using the wrap method to splice woven wire allow the two end stay wires to abut each other and enclose the wires within the wrap .
D Installing Gates Install gates designed to allow locking with a Departmentprovided padlock and equipped with a padlock keeper at the locations shown on the plans .
E Electrical Grounds Install electrical grounds consisting of copper coated steel rods with a nominal diameter of at least ⅝ in mm and a length of at least ft . m along each fence line at the staked locations .
Drive ground rods to an elevation flush with the ground surface at points directly below or adjacent to the fence wire .
Connect each ground rod to the fence with a solid No .
copper wire .
Use approved type metal clamps as indicated in Fence Wire to attach the ground wire to the ground rod and to the fence wires to electrically ground each longitudinal fence wire .
The Department will not require greater than one connection on woven wire and chain link fabric near the bottom at each ground rod .
Install electrical grounds in the following locations On each fence line at the point of crossing beneath an electric power line .
Two grounds at each pedestrian gate one on each side of the gate opening as close to the gate posts as practicable .
Additional grounds on each fence line to maintain spacing between grounds of ft m on fences with metal posts and ft m on fences with wood posts .
At least one electrical ground on each separate section of fence .
The Department defines a separate section of fence as a run with unbroken electrical continuity .
On each separate section of fence uniformly space electrical grounds and locate a ground within a distance from each end no greater than half of the desired maximum spacing interval . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Wire Fence The Engineer will separately measure fence of each design by length along the bottom of the fence from center to center of end posts excluding the lengths of gates as measured between gate posts. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Brace Assemblies The Engineer will separately measure wood or metal brace assemblies by the number of each kind constructed completeinplace regardless of length design or anchorage .
C Electrical Grounds The Engineer will measure electrical grounds by the number of ground rods and connections provided and installed completeinplace .
D Gates The Engineer will measure gates by the number of individual units constructed completeinplace .
E Metal Post Extensions The Engineer will measure metal post extensions by length of extensions based on the difference between the standard driven post length and the actual post length as installed . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract each price for Metal Brace Assembly includes the cost of the brace plate or concrete anchor post anchorages and guy wires or truss rods .
The contract each price for Electrical Ground at includes the cost of the ground wire and connectors .
The Department will include the cost of removing and disposing of brush tree and obstructions with relevant contract unit prices for fence construction unless the contract provides specific pay items for the work .
The Department will include the cost of providing and installing longer fence posts intermediate posts stakes braces extra fabric or wires as required with relevant contract unit prices for fence construction unless the contract includes specific contract pay items for the work .
The Department will pay for fencing on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Pedestrian Gate each .
Vehicular Gate each .
Wood Brace Assembly each .
Metal Brace Assembly each .
Metal Brace Assembly Chain Link Fence each .
Electrical Ground each .
Wire Fence Design___ linear foot .
Metal Post Extensions linear foot TRAFFIC SIGNS AND DEVICES .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of fabricating packaging and delivering or installing traffic signs and devices. . MATERIALS A General Provide electrical material and equipment meeting the requirements of .
Electrical Lighting Systems Materials .
B Structural Steel Fabricate structural steel posts and trusses from steel meeting the requirements of LowCarbon Structural Steel unless otherwise required by the contract .
Provide structural bolts nuts and washers meeting the requirements of .. B High Strength Structural Steel Bolts and Galvanized Hardware .
Provide bolt anchorages as specified in the contract or if not specified as approved .
C Concrete Mix G D Reinforcement Bars All reinforcement bars shall be as indicated in the contract and shall be epoxy coated .
E Spiral Reinforcement .
Minnesota Standard Specifications F Signs Delineators and Markers Fabricate sign panels in accordance with the following unless otherwise required by the contract .
Fabricate all standard signs lighting system identification plates overhead sign identification plates markers and delineators according to the standard sign drawings in the MnDOT Standard Signs and Markings Manual .
Provide sheet aluminum sign base material for Type C Type D Type Overlay sign panels lighting system identification plates overhead sign identification plates delineators markers and Type OH sign panels on sign supports in accordance with .. A .. a Sheet Aluminum except provide nonreflectorized lexonblack flexible plastic signbase material for cylinderstyle delineators .
Provide extruded aluminum sign base material in accordance with .. A .. b Extruded Aluminum Bolted Type covered with .
in sheet aluminum meeting the requirements of .. A .. a Sheet Aluminum .
for Type A Type EA Type EO and Type OH sign panels on panel mounting posts .
Provide in aluminum alloy pullthrough rivets as fasteners to attach the sheet aluminum to the extruded panel .
Tightly butt the sheet aluminum vertically and rivet to the extruded panel on centers no greater than in vertically and horizontally .
Rivet the edges and corners of each sheet .
Do not place rivets within in of the extruded panel joints .
After attaching the sheet ensure the sheet aluminum is free of waviness .
Fabricate all rigid permanent signs markers and delineators with materials from the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List .
Provide retroreflective sign sheeting material for sign panels lighting system identification plates overhead sign identification plates delineators and markers meeting the requirements of .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI for Type XI unless otherwise specified in this section .
Provide black sign legend material according to .. A .. b Signs Delineators and Markers Requirements Materials Screen Processed Painted Legend or .. A .. c Signs Delineators and Markers Requirements Materials Transparent Overlay Film Legend .
Provide Type V or Type VIII retroreflective sheeting material for white X Cylinder Style Delineators .
Provide Type III MT or Type V retroreflective sheeting material for yellow X Cylinder Style Delineators .
Provide all warning signs yellow markers yellow delineators yellow background on Sign Panel Type Overlays and the yellow background on Type A and Type OH sign panels with fluorescent yellow retroreflective sheeting except if indicated differently below For W W W W series W S S Sa and S standard signs provide retroreflective sheeting sign face material meeting the requirements of .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI for Type XI FL fluorescent yellowgreen .
When warning sign plaques are mounted on the same structure as a warning sign match the plaque color and sheeting type with the primary warning sign color and sheeting type .
When a SP sign plaque is to be installed above a regulatory speed limit sign fabricate the sign plaque with fluorescent yellowgreen retroreflective sheeting .
Fabricate the R series the R and the S standard signs with fluorescent yellowgreen retroreflective sheeting on only the warning color parts of the sign according to the design in the MnDOT Standard Signs and Markings Manual .
Provide nonreflectorized black sign face material and fluorescent yellow retroreflective sheeting for sign legend material for X Type Object Markers .
Provide nonreflectorized black sign face material and red retroreflective sheeting for sign legend material for X Type Object Markers .
For the sign face material on the MA Route Marker and the MB Type Overlay obtain the gold color with a screen processed color using a transparent gold paint .
Obtain the blue color with a screenprocessed color using transparent blue paint .
Ensure the overlap of the blue and gold screenprocessed colors does not exceed in .
For sign panels with brown sheeting provide white retroreflective sheeting for sign face material meeting the requirements of .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI and brown transparent overlay film meeting the requirements of .. A. Transparent Overlay Film .
Provide sign legend material with brown transparent overlay film produced by the same manufacturer that fabricates retroreflective sheeting meeting the requirements of .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI for Type XI .
If splicing is required to apply transparent overlay film on sign panels provide vertical butt splices spaced so splices do not occur through letters or arrows .
Before applying the transparent overlay film to the sign face material perform the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Cut and weedout the legend and border from the transparent overlay film as shown on the sign panel details in the contract .
Do not cut and weedout the transparent overlay film covered by Sign Panels Type Overlay Apply the weeded brown transparent overlay film to the white retroreflective sheeting signface material and Apply the transparent overlay film corner pieces located outside the border that fill in the square corners of the sign panel .
Sign panels for signs with black blue green and red backgrounds may be provided through the method described for sign panels with brown sheeting .
Screen the sign legend material for colors other than black and white in accordance with .. A .. b Screen Processed Painted Legend .
G Anchor Rods H Flanged Channel Sign Posts I Square Tubular Sign Posts .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Fabricate and install traffic signs and devices in accordance with the MN MUTCD and the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Do not perform work on the project until underground utilities are located in accordance with Utility Property and Service .
Replace electrical cable damaged due to Contractornegligence at no additional cost to the Department .
Replace damaged electrical cable from terminal point to terminal point .
Construct electrical systems or conduit systems for conveying electrical cables and conductors or portions of electrical cables and conductors as required by the contract in accordance with Permits Licenses and Taxes and .
Electrical Lighting Systems Construction Requirements .
Sign locations and post lengths indicated in the contract are approximate .
The Engineer will make the final determination of sign locations and the required post lengths for Type A and Type OH Signs in the field .
The Contractor shall determine the required post lengths for all other signs .
If refurbishing signs with legends that are pertinent to traffic do not extend the downtime for the sign beyond the eighthour period from a.m. to p.m. unless providing a replacement sign at no additional cost to the Department .
If in the opinion of the Engineer the message on a sign panel is not pertinent to existing traffic delay installation of the sign panel until the message becomes pertinent or install the sign and place an effective cover over the nonpertinent message .
Provide opaque covers that do not hold moisture against the sign face .
The Engineer will not approve burlap as an effective cover for retroreflective signs .
Install the sign panel with the cover and the Department will assume responsibility for maintaining and removing the cover after the Engineer accepts the work .
Unless the Contractor arranges to reclaim cover material the material will become the Departments property upon final acceptance of the work .
Cover maintain and uncover sign panels with nonpertinent messages at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department considers removal and replacement of existing guardrail for the convenience of the Contractor as incidental work .
Replace topsoil sodded and seeded areas disturbed by the work and dispose of excess excavated materials as approved by the Engineer .
B Concrete Structures Produce concrete for footings in accordance with the requirements for Mix No .
G concrete as specified in Structural Concrete .
Provide a rubbedsurface finish on exposed concrete surfaces .
Do not install sign posts on concrete footings until the concrete has cured for a minimum of seven days .
B .
Concrete Footings If the Engineer approves the Contractor may use either spread footings or drilledshaft footings as a substitute. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Construct footings as required by the contract .
The Department will only pay for the planned design quantity for each footing at the contract unit price except for Department required design changes .
If the contract requires drilled shaft footings the Contractor may submit an alternate design for approval by the Engineer with the understanding that if approved the Department will not adjust the contract quantities or unit prices .
If the Engineer approves the alternate design the Contractor may proceed .
Provide design details for alternate drilled shaft footing designs in accordance with one of the following Use a constant diameter shaft at least in greater than the diagonal dimension of the column base plate .
Use the planned longitudinal reinforcement bars without bending .
Use either spiral reinforcement or tie bars spaced at in centers for the full length of the shaft or Install a horizontal construction joint at the bottom of the tapered section of the shaft about ft below the top .
Before placing new concrete above the construction joint coat the surface of the inplace concrete with a Departmentapproved bonding agent .
Lap vertical reinforcement bars a length equal to times the diameter of the reinforcement bar used .
Construct footings in accordance with .
Concrete Bridge Construction Construction Requirements except as modified by .. B .
Median Barrier Footing .
The Contractor may use undisturbed earth to form concrete placement if the soil is stable enough as determined by the Engineer to allow concrete placement and the Contractor takes precautions to prevent contamination of the concrete .
B .
Median Barrier Footing Provide NMC conduit and fittings to connect to the nonmetallic conduit in adjacent median barrier as detailed on the plans and the special provisions .
Provide a surface finish and color that matches the adjacent median barrier .
C Sign Support Provide and install a sign support as required by the contract current AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and this subsection .. C. Provide concrete footings as required by the contract .
Determine the reinforcement steel and the anchor rods as required by the contract .
Provide and install an overhead sign identification plate in accordance with .. P Overhead Sign Identification Plate .
D Overhead Sign Structure Repair Repair an existing overhead sign structure in accordance with the Equipment Rental and the following Contact the Departments Structural Metals Inspection Unit DSMIU to schedule inspection of sign structures .
Perform the inspection before removing the sign structure from storage or after salvaging the structure .
Correct the following conditions if encountered as determined by the DSMIU Rusted or missing nuts bolts or washers Defective shop and field splices on main chord angles Missing welds Cracking welds or structural elements Section loss on post base plate Flame gouges on base plate or at bolt holes Cracks around post handhole Zinc coating loss or deterioration and Rusting .
Perform repairs in accordance with Structural Metals .
Verify that each locking pin fits completely into the locking pin hole in the handrail hinge while the handrail is in the raised position .
For locking pins that do not fit drill out the handrail hinge to make a proper fit .
Repair damage to galvanized surfaces in accordance with .. L. Galvanizing .
After completing the repairs and before installation obtain reinspection by the DSMIU .
E Structural Steel Manufacture and fabricate structural steel in accordance with Structural Metals and the additional requirements and limitations specified in this subsection .. E. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide shop drawings for overhead sign structures and for Type A sign structures in accordance with .. B Shop Detail Drawings .
Assemble the truss sections and posts in the shop before galvanizing .
Check truss sections and posts for straightness alignment and dimensions and correct any variations .
Correct warpage from galvanizing before installing structural steel .
Ensure main chord angles for overhead sign structures that are at least ½ in thick meet a Charpy Vnotch impact strength requirement of ftlb at F. Drill or mechanically cut overhead sign post base plate anchor rod holes .
Lubricate the threads of anchor rods and nuts with antiseize material before installation .
Use the following minimum torque values Table Minimum Torque Values for Anchor Rods Anchor Rod Diameter Torque in ftlb ¼ in ftlb ½ in ftlb ¾ in ftlb in ftlb Tighten all leveling nuts and top nuts against the post base plate so that no shifting of top or bottom washers occurs when they are struck with an inspection hammer .
After this tightness has been achieved additionally tighten the top nuts another th turn onehalf of a flat .
Mar the anchor rod threads directly above the top nuts after tightening is completed .
Mar the threads of the anchor bolts in accordance with .. H Setting Anchor Bolts .
Unless otherwise required by the contract provide and install galvanized structural steel posts HPile as footings for Type A signs in accordance with Piling Structural Metals and the following Construct footings as required by the contract The Department will allow use of a ft HPile post instead of welding a ft stub post to the ft HPile Obtain a bearing capacity from ton to ton for each HPile in accordance with Piling Splice additional length of HPile in accordance with Piling and drive to the bearing capacity required in .. C Equipment for Driving if the driven length of HPile specified in the contract fails to reach bearing capacity Repair damage to galvanized surfaces in accordance with Structural Metals before back filling .
F Flanged Channel Sign Posts F. Furnish Flanged Channel Sign Post Fabricate package and deliver flanged channel sign posts in accordance with Signs Delineators and Markers Flanged Channel Sign Posts this section and the following Band posts of the same weight and length with banding material in lots of no more than posts per bundle Label each bundle with the following .
Post weight per foot mass per meter .
Contractors name .
Project number .
Source of the material and .
Suppliers name Deliver the posts to the Department as required by the contract Give the Engineer at least three working days notice and Deposit posts as directed by Department personnel .
The Engineer will reject material with damage detected during unloading .
The Department will perform final inspection and acceptance of the posts within calendar days after the date of delivery to the Department .
F. Furnish and Install Flanged Channel Sign Posts Install the posts plumb above ground located and oriented as directed by the Engineer .
Remove and replace posts that are bent or damaged and considered unacceptable by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Set posts firmly in the ground .
After driving ensure the top of the post has the same crosssectional dimensions as the post body .
If mounting a delineator on a bridge rail provide and install a bracket as required by the contract in lieu of a conventional steel post .
Install posts in surfaced medians or sidewalks as detailed on the plans or in the special provisions .
G Modify Post Do not splice Type A sign post sections below the friction fuse .
Extend Type A sign posts located above the friction fuse and panel mounting posts by welding a new or salvaged section of the same size to an existing post in accordance with Structural Metals .
The Contractor may extend S . panel mounting posts by bolt splicing as required by the contract and in accordance with Structural Metals .
Galvanize post extensions in accordance with Structural Metals .
If shortening posts dispose of removed sections in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures .
The Contractor may use thermal cutting in accordance with Structural Metals .
Repair galvanized areas marred by cutting or welding in accordance with Structural Metals .
H Sign Panels Fabricate the sign panels in accordance with the standard sign drawings in the MnDOT Standard Signs and Markings Manual or as required by the contract .
For sign panels detailed in the contract provide sign panel layouts with the following characteristics The vertical dimension given is for the legend component having the largest vertical dimension in the particular line of copy .
Other legend components are centered on the larger legend component unless indicated otherwise .
The horizontal dimensions given within the sign panel are to the tenth of an inch and are cumulative representing the distance from the left edge of panel to the extreme left edge of the legend component .
The position of an arrow is measured in degrees counterclockwise from a right horizontal reference line .
The abbreviation MOD used in the sign panel recap Modified .
Package deliver store and install sign panels in accordance with Handling Materials Signs Delineators and Markers and the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
H. Warning Stickers For furnished and installed signs or sign panels affix a Departmentprovided warning sticker to the backside of each sign panel directly above the fabrication sticker .. B .
Fabrication Fabrication Stickers .
Warning stickers are available at the Departments Transportation District Office specified in the Contract .
The Transportation Districts contact person and phone number are specified in the Contract .
Give the Transportation Districts contact person thirty calendar days advance notice before picking up the stickers .
H. Sign Panels Type Overlay Type Overlays are separate panels mounted on the face of signs to form a part of the legend .
Attach Type Overlays to the sign panels with rivets spaced in on centers except at the edges .
Attach the edges of each Type Overlay with rivets spaced no greater than in on centers .
Do not install rivets within in of extruded panel joints .
H. Extruded Sign Panels Attach extruded sign panels to sign posts or panel mounting posts with new post clips and torque each post clip to ftlb to ftlb .
H. Furnish Sign Panels For sign panels the Contractor furnishes but does not install group sign panels by type and then size .
Ensure each package only contains the sign panels for a specific location and no more than sign panels per package .
Label each package with the following Sign number Contractors name Project number Material source Suppliers name Quantity of sign panels and The delivery location required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide notice at least working days to the Departments sign shop personnel before delivery of sign panels to the Department .
Deposit sign panels as directed by Department personnel .
The Engineer will reject sign panels with damage detected during unloading .
The Department will perform final inspection and acceptance of sign panels within calendar days of the date of delivery to the Department .
I Blank J Saw Sign Panels Sawcut extruded aluminum sign panels and ensure the resulting panel edge is smooth .
Dispose of excess material in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures .
K Sign Panel Overlay Type __ Provide and install overlay panels including legends on existing extruded aluminum sign panels .
Attach the overlay sheets to the extruded panel with in aluminum alloy pullthrough rivets .
Use .
in aluminum sign base material for overlay sheets in accordance with .. A .. a Sheet Aluminum .
Use retroreflective sheeting sign face material in accordance with .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI except for the following For a yellow background on sign panel overlays use retroreflective sheeting as specified by .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI FL fluorescent yellow and For a brown background use white retroreflective sheeting as specified by .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI .
Use sign legend material as specified by .. A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI for the sign face material on each sign panel except for the following Use brown transparent overlay film as specified in .. A .
Requirements Transparent Overlay Film If brown transparent overlay film for sign panel overlays requires splicing make splices vertical and butt spliced and spaced so splices do not occur through letters or arrows .
Before applying the brown transparent overlay film to sign face material perform the following Cut and weedout legends and borders specified on the sign panel overlay details in the contract from the brown transparent overlay film .
Do not cut and weedout the brown transparent overlay film that will be covered by Sign Panels Type Overlay .
Apply the weeded brown transparent overlay film to the white retroreflective sheeting sign face material .
Apply the brown transparent overlay film corner pieces located outside the border that fill in the square corners of the sign panel overlay .
Use directapplied sign legend material in accordance with .. A .. b Screen Processed Painted Legend or .. A .. c Transparent Overlay Film Legend for black legends .
Remove demountable legends on existing sign panels and dispose of them in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures .
Tightly butt the overlay sheets vertically and rivet to the existing panel on in vertical and horizontal centers .
Rivet the edges and corners of each overlay sheet .
Do not place rivets within in of the extruded panel joints .
Attach overlay sheets to the existing panel so sheets are free of waviness .
Remove inplace post clips and attach overlaid extruded sign panels to sign posts or panel mounting posts with new post clips .
Torque each post clip from ftlb to ftlb when attaching all extruded sign panels to posts .
L Install Sign Panel Type __ Install a salvaged or Departmentprovided sign panel as required by the contract and the following Install Type A and Type OH sign panels using new post clips Install Type EA and Type EO sign panels with new flanged channel or S x . panel mounting posts and post clips Torque each post clip from ftlb to ftlb when attaching extruded sign panels to posts .
Install Type C and Type D sign panels with new nuts bolts and washers and Use new sign bracket assemblies as shown on the plans for Type OH sign panels installed on sign supports. . Minnesota Standard Specifications M Install Sign Type __ Install Type A signs on breakaway supports at the locations required by the contract .
Install salvaged or Departmentprovided Type A sign panels using new post clips .
Torque each post clip from ftlb to ftlb when attaching all extruded sign panels to posts .
Completed installations shall be in accordance with the contract and details shown on the plans .
Provide and install a new friction fuse consisting of a friction fuse plate and hinge plate new bolts nuts and washers on each post .
Repair damaged galvanized surfaces in accordance with Structural Metals .
Provide and install a new sign structure for Type C and Type D signs and install salvaged sign panels as required by the contract using new nuts bolts and washers .
Install salvaged sign panels to the mounting heights as shown on the plans .
Install each mast arm mounted Type D signs at the locations shown on the plans to the Engineers satisfaction and in accordance with the Structural Details For Signal Mast Arm Mounted Signs specified in the MnDOT Standard Signs and Markings Manual page A .
If the materials specified in the MnDOT Standard Signs and Markings Manual page A are no longer available provide each mast arm mounted Type D sign panel with a mounting system approved by the Department .
Obtain approval for the mounting system by submitting product specifications and strength calculations that demonstrate compliance with the current AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Address submittals to the Fabrication Methods Engineer MnDOT Office of Bridges and Structures Mail Stop Hadley Avenue North Oakdale Minnesota .
Provide new flanged channel or S x . panel mounting posts for Type EA and Type EO sign panels and install salvaged sign panels with new post clips as required by the contract .
Torque each post clip to ftlb to ftlb .
Install Type OH sign structures obtained by salvage or from storage on new concrete footings in accordance with the torque requirements specified by .. E Structural Steel and as required by the contract .
Remove provide and replace the following with new components Safety chains and components of safety chain snap assemblies Safety rail locking pins and Chains welded to the locking pin heads one chainlocking pin .
Dispose of removed items in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures .
Verify that each locking pin fits in the locking pin hole in the handrail hinge while the handrail is in the raised position .
Drill out the handrail hinge to make a proper fit for locking pins that do not fit .
Repair damaged galvanized surfaces in accordance with .. L. Galvanizing .
N BLANK O Lighting System Identification Plate Provide and install a lighting system identification plate that incorporates the lighting system identification number appearing in parenthesis directly below or alongside the sign number in the contract for each new lighted overhead sign as specified in the contract .
Strapmount the plate on the overhead sign post as required by the contract .
Install the plate on the righthand post when looking in the direction of traffic flow .
If signs face both directions of travel on a single structure provide and install two plates .
Install plates directly below the Overhead Sign Identification Plate as specified in this section .
For bridge mounted signs install the lighting system identification plate on a lb per ft delineator post in accordance with Flanged Channel Sign Posts .
Install the lighting system identification plate and post as close to the bridge as possible and behind the guardrail .
If no guardrail is in place install the plate and post at least ft outside the edge of the shoulder or face of curb .
Install the plate directly below the Overhead Sign Identification Plate as specified in this section .
P Overhead Sign Identification Plate Provide and install an overhead sign identification plate for each overhead sign installed as required by the contract .
Provide a plate that incorporates the overhead sign number directly below the sign panel shown on the plan layout and as required by the contract .
For post mounted signs strapmount the plate on the overhead sign post as required by the contract .
Install the plate on the righthand post when looking in the direction of traffic flow .
If signs face both directions of travel on a single structure provide and install two plates .
Install the plate ft above the base plate elevation facing traffic .
For bridgemounted Type OH signs with sign lighting install the overhead sign identification plate ft above the edge of the pavement on the lighting system identification plate delineator post as specified in this section .
For bridgemounted Type OH signs without sign lighting install the plate on a lb per ft delineator post in accordance with Flanged Channel Sign Posts .
Install the plate and post as close to the bridge as possible and behind the guardrail .
If .
Minnesota Standard Specifications no guardrail is in place install the plate and post at least ft outside the edge of shoulder or face of curb .
Install the plate so the bottom is ft above the edge of pavement .
Remove the existing plate if present when installing new overhead sign identification plates on existing overhead sign structures .
Q Extend Walkway Support Extend each walkway support on existing Type OH sign structures as required by the contract .
R Friction Fuse Provide and install a friction fuse on each existing Type A sign post as required by the contract and the following Remove the inplace friction fuse consisting of a friction fuse plate and a hinge plate and inplace mounting hardware and dispose of these items in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures Provide and install a new friction fuse consisting of a friction fuse plate and a hinge plate new bolts nuts and washers on each post as required by the contract and Repair damaged galvanized surfaces in accordance with .. L. Galvanizing .
S Keeper Plate Provide and install a keeper plate on each existing Type A sign post as required by the contract .
Verify sign post dimensions in the field .
Immediately before installing keeper plates clean the base connection plate to remove grit dirt and deleterious material .
Reinstall the post in accordance with base connection bolting procedures shown on the plans .
Replace missing damaged or rusty bolts nuts and washers .
T Reference Location Signs Provide reference location signs or install salvaged reference locations signs as required by the contract .
Provide and install the tubular or flanged channel sign post mounting bracket or strap mounting hardware and attach the reference location sign with mounting hardware required by the contract .
For reference location signs attached to Type C or Type D sign structures install the reference location sign to the left sign post with new stainless steel bolts nuts washers and nylon washers at the mounting height designated in the Plan .
For reference location signs mounted back to back install a nylon washer against the face of each reference location sign to prevent damage to the sheeting materials .
U Traffic Control Provide signs for traffic control meeting the requirements of the MnDOT Standard Signs and Markings Manual .
Provide barricades meeting the requirements of MnDOT Standard Plate .
Provide all other traffic control devices in accordance with the MN MUTCD .
Install nylon washer spacers between the temporary traffic construction sign panels and the inplace sign panels .
Provide Traffic Control Devices TCDs as required by the contract and MN MUTCD .
Install TCDs in accordance with the MN MUTCD before beginning work .
Maintain TCDs while in place and remove them if not required .
V Scheduling of Work Schedule work in accordance with the following requirements Ensure one of the following signs is in service at all times for each exit .
The Exit sign in the gore or .
The Exit direction sign just in advance of the gore Provide at least one directional sign either an advance guide sign or an Exit directional sign in service at all times for each exit and Do not remove sign structures until approved by the Engineer .
The Engineers approval for removing an existing sign is contingent upon compliance with Items and above and upon completion of a constructed functional replacement sign .
W Delineators and Markers Provide delineators and markers or install salvaged delineators and markers as required by the contract .
Provide and install the tubular or flanged channel sign post mounting bracket or strap mounting hardware and attach the delineator or marker with mounting hardware required by the contract .
X Infiltration Area Marker Furnish and install a new lbft flanged channel post at the location approved by the Engineer .
Attach the furnished sign panel to the flanged channel post with new mounting hardware at the mounting height detailed on the Plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Y Safety Cable Provide and install brackets aircraft cable and all necessary hardware required to assemble and attach safety cable as shown on the plans for Type OH signs with walkways and no sign lighting . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A General The Engineer will individually measure each of the following items modify post install sign panel type __ overhead sign identification plate lighting system identification plate extend walkway support friction fuse and keeper plate .
B Concrete Structures B .
Concrete Footings The Engineer will measure concrete footings for Type OH signs by volume based on the dimensions required by the contract .
The Engineer will not deduct the volume of metal reinforcement anchorages and conduit .
The Engineer will measure anchorage assemblies separately .
B .
Median Barrier Footing The Engineer will measure median barrier footings by volume based on the dimensions required by the contract The Engineer will not deduct the volume of metal reinforcement anchorages and conduit .
The Engineer will measure anchorage assemblies separately .
C Sign Support The Engineer will measure a sign support as a complete unit including concrete footings and overhead sign identification plates .
D Overhead Sign Structure Repair The Engineer will measure overhead sign structure repair by the number of hours required to complete the repair including use and operation of equipment travel time inside the project limits and work and materials involved .
E Structural Steel The Engineer will measure the following structural steel items Trusses for overhead signs Design B Posts for overhead signs Design B Walkway supports for overhead signs Design B Walkway grating for overhead signs Design B Panel mounting posts for overhead signs Design B Trusses for overhead signs Bridge Mounted and Posts and Hpiles for Type A signs .
The Engineer will measure structural steel items separately by the computed weight mass of structural steel incorporated in each item in accordance with the measurement provisions of .. A Weight as modified by the following The weight measurement for Design B overhead sign trusses includes the following .
Structural members of the truss .
The lower chord juncture plate .
Cap plates .
Tie plates .
Collar .
Panel mounting posts .
Walkway grating .
Walkway supports .
Safety rail and .
Fixture mounting channel .
The weight measurement for Design B overhead sign posts includes the following .
Posts .
The base juncture plate .
Lower chord juncture post plate .
Gusset plates .
Baseplate .
Overhead sign identification plate .
Lighting System Identification Plate if sign lighting installed and .
The anchorage assembly .
The weight mass measurement for Bridge Mounted overhead sign trusses includes the following .
The structural members of the truss .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
The panel mounting posts .
Walkway grating .
Walkway supports .
Safety rail and .
Fixture mounting channels .
The Engineer will base the computed weight mass on the quantity tables in the contract The Engineer will not measure bolts nuts rivets washers and shims used in the fabrication and erection of signs and will not apply the provisions of .. A Weight that provide a percent increase in weight mass .
F Flanged Channel Sign Posts The Engineer will measure flanged channel sign posts by the computed weight for each post size provided .
G Sign Panels The Engineer will measure each type of sign panel by area based on the nominal dimensions of the sign panels .
All signs are considered rectangular for the purpose of measurement except that the Engineer will measure triangular shaped sign panels as the actual area of the triangle .
The Engineer will not make deductions for rounded corners .
H Saw Sign Panels The Engineer will measure sawing of extruded sign panels by the length of the saw cut .
I Sign Panel Overlay Type __ The Engineer will measure sign panel overlays by the area and type of sign panels overlaid .
J Install Sign Type __ The Engineer will measure each type of sign by the number of complete units in place in accordance with .. M Install Sign Type __ .
K Delineators and Markers The Engineer will measure delineators and markers by the number of each type of complete units provided and installed .
A complete unit consists of the following as specified by the MnDOT Standard Signs and Markings Manual Traffic Engineering Manual or as required by the contract Delineator or marker panel Tubular or flanged channel sign post Mounting bracket or strap mounting hardware Delineator or marker panel mounting hardware . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for traffic signs and devices at the contract unit price per unit of measure .
The contract cubic yard price for Concrete Footings includes the cost of constructing the footings reinforcement bars replacing topsoil and sodded areas disturbed by the operations and disposing excess excavated material as approved by the Engineer .
The Department will include the cost of excavation for concrete structures with other relevant contract unit prices except for the following The Department will pay for the volume of excavation required in below the bottom of the concrete structure measured as actual material removed within the limitations set forth in .. A Structure Excavation as extra work .
The Department will pay for Class R excavation that is encountered and can not be avoided by adjustment of the concrete structure location as extra work .
The contract pound price for Structural Steel Design B Posts for OH Signs includes the cost of anchorage assemblies .
The contract unit price each for Median Barrier Footing includes the cost of constructing the footing and reinforcement bars in place as shown on the plans .
The Department will include the cost of excavation for concrete structures with other relevant contract unit prices except for the following The Department will pay for the volume of excavation required in below the bottom of the concrete structure measured as actual material removed within the limitations set forth in .. A Structure Excavation as extra work .
The Department will pay for Class R excavation that is encountered and can not be avoided by adjustment of the concrete structure location as extra work .
The contract unit price each for Sign Support includes the cost of providing and installing the sign support concrete footings and overhead sign identification plate. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The contract manhour price for Overhead Sign Structure Repair includes the cost of performing the work as required by the contract except that the contract each price for Install Sign Type OH will include the cost of the crane work and materials required to position and block the truss up off the ground .
Overhead sign structure repair is exempt from Compensation for Altered Quantities .
The Department will not make a unit price adjustment for overhead sign structure repair in the event of a quantity underrun or overrun .
The contract pound price for Structural Steel includes the cost of providing and erecting the structural steel items as required by the contract including the cost of providing and installing posts in surfaced medians or sidewalks .
The contract pound price for Structural Steel also includes the cost of manufacturing packaging and delivering flanged channel sign posts as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Modify Post includes the cost of modifying each post as required by the contract .
The Department will include the cost of screening and installing fabrication stickers and installing warning stickers with the applicable pay items for traffic signs and devices .
The contract square foot price for Sign Panels Type C and Type D includes the cost of providing and installing the tubular or flanged channel sign posts stringers brackets and attachment angles or strap mounting hardware for sign panel attachment .
The contract square foot price for Sign Panels Type EA and Type EO includes the cost of providing and installing the flanged channel or S x . panel mounting posts .
The contract square foot price for Sign Panels Type A includes the cost of the hardware required to assemble the panel sections and to attach the assembled sign panels to the sign posts .
The contract square foot price for Sign Panels Type OH includes the cost of the hardware required to assemble the panel sections and attach the assembled sign panels to the panel mountings posts or the sign support .
The Department will include the cost of torquing post clips with the applicable pay items for traffic signs and devices .
The contract unit price each for Furnish Sign Panels Type ___ includes the cost of providing and delivering the sign panels as required by the contract .
The contract linear foot price for Saw Sign Panels Type ___ includes the cost of sawing sign panels as required by the contract .
The contract square foot price for Sign Panel Overlay Type ___ includes the cost of removing and reinstalling the existing sign panel and providing installing and torquing new post clips except the contract square foot price for Sign Panels Type Overlays includes the cost of providing and installing new type overlays .
The contract unit price each for Install Sign Panel Type ___ includes the cost of installing each sign panel as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Install Sign Type ___ includes the cost of installing each sign as required by the contract .
The contract unit price for Install Sign Type OH includes the cost of safety chains and components of safety chain snap assemblies safety rail locking pins and chains welded to the locking pin heads .
The Department will pay for posts and concrete footings or HPile footings for Type A signs and the footings for Type OH signs separately .
The Department will pay for posts and HPiles for Type A signs under Structural Steel Posts for Type A signs .
The Department will pay for the anchorage assemblyies under Structural Steel Posts for Type OH Signs Design B .
The Department will pay for concrete footings for Type OH signs under Concrete Footings Type Spread or Shaft or median barrier footings .
The contract unit price each for Overhead Sign Identification Plate includes the cost of providing and installing each overhead sign identification plate as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Lighting System Identification Plate includes the cost of providing and installing each overhead sign lighting system identification plate as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Extend Walkway Support includes the cost of extending each walkway support as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Friction Fuse includes the cost of removing an in place friction fuse and providing and installing a new friction fuse as required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The contract unit price each for Keeper Plate includes the cost of providing and installing a new keeper plate as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Reference Location Sign includes the cost of providing and installing each reference location sign as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Install Reference Location Sign includes the cost of installing each reference location sign as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for delineators and markers includes the cost of providing and installing each delineator and marker as required by the contract .
The contract unit price each for Install Delineator and Install Marker includes the cost of installing each delineator and marker as required by the contract .
The Department will pay for traffic signs and devices on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Median Barrier Footing each .
Sign Support ___ each .
Modify Post each .
Install Delineator each .
Install Marker each .
Install Reference Location Sign each .
Install Sign Panel Type ___ each .
Install Sign Type ___ each .
Overhead Sign Identification Plate each .
Lighting System Identification Plate each .
Extend Walkway Support each .
Friction Fuse each .
Keeper Plate each .
Delineator Type ___ each .
Bridge Number Marker XA each .
Infiltration Area Marker XA each .
Reference Location Sign each .
Object Marker Type___ each .
Saw Sign Panels Type___ linear foot .
Concrete Footings Type ___ cubic yard .
Structural Steel Specify Item Use pound .
Overhead Sign Structure Repair hour .
Sign Panels Type ___ square foot .
Sign Panel Overlay Type ___ square foot .
Furnish Sign Panels Type ___ square foot TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS .
DESCRIPTION A General This work consists of providing and installing materials and electrical equipment or installing Departmentprovided materials and electrical equipment or both to provide a complete operating traffic control signal system .
This work also consists of providing the following as specified in the Contract Revised traffic control signal systems Wood pole span wire traffic control signal systems Automatic Traffic Recorder ATR systems Temporary bridge signal systems Conduit systems Detection systems Materials for future signal systems Interconnect systems Flasher systems and Emergency Vehicle Preemption EVP systems or a combination. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Qualifications of Workers .. B C Definitions Refer to the ITE the MN MUTCD Abbreviations and Definitions for the definitions of words and phrases pertaining to traffic control signal systems and related work .
Refer to NEMA Standards Publication for Traffic Control Systems for the definitions of words and phrases in conjunction with traffic control signal control equipment and controller units .
Refer to the NEC Article for the definition of the term Listed .
Refer to the NEC Article for the definition of the term Labeled .
Use a National Recognized Testing Laboratory NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor .
Ensure the testing laboratory is listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests conducted as required by this section .
Use the definitions in these Standard Specifications unless otherwise defined in other Contract Documents .
Bell End The end of a piece of rigid PVC conduit that flares out to allow connection of an additional piece of conduit .
Cut Sheet Catalog Sheet or Specification Sheet A document showing a finished product including part numbers and an ordering matrix if required .
End Bell The rigid PVC conduit fitting that is glued on at the end of a conduit to protect the conductors during pulling operations .
Pedestrian Signal Head A signal head which contains the symbols WALKING PERSON symbolizing WALK and UPRAISED HAND symbolizing DONT WALK and countdown numbers that is installed to direct pedestrian traffic at a traffic control signal .
The head is comprised of a pedestrian signal housing and a pedestrian signal indication that fits within the housing .
Pedestrian Signal Housing Polycarbonate housing that protects the light source and other required components .
The housing includes an indication mounting door and sun visor .
Pedestrian Signal Indication Light Emitting Diode LED hand and man countdown indication module that is installed within the pedestrian signal housing .
Shop Drawing A detailed document showing how a specific product will be fabricated and constructed .
This document will also include required material specifications and requirements .
Signal Head An assembly of one or more signal sections that is provided for controlling vehicle traffic .
This assembly of signal sections also includes a backplate background shield .
Signal Section The assembly of a signal housing signal lens if any and light source with necessary components to be used for displaying the signal indication .
The section is comprised of two components a signal housing and a signal indication that fits within the housing .
Signal Housing That part of a signal section that protects the light source and other required components .
Polycarbonate housing that protects the light source and other required components and includes a hinged opening with visor in which the signal indication is mounted .
This is one of two components that make up a signal section .
Signal Indication The illumination of a signal lens or equivalent device .
The device is a Light Emitting Diode LED indication module that is installed within the signal housing .
This is one of two components that make up a signal section .
Source of Power SOP The electric utility transformer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS A General A .
Regulations and Code Provide equipment meeting relevant standards and requirements from the following references NEMA Underwriters Laboratories Inc. UL or The Electronic Components Industry Association ECIA .
Provide materials equipment and workmanship meeting the standards in the current editions of the following references NEC ASTM ANSI ITE MN MUTCD FHWA AASHTO and Relevant local laws and ordinances .
Provide conductors based on the American Wire Gauge AWG and as specified in the Contract .
A .
Materials and Electrical Equipment List Within calendar days following the Award of Contract date submit a list of Contractorprovided materials and equipment to the Engineer .
Include in the list the name of the manufacturer size and the location where the item is obtained .
Within calendar days following the contract approvalnotice mailing date provide evidence in writing to the Engineer that orders are placed for all components required on the Project .
A .
Material Samples for Testing Provide samples of materials for testing and inspection .
The Engineer may accept materials on the basis of the manufacturers certification that material was sampled tested and inspected for compliance with the Contract .
The Department reserves the right to accept or reject material on the basis of its own tests and inspections .
A .
Tests Perform the tests necessary to demonstrate that the materials equipment and the installation of these items are in accordance with the Contract at no additional cost to the Department .
Provide instruments equipment tools materials and labor necessary to perform the required tests at no additional cost to the Department .
Instruments equipment tools and materials for performing tests will remain the property of the Contractor after completion of the tests .
A .
Warranties Guarantees and Instruction Sheets Provide new materials and equipment with warranties and guarantees .
For materials and equipment submit manufacturers warranties and guarantees instruction sheets and parts lists to the Engineer before final acceptance of the Project or if requested by the Engineer .
Warrant and guarantee that materials and equipment provided to the project are free of defects in materials and workmanship in accordance with the following Turn over warranties and guarantees offered by the material and equipment manufacturer as a customary trade practice to the Department .
Name the Department as the obligee on manufacturers warranties and guarantees Warrant and guarantee inservice operation of materials and equipment for one year .
The oneyear inservice warranty period begins when the Contractor turnson the traffic control signal system except the oneyear period for materials and equipment components placed into operation after the turnon of the traffic control signal system begins on the date the materials and l equipment are initially individually placed in service .
The Department defines turnon as the time the complete traffic control signal system meets the installation and operational requirements of the Contract and is placed in automatic operation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Replace or correct materials and equipment the Engineer finds defective within the oneyear inservice warranty period at no additional cost to the Department .
The warranty and guarantee requirements of this section do not apply to parts of materials and equipment that the Engineer determines were subject to misuse negligence or accident and not the fault of the Contractor .
A. MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products Lists Access traffic control signal system materials and equipment listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
A .
Shop Drawing Submittals .A .
A. MnDOT Approved Products Materials List .A .
A .
Cut Sheets Catalog Sheets or Specification Sheets .A .
B Conduit and Accessories B .
Rigid Steel Conduit RSC and Conduit Fittings B .
Intermediate Metal Conduit IMC and Conduit Fittings B. NonMetallic Rigid PVC and HDPE Conduit B .
Liquid Tight Flexible NonMetallic Conduit LFNCB B. PVC Coated Hot Dipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit PVC Coated RSC B. Conduit Expansion and DeflectionExpansion Fittings C Handholes D Pulling Vaults E Splice Vaults F Junction Boxes G Concrete G. General Provide Mix No .
G concrete for mast arm pole foundations and light pole foundations .
Provide Mix No .
F concrete for the following Groundmount cabinet foundations for cabinets Equipment pad foundations Pedestrian push button station foundations Pedestal foundations and New sidewalk construction or sidewalk replacement .
Provide concrete Mix No .
G if the Contract does not require a specific mix designation .
Construct or replace concrete pavement or base removed for trenching or construction operations with Mix No .
GHE concrete .
Provide plastic curing blankets in accordance with Plastic Curing Blankets .
G. Reinforcement Bars H Anchor Rods H. Traffic Control Signal Cabinets For traffic control signal cabinets provide anchor rods and nuts in accordance with Anchor Rods for Type A or Type B anchor rods .
Provide anchor rods with the tops stamped AB .
The Engineer will not accept color coded bolt identification instead of stamped anchor rods .
Provide anchor rods with a diameter of ¾ in in .
in long before bending a in ell on one end .
Thread the opposite end of each anchor rod with at least in of thread .
Hotdip galvanize each anchor rod full length in .
Minnesota Standard Specifications accordance with Galvanized Hardware .
Provide stainless steel washers in in diameter in accordance with Anchor Rods .
H. Signal Service Cabinets Type SSB H. AntiSeize and Lubricating Compound Bridge Grease Apply brushon antiseize and lubricating compound to threaded portions and faying surfaces of signal system metal hardware before assembly .
I Blank J Cables and Conductors K Traffic Signal Mast Arm Poles Mast Arms Luminaire Pole Extensions Luminaires L Emergency Vehicle Preemption EVP M Traffic Control Signal Pedestal Only use anodized aluminum pedestal shafts unless otherwise shown on the Plan .
N Vehicle Signal Heads O Pedestrian Signal Heads P Wood Poles Q Blank R Service Equipment S Accessible Pedestrian Signal APS Push Buttons and Mounting Hardware T Preformed Pavement Marking Tape U Fiber Optic Cables and Pigtails V Signs Provide pedestalmounted pole shaftmounted or mast armmounted signs of the size as specified in the Contract and fabricated in accordance with the Standard Sign Manual and Signs Delineators and Markers .
W Traffic Control Signal Cabinet and Control Equipment Provide the traffic control signal cabinet or other padmounted cabinet and control equipment as specified in the Contract .
X Miscellaneous Materials If the Contract does not specify requirements for materials and equipment provide the materials and equipment as approved by the Engineer .
Y Bent Tube Monotube Signal Bridges Fabricate bent pipe monotube signal bridges as specified in the Contract .
Z Concrete Walks and Pedestrian Curb Ramps Construct inch thick concrete walks around traffic control signal bases as specified in the Contract .
If in a curb section concrete walks may include pedestrian curb ramps .
Construct pedestrian curb ramps if shown on the Plans in accordance with the Department Standard Plan .. AA Pole Base Connectors Use pole base connectors pins sockets and hand crimp tools listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
BB Loop Detector Sealant Material Use loop detector sealant material listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
CC Loop Detector Splices Use loop detector splice encapsulation kits listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals. . Minnesota Standard Specifications DD Stainless Steel Woven Wire Cloth EE Signal Service Cabinet Type SSB FF LED Luminaires Use LED Luminaires for mounting at feet .
GG Luminaire Wire Holders Use Departmentapproved luminaire wire holders for signal systems listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
HH Grounding Electrodes Ground Rods and Plate Electrodes II Blank JJ Terminal Blocks Use terminal blocks when doing a revision to an existing traffic control signal system that has inplace terminal blocks or on temporary wood pole traffic control signal systems .
Provide terminal blocks consisting of a onepiece phenolic molding with doublepoint terminals with strap screw contacts for size binder head screws .
Provide barriers between terminals at least ½ in high .
Ensure the holes for the binder head screws do not extend through the plastic .
Provide terminal blocks with slots that fit the spade lugs for terminating conductors .
Ensure each terminal block meets the V requirements of NEMA .
Provide terminal blocks that are NRTL Listed as compliant with the requirements of UL XCFR.GuideInfo Terminal Blocks .
KK Sponge Rubber Expansion Joint LL Underground NonDetectable Marking Tape .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General The locations shown on the Plans for component parts having X and Y coordinates are exact locations .
Obtain the Engineers approval before making modifications to these locations .
Component part locations which have no X and Y coordinates supplied on the Plan are approximate .
The Engineer will establish the exact locations of component parts including pedestrian curb ramps .
Keep highways streets and roads open to traffic during construction in accordance with Maintenance of Traffic .
Protect openings or uncompleted work that may cause a hazard to vehicle or pedestrian traffic in accordance with Public Convenience and Safety .
A .
Compliance with Electrical Codes and Standards Perform work meeting the requirements of the NEC the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry Board of Electricity and state laws and local ordinances governing electrical work .
A .
Permits and Inspections Obtain the necessary permits and inspections at no additional cost to the Department .
Perform work in conjunction with construction of electrical systems and conduit raceways for conveying cables and conductors as specified in the Contract and in accordance with Permits Licenses and Taxes .
Obtain a permit for the performance of this work including the installation of conduits in accordance with the Minnesota Electrical Act .
A .
Utility Property and Service Meet the minimum clearance requirements determined by the electrical utility company for overhead electrical lines to other overhead structures and equipment operations .
A .
Installation Requirements Install materials and devices in accordance with the Contract and the manufacturers installation requirements .
A .
Removal Requirements A. Calibration Requirements for Precision Measurement Tools and Test Equipment Submit documentation for precision measurement tool and test equipment calibration and certification to the Engineer before using. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Calibrate precision measurement tools and test equipment at least every two years .
B Maintenance and Operation of New and Existing Electrical Systems Maintain and keep in operation the new and existing electrical systems within the limits of the Project in accordance with Maintenance During Construction but not including .
Winter Suspension until the Engineer accepts the Project in writing as specified in Contractors Responsibility for Work .
Maintain and keep in operation new and existing electrical systems during periods of suspension at no additional cost to the Department .
Maintenance of the existing electrical systems including traffic control signals ATRs flasher systems and roadway lighting or Departmentapproved temporary replacements is considered incidental during the progress of new work except if the Engineer directs or the Contract requires turnoffs .
Notify the Engineer at least h before scheduled turnoffs and before performing work on existing electrical systems .
Do not turn off existing traffic control signal systems without the Engineers approval and the Engineers presence .
If damage to new or existing electrical systems occurs due to Contractor operations within h repair or replace the damage at no additional cost to the Department in accordance with and relevant to specifications for new construction .
Failure to repair or replace damage within h will result in the Department repairing or replacing and deducting costs from project money entitled to the Contractor .
The Department will maintain the existing traffic control signal cabinets and control equipment within the cabinet unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
C Excavation and Backfill Provide excavation and backfill for the installation of foundations cable conduit handholes and other items shown on the Plans in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills .
Do not excavate trenches for conduit and holes for foundations and handholes wider than necessary .
Install foundations conduit and handholes as soon as possible following excavation .
Place excavation material in locations that will not cause damage or obstruct vehicle or pedestrian traffic or interfere with surface drainage .
Locate trenching at the distance from the edge of the pavement back of curbing or edge of surfaced shoulders as specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
Ensure the trenching operation does not cause damage to the pavement curbing or surfaced shoulders .
Construct the trench with uniform alignment for accurate referencing of the underground installation .
Relocate cable and conduit to be installed as specified in the Contract where sites designated for underground facilities guardrail sign posts and below ground structures are planned .
Coordinate with the Engineer and obtain the Engineers approval of the relocations before installing .
If trenching and excavation operations require the removal of concrete pavement or concrete sidewalk cut the concrete with a concrete saw to a depth of at least percent of the thickness of the concrete along the removal lines before breaking and removing or remove the concrete to existing joints .
Backfill excavations around the installed foundations conduit and handholes .
Use backfill material similar to adjacent soils and compact backfill material to the same density .
Avoid placing stones immediately adjacent to conduits or directburied cable during backfill placement .
If specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer use granular material in designated layers or portions of the backfill provided in accordance with Structure Excavations and Backfills .
Restore the following to the original condition as specified in the Contract to the Engineers satisfaction and at no additional cost to the Department Roadway surfacing including concrete pavement bituminous surface or gravel surface Sidewalk Curb and gutter Sod and Railway .
Remove and dispose of surplus material from excavation and backfill outside the rightofway in accordance with .. D. Disposal outside Right of Way .
D Conduits Fittings and Junction Box Installation D. General Provide conduit and fittings of the type and size as specified in the Contract .
The Contractor may install conduit and fittings of a larger size than specified .
If the Contract does not specify the size of conduit provide conduit at least ¾ in and sized in accordance with the NEC so the area occupied by the cables and conductors does not exceed percent of the internal cross sectional area of the conduit for rigid steel conduit or percent for nonmetallic conduit. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Install conduit in accordance with the NEC .
In a single conduit run provide conduit of the same size and type continuous from outlet to outlet .
The Contractor may incorporate special conduit fittings for pulling cables and conductors or making short radius bends as necessary in the run .
The Engineer will reject damaged conduit with sharp kinks or reduced cross sections .
Prevent conduit from being damaged .
Rigidly support conduit that will be encased in concrete or masonry in position during casting .
Install nonmetallic conduit end bells on HDPE or Rigid PVC conduit before installing cables and conductors to prevent damage .
Install threaded insulated grounding bushings with lay in ground lugs on RSC conduit before installing cables and conductors to prevent damage .
Use lay in ground lugs constructed of stainless steel copper tin plated copper brass or bronze .
Install expansion and deflectionexpansion devices at each structure expansion joint as specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
Install cables and conductors in conduit unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
If installing conduit for future use do not install the equipment grounding conductor .
D. Conduit Placement Install conduit in a straight run entering into handholes and foundations .
Ensure handholes and foundations are in line with the general direction of the conduit run .
D .. a Above Ground Secure conduit attached above ground to wood poles with Ushaped twohole pipe straps meeting the requirements of the current edition of the NEC and spaced no more than ft apart .
Secure conduit attached above ground to metal poles with at least ¾ in wide stainless steel banding spaced no more than ft apart .
Support conduit within ft of each termination or fitting .
Secure conduit attached above ground to cabinets bridges and other structures as specified in the Contract and to the Engineers satisfaction .
D .. b Underground Place conduit using the trenching method vibratory plow or by directional boring .
Only place conduit under existing pavement or sidewalk by directional boring .
If a distortion greater than ¼ in is created in the existing surface remove the distortion and restore the roadway or sidewalk to the original condition at no additional cost to the Department .
Except under existing pavements when placing High Density Polyethylene HDPE continuous length conduit use trenching vibratory plow or directional boring installation methods .
If plowing HDPE conduit provide a vibratory plow with a feed blade that is capable of performing the following Breaks the ground Places the conduit to a predetermined depth Guides the conduit into the bottom of the break through the guide blade chute so that little or no stress is placed on the conduit during installation to avoid damage Does not pull the conduit in place and Closes the break in the ground .
Only use RSC or Rigid PVC conduit between foundations and the nearest handhole .
HDPE conduit may not be used in any foundation or equipment pad .
Do not use the trenching method vibratory plow or push conduit with a pneumatic compaction tool to place conduit under existing concrete bituminous surfaces or railways Grout the voids that result from abandoned boring operations through a roadbed or sidewalk at no additional cost to the Department and as approved by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications If placing conduit underground below new or reconstructed roadway surface areas or sidewalk which has not been paved use the trenching method to place the conduit at a uniform depth below the adjacent ground line and backfill and compact before placing new roadway surfaces or new sidewalk as approved by the Engineer .
Obtain the Engineers approval of the trench before installing the conduit .
Place Department furnished locator balls at open ends of conduit under roadways or slope pavement that do not terminate in handholes pads or foundations .
Place underground conduit at least in below the surface of a ground area and at least in below roadway surfaces .
Place underground conduit under railroad tracks at least in below the bottom of railroad ties or as required by the railroad company .
If approved by the Engineer the Contractor may change conduit runs as specified in the Contract to avoid underground obstructions .
Provide underground conduit runs with provisions for draining moisture .
Slope horizontal conduit runs to drain at a rate of at least .
percent or in per ft. To drain the low points not including the open ends of conduit runs install a standard tee conduit fitting and nipples at least in long .
Extend the fitting and nipple into a hole in in deep .
Backfill the hole with crushed rock or Departmentapproved granular material .
Position conduit terminating in handholes or concrete foundations so the conduit extends inside the handholes pole bases cabinet bases or structure bases by in to in .
Slope the conduit toward the access opening .
Slope the conduit out of the foundation toward the handhole opening for drainage .
Locate conduit couplings at least in from the structure surface .
Place conduit entering existing concrete foundations by sawing and breaking the concrete or core drilling so conduit enters the equipment pad or foundation below the adjacent ground surface and projects from in to in above the top of the equipment pad or foundation and inside the pole base or cabinet .
Return the foundation to its original condition by patching with concrete as approved by the Engineer .
Thread conduit stubbed out of a concrete foundation for future use if installing RSC .
Cap stubbed conduit on the open ends with standard pipe caps or rigid PVC caps based on the type of conduit .
Extend conduit from in to in out of the concrete foundation underground in the direction shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Following installation of cables and conductors seal the open ends of conduit entering equipment pads and foundations using duct seal compound NRTL classified under general use tapes .
D. Conduit Bends Provide conduit bends except factory bends with a radius of at least six times the nominal diameter of the conduit .
Make conduit bends without damaging the conduit and without reducing the internal diameter of the conduit .
For bends in conduit runs provide the minimum radius necessary but do not exceed degrees of bend per run between handholes foundations or both .
D. Rigid Steel Conduit and Intermediate Metal Conduit D .. a Joints Thread the ends of the conduit and use a standard threaded conduit coupling to join standard length conduit .
If cutting standard length conduit thread and ream the ends to remove burrs and rough edges .
Butt or bring together the full circumference of the conduit ends with a coupling to provide effective electrical continuity for the length of the conduit run .
Paint coating on conduit damaged by handling or installing with rust preventative paint as approved by the Engineer .
All threaded RSC and IMC and fittings must have all threads protected with a brush on corrosionresistant compound in accordance with NEC Article .. D .. b Open Ends Cap the open ends of conduit in handholes and conduit extending above concrete foundations with standard conduit caps or other method approved by the Engineer until wiring installation .
Install a threaded insulated grounding bushing with lay in ground lugs for RSC on the open ends when caps are removed .
Provide grounding bushings in accordance with the UL for grounding and bonding equipment .
Provide grounding bushings with lay in grounds lugs sized to accommodate a AWG conductor for bonding .
Apply antioxidant joint compound to the lug and bonding conductor before assembling. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Cap the open ends of conduit that terminates on the side of wood poles or other structures with weatherhead entrance fittings .
D .. c Existing Conduit Clean and blowout existing underground conduit incorporated into a new or revised electrical system with compressed air before placing new cables and conductors .
Replace old insulated grounding bushings and bonding jumpers with new insulated grounding bushings with lay in ground lugs sized to accommodate a AWG conductor and bonding jumpers in existing handholes to maintain a continuously grounded and bonded system .
If placing new handholes in existing conduit runs cut the conduit and extend it into the new handhole as approved by the Engineer .
Thread the open ends of conduits install new insulated grounding bushings with lay in ground lugs sized to accommodate a AWG conductor for bonding and bond the conduit as specified in the Contract .
D. Rigid PVC Conduit D .. a Joints Trim the inside and outside of cut ends of rigid PVC conduit to remove rough edges .
Use standard sized couplings or rigid PVC conduit with an attached preformed coupling .
Clean rigid PVC conduit sections with a joint cleaner and cement joints with a PVC cement .
Allow the PVC cement to set for h before pulling conduit through a directionalbored channel .
Butt or bring together the full circumference of the conduit ends with a coupling .
Use longline couplings to join conduit sections if placing rigid PVC conduit under existing roadway surfaces .
D .. b Open Ends Immediately cap or plug the open ends of rigid PVC conduit to prevent the entrance of moisture until the installation of the cables and conductors .
Before installing cables and conductors provide rigid PVC conduit with standard PVC conduit end bells and end bells for HDPE continuous length conduit to prevent damage to the cables and conductors .
Cap or plug the open ends of rigid PVC conduit not containing conductors using standard sized PVC conduit caps or plugs .
D .. c Conduit Encasement If specified in the Contract use of the trenching method for rigid PVC conduit place in granular or concrete encasement .
For granular encased rigid PVC conduit ensure the bottom and sides of the trench are free of sharp irregularities before placing conduit .
Backfill the first in of the trench with granular material meeting the requirements of Granular Material .
For concrete encased rigid PVC conduit extend the trench width in from each side of the conduit .
Provide Mix No .
F concrete or an equivalent and encase the conduit in on each side .
D. Conduit on Bridges Concrete Encased Hanging and Surface Mounted Provide PVC coated hotdipped galvanized rigid steel conduit and fittings in accordance with and install as shown on the Plans as approved by the Engineer and as follows No exposed metal Do not cut or alter PVC protective sleeves on fittings and couplings Apply a corrosion compound in accordance with NEC .
on conduit threads Repair damaged PVC coating in accordance with manufacturers instructions Use fittings from the same manufacturer as the conduit Support the conduit in accordance with the NEC Installers trained and certified by the manufacturer or the manufacturers representative every two years .
Before installation submit an unexpired manufacturer certified installer card for each contractor employee directly performing the installation .
Provide conduit hangers clamps straps Ubolts strut and bar supports threaded rod inserts and miscellaneous hardware in accordance with the NEC and .. C Hangers and Supports for PVC Coated Hot Dipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit for hanging and surface mounted conduit .
Install the conduit hangers clamps straps Ubolts strut and bar supports threaded rod inserts and miscellaneous hardware as shown on the Plans and as approved by the Engineer .
Ensure the installation allows for conduit expansion contraction and deflection .
D. Expansion and DeflectionExpansion Coupling Fittings for Conduit on Bridges Provide expansion and deflectionexpansion coupling fittings in accordance with for conduit runs encased in concrete hanging or surface mounted .
Install expansion and deflectionexpansion coupling fittings as shown on the Plans or if not shown as directed by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Set the internal bushing for expansion coupling fittings in conduit runs in accordance with the manufacturers installation instructions .
If the manufacturer does not provide instructions for setting the internal bushing then position the internal bushing in the middle of the expansion joint coupling fittings to allow for equal movement in both directions .
Wrap the expansion and deflection expansion coupling fittings encased in concrete with sponge rubber expansion joint in accordance with and as shown on the Plans or as directed by the Engineer .
Ensure the outer seam of the wrap is on the bottom side of the expansion and deflection expansion fittings assembly .
Secure the wrap in place before concrete pouring operations .
Protect the sliding mechanism of expansion coupling fittings from concrete contamination when encasing in concrete .
D. Junction Boxes Attached to Bridges Provide junction boxes in accordance with or as shown on the Plans .
Install junction boxes as shown on the Plans .
If the Plan does not specify install as directed by the Engineer with anchorages supports and hardware to allow removal of the junction box .
Install junction boxes surface mounted to concrete with masonry anchorages or powder activated studs with the hardware necessary to allow removal of the junction box .
Provide the manufacturer supplied drain fitting and install as close to the bottom of the enclosure as possible .
D. Rigid PVC Conduit Attached to Wood Poles Securely fasten Rigid PVC conduit to wood poles by appropriate type conduit straps that meet the current edition of the National Electrical Code NEC .
Space the conduit straps feet apart .
D. Liquid Tight Flexible NonMetallic Conduit LFNCB Securely fasten Liquid Tight Flexible NonMetallic conduit with appropriate type conduit straps as specified in the Contract and in accordance with the current edition of the National Electrical Code NEC .
E Handholes Install handholes as specified in the Contract and as approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor may install additional handholes at no additional cost to the Department .
Set the tops of handholes so the cover is in below grade except in sidewalk areas .
Set the cover flush with the sidewalk in accordance with ADA requirements .
To facilitate drainage set handholes on a compacted aggregate drain bed ft larger in diameter or square of the handhole enclosure and in deep using coarse filter aggregate in accordance with .. H Coarse Filter Aggregate .
Backfill handholes after installing the cover .
Install conduits entering handholes thru the barrel or side wall of the handhole .
Drill conduit holes into the side walls of handholes no more than inch larger than the size conduit being installed .
Remove excess material inside of existing handholes that are to be used in the new system .
After handhole and conduit installation at each handhole location make the sidewalls inside handholes watertight by patching with concrete for precast concrete handholes .
For other handholes use a caulking compound or other type of sealant compatible with the handhole material to the Engineers satisfaction .
After all the cables and conductors have been installed in the handhole place a Department provided locator ball as follows Use a Department furnished locator ball Cut ¾ inch PVC conduit to length to allow the locator ball to be installed within inches from the top of the handhole when the conduit is stood vertically against the side of the handhole Drill ¼ inch hole thru the top of the conduit providing two holes Attach the locator ball with a inch nylon cable tie wrap using the drilled holes to the conduit and Place the locator ball attached to the conduit against the sidewall of the handhole in a vertical position .
Use red locator balls for handholes containing conductors with an operating voltage of volts .
Use orange locator balls for handholes containing conductors with an operating voltage of volts and communications circuits .
For placing precast concrete handholes in accordance with Standard Plate with metal frame and cover in areas not .
Minnesota Standard Specifications surfaced with concrete support handholes with concrete to the Engineers satisfaction .
Bond and ground the metal ring and cover in accordance with the NEC Article .. F Concrete Foundations and Equipment Pads F .. a General Except for portions of concrete foundations that extend into solid rock use forming tubes or wood forms with the following characteristics to construct concrete foundations in accordance with Minor Concrete Structures Of the size and shape as specified in the Contract With an ordinary surface finish in accordance with .. F Finish of Concrete on all sides in below the adjacent ground line and Floated smooth top with beveled or chamfered edges .
For cast inplace foundations and equipment pads use rigid forms and securely brace .
Use a forming tube for only the upper half of the foundation for cast inplace .
If soil conditions or method of installation do not allow for a partial length forming tube to be used a full length forming may be used instead .
Obtain the Engineers approval before installing a forming tube for the full length of the foundation .
Remove the top portion of the fiber forming tube at finished grade level or sidewalk h after placing concrete Brace entering conduits anchor rods ground rod electrodes and other equipment in position with a rigid metal template to ensure proper location and projection as specified in the Contract .
Remove the template h after placing the concrete .
Use portable vibrators and hand spading to consolidate the concrete to form a smooth dense surface free of air or water blisters .
Cover the structure with white polyethylene sheeting in accordance with .
Form the exposed concrete flush or above the adjacent ground line sidewalk or paved area as specified in the Contract to present a neat appearance .
Before placement of the concrete tape the threaded portion of the anchor rods projecting above the concrete surface with vinyl electrical tape .
Install precast concrete foundations in drilled shafts when soil conditions allow and in accordance with .. F .. a .
Replace foundations and equipment pads at no additional cost to the Department if anchor rods conduits and ground rod electrodes are missing improperly located or projection heights do not meet the requirements in the Contract .
Do not alter the transformer base plate openings and anchor rod holes to accommodate misaligned anchor rods conduits and ground rod electrodes .
Do not alter foundations conduits anchorages or ground rod electrodes if misfits between the assembly of the pole and foundation occur .
If unstable foundation conditions are encountered the Contractor may alter concrete foundation construction to secure a stable foundation .
Obtain the Engineers approval before altering concrete foundation construction .
If obstructions such as solid rock are encountered that prevent concrete foundation construction as planned the Contractor may adjust the foundation dimensions as specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer to provide a stable foundation .
After the concrete has been placed Determine the length of time required for the safe temporary removal of the concrete foundation or equipment pad template to complete an ordinary surface finish on the top of the foundation or pad Remove template in a manner to avoid damage to or spalling of the concrete Ensure removal of the template does not allow the anchor rods and conduits to move Float foundation or pad with a smooth top and beveled or chamfered edges Finish the foundation or pad in accordance with .. F Finish of Concrete and Place back the rigid metal template on the foundation or pad after the concrete finishing work has been completed .
Backfill and compact the conduit trench and around the foundation .
Use erosion control products to reinforce vegetation around the foundations and equipment pads in accordance with Rolled Erosion Control Products .
F .. b PA and Pole Foundations Standard Plates and Construct PA pole foundations in accordance with Minor Concrete Structures and as specified in the Contract and in accordance with the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Construct foundations in drilled shafts .
Excavate a hole with an auger of sufficient size to the dimensions of the foundation specified in the Contract .
Minimize over excavation .
Protect the sides of the drilled shaft from collapsing .
Pour concrete as soon as possible after the excavation to prevent loose or soft materials from accumulating at the bottom of the shaft that would affect the performance of the foundation .
Remove loose materials at the bottom of the shaft and groundwater before placement of concrete .
Use a continuous fiber forming tube for the upper portion of the foundation above grade and maximum ft below grade .
Pour concrete directly against the soil of the drilled shaft if the sidewalls remain firm and stable .
A continuous full length fiber forming tube may be used to prevent the sidewalls of the shaft from collapsing with the approval of the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
Full length means more than half the depth of the drilled shaft .
When a full length fiber forming tube is needed to prevent the drilled shaft from collapsing refer to the Frost Depth Zone Table and cut four in x in rectangular holes into the fiber forming tube before installing into the drilled shaft .
Cut two rectangular holes approximately degrees apart ft to ft below grade if the project site is located in Zone and ft to ft below grade if the project site is located in Zone .
Rotate the forming tube degrees and cut two more rectangular holes degree apart approximately ft lower from the first two holes .
Table Frost Depth Zone Zone Depth of Rectangular Holes Below Grade ft ft ft ft Refer to The Office of The Revisor of Statutes website for frost depth zone requirements Minnesota Administrative Rules .
Footing Depth for Frost Protection httpswww.revisor.mn.govrulesid .
to determine appropriate frost depth zone .
During placement of the concrete ensure concrete fills the shaft area and any void area outside the fiber forming tube that is below grade .
If soil or rock conditions not suitable for standard foundations are present or if conditions are marginal contact the MnDOT Bridge Evaluation and Fabrication Methods Engineer and the MnDOT Foundations Unit for a foundation design that can be used as an alternative to the standard foundation design .
Foundation design is based on installing in a drilled shaft .
Any variation to the drilled shaft requires an approval by the District Soils Engineer .
If a drilled shaft foundation is not possible obtain approval from the District Soils Engineer to conduct open excavation for the foundation before starting the work .
F. Anchor Rods Use anchor rods in accordance with and as specified in the Contract .
Obtain the Engineers approval before working on the foundations and equipment pads .
Place the anchor rods in pole foundations in a rigid cage to maintain alignment while pouring the concrete as approved by the Engineer .
Provide anchor rod cages designed without welding or tack welding on the anchor rods or as shown on the Standard Plate .
The Engineer will reject anchor rods with welding or tack welding .
F. Equipment Pads Construct concrete equipment pads at the location staked by the Engineer and as shown on the Plans .
Install the equipment pad for the Department provided traffic control signal cabinet and control equipment as part of the equipment pad using Department provided anchor rods nuts and washers to mount the cabinet .
Install the equipment pad for the signal service cabinet type SSB as part of the equipment pad concrete foundation using anchor rods nuts and washers supplied by the SSB cabinet manufacturer .
Ensure the anchor rods t project above the pad to accommodate the in thick gasket .
Install threaded insulated grounding bushings with lay in ground lugs on all RSC ends .
Install end bells on all rigid PVC conduit ends .
Install a ground rod electrode in the load side of the equipment pad .
Install a second supplemental ground round electrode outside of the equipment pad not less than ft from the outer edge of the equipment pad with the upper end of the ground rod electrode in to in below ground line or in to in if under sidewalk. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide a continuous grounding electrode conductor without a splice or joint terminating one end to the ground busbar in the service cabinet then connecting it to the ground rod electrode in the equipment pad and terminating the other end to the supplemental ground rod electrode .
Provide NRTL listed clamps or exothermic welded connections to connect or terminate the grounding electrode conductor to the ground rod electrodes .
If the equipment pad requires reinforcement bars as specified in the Contract provide a continuous grounding electrode conductor without a splice or joint terminating one end to the reinforcement bar in the pad then connecting it to the busbar in the service cabinet .
Use NRTL listed clamps for concrete encasement or exothermic welded connections suitable to connect to the reinforcement bar .
G Loop Detectors G. General Provide preformed rigid PVC or sawcut inductive loop detectors as specified in the Contract .
Install complete loop detectors with the following An electrical conductor embedded loop or group of loops installed in the roadway as specified in the Contract and A loop detector leadin cable to the traffic control signal cabinet or other cabinet .
G. Installation Splice the loop detector roadway conductor to the loop detector leadin cable in accordance with Standard Plates or and as follows Cut the drain wire off the loop detector leadin cable at the point where it exits the cable jacket at the end of the cable assembly that will be installed in the loop detector splice kit Ensure the loop detector leadin cable jacket is encased in the loop detector splice encapsulation material forming a water tight seal and Terminate the loop detector leadin cable assembly located in the traffic control signal cabinet in the appropriate terminals as shown on the cabinet print .
G .. a Preformed Rigid PVC Loop Detector Provide loop detectors encased in rigid PVC conduit in accordance with Standard Plate .
G .. b. SawCut Loop Detectors Provide sawcut loop detectors in accordance with Standard Plate .
The Engineer may make minor adjustments to the size or shape of the loop detector in the field at no additional cost to the Department .
Make an individual saw cut from each loop detector to the conduit leading to the handhole .
G. Loop Detector Test Report Submit three copies of a signed and dated loop detector test report to the Engineer .
Include the following information in the report for each loop detector and leadin cable system provided and installed as specified in the Contract Project numbers intersection and location identification Loop detector number shown on the Plans Width and length dimensions of the loop detector in inches as installed Number of turns of wire in loop detector as installed Meet the following continuity test results for each detector circuit as tested at two locations .
Less than .
Ω from lead to lead for loop detectors as measured at the handhole or junction box before splicing the loop detector leadin cable .
Less than Ω for loop detector and leadin cable systems at the intersection traffic control signal cabinet after splicing the handhole or junction box and .
An ohm reading at the intersection traffic control signal cabinet greater than the ohm reading measured at the loop detector adjacent handhole or junction box .
Inductance test results from µH to µH for each loop detector and leadin cable system and Insulation resistance test results of at least MΩ as performed at VDC between one loop detector leadin cable conductor and the Equipment Ground Bus in the cabinet .
Perform the continuity test inductance test and insulation resistance test at the intersection traffic control signal cabinet before terminating the loop detector leadin cable conductors on the terminal facilities .
Perform loop detector tests in the Engineers presence at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will distribute the three final loop detector test reports for the intersection as follows .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The original to the official project file One copy to the traffic control signal cabinet and One copy to the Departments Electrical Services Unit or maintaining agency .
If a loop detector or leadin cable system fails any of the loop detector tests replace parts or the entire loop detector and leadin cable system at no additional cost to the Department as directed by the Engineer .
Repeat and record the loop detector tests for the revised loop detector and leadin cable system .
Each loop detector and leadin cable system must pass the loop detector tests and must be operational as approved by the Engineer .
Regardless of the test results the Department may test each loop detector and leadin cable system with Department owned test equipment .
H Bonding and Grounding Provide bonding grounding grounding electrodes grounding electrode conductors equipment grounding conductors bonding jumpers and grounding connections in accordance with NEC .
Provide grounding of the system and neutral at the service cabinet .
Provide conductors for equipment grounding grounding electrodes and bonding jumpers in accordance with .B .
Use NRTL listed stainless steel copper tin plated copper brass or bronze connectors for bonding and grounding unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
H. Grounding Electrodes Provide grounding electrodes in accordance with .
H. Bonding and Grounding Form a continuous bonded and grounded system using the following Metal conduit Metal traffic control signal pedestals Mast arm poles Light poles Service equipment Metal junction boxes Down guys Span wire Microwave and sonic detector units Cabinets and Pedestrian Push Button Stations .
H. Pole Base Bonding and Grounding Use a brass bronze or stainless steel bolt a minimum of in in diameter installed in the lower part of the shaft or base to attach the grounding and bonding jumper to metal traffic control signal pedestals mast arm poles and light poles .
Do not use a solder or sheet metal strap connection .
Use an NRTLlisted reusable screwtype active clamping ground lug with a tang that connects to the in signal pole base grounding stud to attach the AWG stranded insulated green grounding conductor to metal traffic control signal pedestals and mast arm poles to the signal pole base .
Terminate the AWG stranded insulated green conductor on the Equipment Ground Bus .
Ground the Equipment Ground Bus to the signal service ground rod electrode with at least AWG stranded insulated green grounding electrode conductor .
Provide and connect a. stranded insulated green equipment grounding conductor from the Equipment Ground Bus in the traffic control signal cabinet or other type cabinet to the ground bus of the service cabinet and to each incoming conduit insulated grounding bushing lug or each incoming AWG stranded insulated green conductor .
When connecting the daisy chain AWG stranded insulated green grounding conductor that runs from the adjacent signal pole ground rod electrode to the next signal pole ground rod electrode exothermically weld it to the ground rod electrode with a T type connector utilizing a or wiretap connection .
Use a wiretap connection at the end of the daisy chain run .
Bond the AWG stranded insulated green grounding conductor to the signal pole base in grounding stud using a NRTL listed reusable screw type active clamping ground lug with a tang. . Minnesota Standard Specifications H. Exothermic Welding Bond all ground rod electrodes to the AWG stranded insulated green conductor coming from the traffic control signal cabinet and running to the signal pole base using exothermic welding .
The exothermic welding is achieved by Stripping off enough insulating material from the AWG stranded green insulated grounding wire to ensure the insulation does not burn or melt during the welding process Use a manufacturers specific sized mold for exothermic welding of a AWG stranded copper wire being welded to a nonthreaded in copper clad ground rod electrode .
Use a T type configuration with a wiretap wiretap or wiretap for the mold as specified in the Plans and Strict adherence to the weld manufactures instructions for material preparation when welding and testing of the exothermic weld .
H. Ground Rod Electrode Installation Drive ground rod electrodes at service points and locations required by the contract .
Install ground rod electrodes and grounding connections in accordance with the NEC .
Place the ground rod electrode for PA PA PA and BA series signal poles in the nearest hand hole adjacent to the signal pole foundation as required by the contract .
Provide pedestal foundations with a ground rod electrode placed inside the pedestal foundation slightly off center in the pedestal foundation as required by the contract before casting the concrete foundation .
Ground the signal poles by bonding together the AWG stranded insulated green grounding conductor that runs from the traffic control signal cabinet to the ground rod electrode and through to the pole base .
Install the ground rod electrode in the handhole with the top of the ground rod in below the bottom of the handhole cover as specified in the Contract .
When ground rod electrodes are required to be installed outside of the foundation and rock is encountered preventing the ground rods from being installed vertically follow the installation requirements for rod electrodes in accordance with the NEC .
If it is not possible to install ground rods according to the installation requirements of the NEC install plate electrodes in accordance with as directed by the Engineer .
If installing the ground rod electrode in concrete foundations install the top of the ground rod electrode from in to in above the foundation .
Bond the service equipment to the ground rod electrode .
Use exothermic welding to bond ground rod electrodes to the AWG stranded insulated green grounding conductor from the traffic control signal cabinet to the signal pole base .
Use a AWG standard green insulated grounding electrode conductor to bond metal poles pedestals cabinets and other structures requiring a grounding conductor to the ground rod electrode as specified in the Contract .
Attach one end of the bonding jumper to the lower part of the pole pedestal cabinet or structure shaft or base .
Use an exothermic weld to attach the other end of the bonding jumper to the ground rod electrode as specified in the Contract .
If five AWG stranded green insulated grounding conductors need to be spliced to a ground rod as shown on the Plan then provide exothermic welded connections in accordance with the manufacturers installation requirements and the following Provide or prepare a mold to bond four conductors to a ground rod that accommodates .
A in ground rod .
A AWG stranded green insulated bonding jumper conductor in to in long and .
Three AWG stranded green insulated grounding conductors Insert the ground rod one end of the bonding jumper and grounding conductors into the mold and position them for the connection Perform the exothermic weld to produce a permanent electrical connection Provide or prepare a mold designed to bond three AWG conductors Insert the other end of the bonding jumper from the previous weld and the remaining grounding conductors into the mold and position them for connection and Perform the exothermic weld to produce a permanent electrical connection .
H. Replacement RSC Threaded Insulated Grounding Bushings In addition to the required bonding and grounding jumper and required threaded insulated grounding bushings with lay in ground lugs on open ends of new RSC provide and install new bonding and grounding jumpers and new threaded grounding conduit bushings on open ends of inplace RSC at the inplace locations as directed by the Engineer .
H. AntiOxidant Joint Compound Apply antioxidant joint compound in accordance with to all bonding and grounding connections before assembly and after final connection .
I Blank .
Minnesota Standard Specifications J Wiring J .
General Install cables conductors and wiring in accordance with the NEC .
Use insulated spade lugs or pole base connectors for terminal connections of conductors .
Tape the ends of unterminated spare conductors with vinyl electrical tape to prevent exposure to moisture .
Leave ft of slack cable in each handhole through which a run of cable passes .
Leave in of slack cable or conductors in each mast arm pole base light pole base and traffic control signal pedestal base .
Install unmetered service conductors in a separate conduit system from all other conductors .
Run conductors of a branch circuit in a single conduit .
Continuously run cables and conductors without splices from the terminal appliances in the traffic control signal cabinet to the pole base connectors terminal blocks or other terminal appliances .
Continuously install loop detector leadin cable without splices or terminals from the loop detector conductor and leadin cable splice to the traffic control signal cabinet or other type cabinet .
Continuously install interconnect cable between cabinets without splices .
Run the cable in straight lines with a minimum number of bends in the cable run .
Provide the size and quantity of conductors in each cable and the number of cables in a given conduit run as shown on the Plans .
Wire the electrical system in accordance with the field wiring diagram as shown on the Plans .
Identify cables as shown on the field wiring diagram in all handholes junction boxes traffic control signal pedestal bases mast arm pole bases light pole bases and cabinets .
Except for the individual conductors terminated at the cabinet fuse panels wrap white vinyl adhesive tape around the cable to identify cables and conductors .
Handwrite labels with a black permanent marker as approved by the Engineer or use a label maker with labels suitable for use in wet locations .
Wrap the labels from a label maker around the cable in one complete revolution with minimum in overlap .
Place machine printed labels embossed plastic labels vinyl adhesive preprinted labels or sleeve type labels around each conductor to identify the individual conductors terminated at the cabinet fuse panels .
Place labels on each cable terminated at the terminal appliances located inside the traffic control signal cabinet i.e .
RED YEL GRN RLTA YLTA GLTA RRTA YRTA GRTA DWK P WLK P etc .
or the like indicating the signal indication and the signal head number .
Apply the label within in of the terminal point .
Provide an identification strip for terminal blocks in traffic control signal pedestal bases and pole bases as part of the terminal block .
Identify each conductor in a similar manner as above to label the signal indication it serves .
Using a black permanent marker label both sides of pole base connectors with signal head number .
J .
Underground Wiring To avoid damaging the cable and conductor insulation hand pull cables and conductors through conduit raceways .
Clean the conduit at the time of installation .
Tape the ends of cables and conductors to exclude moisture until spliced or terminated .
Hand pull cables and conductors through rigid PVC conduit without splitting or damaging the rigid PVC conduit due to pull rope abrasion .
Replace the damaged portion of the rigid PVC conduit as approved by the Engineer .
Use the trenching method or a vibratory plow to direct bury interconnect cable not placed in conduit to a depth of at least in except where required to enter a handhole .
If the Contract specifies the interconnect cable to enter a handhole install the cable in the side of the handhole from in to in above the bottom of the handhole .
Maintain a depth of at least in within ft to ft of the handhole .
If plowing direct buried interconnect cable provide a vibratory plow with a feed blade that is capable of performing the following Breaks the ground Places the cable to a predetermined depth Guides the cable into the bottom of the break through the guide blade chute so that little or no stress is placed on the cable during installation to avoid damage Does not pull the cable in place Places nondetectable marking tape in to in above the cable or conduit and Closes the break in the ground. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Submit the plowing method to the Engineer for approval before installing the cable .
Install underground nondetectable marking tape in to in above the interconnect cable or conduit .
Place any direct buried cable that enters or exits handholes in a conduit sleeve at least ft long .
J .
Cabinet Field Lead Wiring Do not cut a field lead entering a cabinet shorter than the farthest terminal in the cabinet .
After completing field connections to the cabinet terminal dress and band together the field leads to provide an orderly arrangement within the cabinet .
J. Splices Do not splice conductors unless specified in the Contract or approved by the Engineer .
If specified in the Contract only splice in handholes control cabinets junction boxes or in bases of poles .
Do not splice underground cable unless specified in the Contract .
Use an approved epoxy splice kit for underground cable splices as specified in the Contract .
Provide splices for conductors and cables as specified in the Contract .
Electrically and mechanically secure splices without solder except loop detector splices .
Use connector types with splices as specified in the Contract and as follows Do not use pressure spring type connectors and Splice loop detectors as specified in the Contract .
J. Aboveground Wiring For cables and conductors installed above ground except where run on overhead span wire use one of the following methods Conduit attached to wood poles metal poles cabinets or other structures or Inside metal poles pedestals cabinets or other structures .
Provide slack of percent of the span length when installing overhead span wire .
When installing cables and conductors on span wire using straps with spacing less than in for lacing .
Provide weatherresistant black nylon nonmetallic straps with a loop tensile strength of at least lb .
Submit the nonmetallic straps to the Engineer for approval before installation .
J .
Pole Base Connectors Provide Departmentapproved pole base connectors for terminating signal conductors in mast arm pole bases traffic control signal pedestal bases and other bases with vehicle and pedestrian signal indications or pedestrian signal indications .
Assemble pole base connectors in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
Use a Departmentapproved hand crimp tool to install pole base connectors as specified in the Contract .
J .
Signal and Pedestrian Head Terminal Block Wiring For horizontally mounted terminal blocks in the signal head terminate the forks of the spade lugs facing down on the terminal block for the signal control cable running from the pole base into signal head .
Form a loop with the conductors at least in above the terminal block and then loop the conductors back down to exit the head for termination in the pole base .
For vertically mounted terminal blocks terminate the spade lugs for the signal control cable running from the pole base into signal head and loop the conductors to extend up from the terminal block at least in above the terminal block and then loop the conductors back down to exit the head for termination in the pole base .
After the conductors have been properly terminated spray the spade lugs and the entire terminal block with an approved pole base terminal block coating .
The coating of the terminal block includes spraying the terminal connections and the exposed wire ends where crimped to the spade connector .
Only use Departmentapproved pole base terminal block coatings listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
J. Terminal Blocks Where specified in the Contract for retrofit projects with in place terminal blocks or temporary wood pole traffic control signal systems provide each mast arm pole base traffic signal pedestal base and other bases or poles with vehicle and pedestrian signal indications or pedestrian signal indications with a NRTL listed terminal block for terminating field conductors and traffic signal conductors .
The terminal blocks screws and spade lugs in each base shall be covered with an approved electrical insulating coating .
Provide Pole Base Terminal Block Coatings listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Remove the white plastic marking strip from the terminal block before applying the approved electrical insulating coating .
After coating the terminal block reinstall the white plastic marking strip .
Install terminal blocks in bases so that the terminal block screws face the door opening and are accessible .
K Service Equipment Installation Install service equipment in accordance with the NEC and local laws and ordinances governing service equipment installations .
Refer to the Plans for the approximate location of service points .
The Engineer or the electric utility company will determine the exact location of service points .
Install signal service cabinets Type SSB as specified in the Contract .
Install roadway lighting service cabinets as specified in the Contract .
Install the Department provided rubber gasket sections between the bottom of each cabinet base and the equipment pad .
Leave one ½ in gap in the gasket to ensure proper water drainage .
Position the photoelectric control to face north .
The photoelectric control may face east or west only if facing it north is not an option due to service cabinet orientation .
When installing service equipment on a wood pole install the meter socket directly above the service disconnect .
Terminate risers near the top of the wood pole or structure .
Cap risers with a weatherhead to prevent the entrance of water .
Extend power conductors beyond the weatherhead with an additional ft length for a drip loop to allow the electric utility company to connect to the service conductors from the source of power .
The electric utility company will perform connections at no additional cost to the Contractor unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
For installation on a mounting bracket assembly locate the meter socket and disconnecting means as specified in the Contract .
Provide lugs for terminating conductors sized for the associated conductors .
Do no trim strands of conductors to fit into undersized lugs .
Arrange for the service point connection with the electric utility company .
L Vehicle and Pedestrian Signal Head Installation L. Pedestal Mounted With Signal Bracketing Mount vehicle and pedestrian signal heads on top of traffic control signal pedestals as specified in the Contract .
Install symmetrically arranged and securely assembled pedestal mounted assemblies plumb and level .
Provide for internal wiring within the pedestal shaft signal brackets and pipe fittings .
Place a pedestal mounted vehicle signal head directly above the pedestal slipfitter collar .
Attach with a bracket to the top of the vehicle signal head and to the pedestal shaft .
L. Vertical Pole Shaft Mounted With Signal Bracketing Mount vehicle and pedestrian signal heads on a vertical pole shaft if shown on the Plans .
Provide threaded ½ in halfcouplings capable of receiving threaded ½ in signal brackets and provide for internal wiring within the vertical pole shaft .
Weld the halfcouplings into the vertical pole shaft ft above the pole foundation .
Position threaded couplings on the vertical pole shaft as specified in the Contract .
Mount vehicle and pedestrian signal heads as shown on the Plans .
Provide plumb securely assembled pole mounted assemblies that allow for internal wiring within the vertical pole shaft signal brackets and pipe fittings .
L. Vertical Pole Mounted With Angle Mount Plumbizer Use angle mount plumbizers to plumb the vehicle and pedestrian signal heads mounted on vertical pole shafts .
Assemble the signal and pedestrian heads and angle mount plumbizers in accordance with manufacturer installation instructions .
Attach two vehicle signal sections below the mount .
Attach the remaining vehicle signal sections above the mount .
Attach the signal head and the angle mount plumbizer assembly to the pole as specified in the Contract .
Mount the pedestrian head below the signal head mount as specified in the Contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Install an angle and straight mount cap on the unused upper side of the angle mount when installing pedestrian signal indications .
Use extended threaded pole adaptors if attaching a cluster head dog house style signal head assembly at the mount .
Use signal head mounting spacers if attaching four sections or five sections at the mount .
L. Pedestal Mounted With Two Vehicle Straight Mount Plumbizers Use a straight mount plumbizer to mount vehicle and pedestrian signal heads plumb on pedestal shafts .
Attach two separate signal sections below the mount attach the remaining vehicle signal sections above the mount .
Attach the signal head and the straight mount plumbizer assembly to the pole as specified in the Contract .
Use a universal hub to attach the straight mount plumbizer to the pedestal shaft .
Using the manufacturers specific installation tool for captive fastener installation attach the universal hub to the pedestal shaft in accordance to the manufacturers instructions .
Install a PVC wireway between the universal hub and the entrance of the straight mount plumbizer .
Mount the pedestrian head on the bottom of the straight mount plumbizer as specified in the Contract .
Use a universal hub to attach the straight mount plumbizer to the pedestal shaft .
Using the manufacturers specific installation tool for captive fastener installation attach the universal hub to the pedestal shaft in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Install a PVC wire way between the universal hub and the entrance of the straight mount plumbizer .
Mount the pedestrian head below the signal head mount as specified in the Contract .
Install an angle and straight mount cap on the unused upper side of the angle mount when installing pedestrian signal indications .
Use signal head mounting spacers if attaching four signal sections or five signal sections at the mount .
L. Mast Arm Mounted With Straight and Angle Mount Plumbizer Use angle mount plumbizers to mount vehicle signal heads on traffic control signal mast arms at the extended end of the mast arm .
Use straight mount plumbizers to mount vehicle signal heads at the mid arm position of the mast arm .
Mount two signal sections below the mount and the remaining signal sections above the mount .
Mount two signal sections below the mount and the remaining vehicle signal sections above the mount .
Attach the signal head and the straight mount or angle mount plumbizer assembly to the pole as specified in the Contract .
Use signal head mounting spacers if attaching four signal sections or five signal sections at the mount .
Provide vertical clearance from the bottom of the signal heads including the backplates to the pavement from ft to ft. L. Signal and Pedestrian Indication Labeling Label the indications with the installation date as follows Place a date of installation on the back of the indication .
Provide labels for the date of installation on the back of the indication meeting the following requirements Record the installation date on white selfadhering label Machine printed numbers Black text ½ in tall MonthYear numeric format Suitable for placement in wet locations Paper based labels are not acceptable and Place inside on the back of the indication .
L. Bagging Use gunnysacks or other material approved by the Engineer to bag vehicle and pedestrian signal heads after installation and until traffic control signal activation to indicate that the traffic control signal is not in operation .
Maintain bagging as approved by the Engineer .
L. AntiSeize and Lubricating Compound Brush antiseize and lubricating compound in accordance with onto the threaded portions of signal bracketing pipe fittings mounting hardware angle and straight mount plumbizer threaded nipples and any threaded metallic fittings before installation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications L. Signal and Pedestrian Indication Documentation For each signal and pedestrian indication submit to the Engineer for approval four copies of all warranty information indicating the required year warranty period from date of installation product invoice and documentation indicating name of manufacturer model number and serial number .
M LED Luminaire Installation Provide LED luminaires as shown on the Plan .
Wire luminaires continuously without splices from the source of power to the luminaire as specified in the Contract .
Provide a MnDOT approved wire holder that supports the luminaire cableconductors within the end of the pole tenon near the connection point of the luminaire fitter .
Label each luminaire in accordance with .P .. c If a photocontrol unit is required orient the unit to face north .
After the luminaire shaft extension davit pole has been installed on the signal mast arm pole Place the luminaire on the luminaire shaft extension tenon Place a level on the area provided on top of the luminaire or if provided use the luminaire internal leveling bubble Level the luminaire sidetoside and front and fronttoback and Tighten the luminaire fitter connection bolts to the recommended torque level provided by the manufacturer .
N Wood Pole Installation Place wood poles in the ground to a depth equal to percent of the pole length .
Excavate in larger than the diameter of the base of the pole and keep free from loose material .
Hoist the pole into place without damage .
Plumb and rake as directed by the Engineer .
Provide backfill utilizing Selected Material as specified in Structure Excavations and Backfills and place in in or less lifts .
Moisten and compact each lift .
Place the wood pole so that a void area does not display between the wood pole and backfill at the ground plane when placed under load .
O Blank P Traffic Control Signal Pedestal Installation Use Ushaped galvanized metal shims in accordance with Standard Plate to plumb traffic control signal pedestals as approved by the Engineer .
Bolt traffic control signal pedestals to the castinplace anchor rods of the concrete foundations .
Place the pedestal access door degrees from the roadway centerline .
Q Mast Arm Pole Installation Install mast arm poles in accordance with .
H Pole Installation and the following Hoist mast arm poles without mast arms attached into position without damage .
Place the transformer base access door degrees from the mast arm .
Attach no appurtenances such as pedestrian push buttons signs etc .
to the transformer base that requires the drilling of holes in the transformer base .
Place clear silicone sealant between the pole base plate where it meets the transformer base top to ensure a moisture proof seal between the pole and the transformer base and Assemble and tighten the transformer base and pole in accordance with the pole manufacturers installation instructions and the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Install mast arms brackets and other attachments to the vertical pole shaft without damage .
Ensure a moisturefree seal between access openings and covers use a clear percent silicone sealant to seal the access opening covers on the mast arm pole .
Repair and restore damaged areas to original condition as specified in the Contract or as approved by the Engineer .
Repair damage to galvanized finish in accordance with ASTM A Annex A .
Only use zinc rich paints found on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List for Signals .
R Pedestrian Push Button Installation Provide and install pedestrian push button stations as shown on the Plans .
R. APS Push Button Bases Install APS push button bases and shafts at locations indicated in the Plans and in accordance with the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Install in Rigid PVC Conduit with end bell ½ in above the sidewalk Support the in Rigid PVC Conduit with a minimum ½ in rebar prior to concrete pouring .
Drive support rebar into the ground below a sufficient depth to adequately support the conduit during concrete pouring operations and .
Remove the support rebar after the concrete has been poured during concrete finishing operations .
After the concrete has cured Drill four in holes six in deep into the concrete as shown on the Plans Install in UNC stainless steel threaded rods Use APS push button base adhesive anchoring systems to secure the stainless steel threaded rods into the drilled holes .
Follow all manufacturers installation instructions including cleaning and insertion of the anchor with adhesive Allow the epoxy adhesive to cure a minimum of h prior to installing the pedestrian push button pedestal base .
Follow epoxy manufacturers required cure time prior to installing the pedestrian push button pedestal base .
Do not exceed manufacturers maximum torque values when tightening nuts holding the pedestal base Apply anti seize compound to all the exposed threads on the anchor rods access door cover set screws and in aluminum shaft prior to assembly Install stainless steel washers and nuts Plumb pedestal shaft and APS push button base with leveling shims in accordance with Standard Plate .
Install a continuous AWG green insulated grounding conductor from the pedestrian pedestal base grounding lug to the nearest hand hole and .
Exothermic weld AWG green insulated grounding conductor to the ground rod installed in the hand hole .
R. APS Pole Mounting Adaptor Install APS pole mounting adaptors at locations shown on the Plans and in accordance with the following Do not install the APS pole adaptor on the pole above the transformer base access cover Do not install the APS pole adaptor on the transformer base Installation of the APS Pole mounting adaptor will require four ¼ stainless steel bolts inch long flat washers and lock washers .
Drill and tap Four ¼ holes in the signal pole for APS pole adaptor mounting .
Drill a ½ in hole for a wire way access behind either the upper or lower horizontal tube for APS button connection wire .
Paint the freshly drilled holes with zinc rich paint found on the MnDOT APL for Signals .
Provide a rubber grommet in the ½ in hole to protect the C AWG Loop Leadin .
Apply antiseize and lubricating compound in accordance with to all mounting bolt threads before assembly .
Place clear silicone sealant between the pole and the mounting flange before assembly and Follow the APS button manufacturers installation instructions .
R. APS Pushbutton Mounting Spacers Install APS pushbutton mounting spacers at locations shown on the Plans and in accordance with the following Install APS pushbutton mounting spacers behind the APS pushbutton between the pedestal and the APS Pushbutton Installation of the APS Pushbutton will require or of the mounting spacers depending on the APS pushbutton manufacturer used .
When spacers are required one will be used as a wire way for the low voltage communications cable and Where the APS communications cable enters the aluminum pedestrian shaft a nonconductive sleeve is required to prevent abrasion to the cable assembly .
R. APS Push Button Units Install accessible pedestrian push button units at the locations as shown on the Plans .
Each push button unit contains three custom components Sign with Braille Push button with direction arrow and Custom voice message as specified in the Contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Ensure the button is placed at the correct location .
Mount the button facing the pedestrian landing and parallel to the crossing .
Apply an approved electrical insulating coating to the APS wire termination blocks after wire installation .
Provide electrical insulating coatings listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Apply a bead of clear silicone sealant around the top of the push button station housing where the push button comes in contact with the pole shaft .
S Crosswalk Pavement Markings Preformed Pavement Marking Tape Provide Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Permanent Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends PREF TAPE in accordance with .A .
Install crosswalk block markings in accordance with and as follows Groove the block markings into the pavement surface to protect the marking from snow and ice removal operations and Mobile retroreflectometer measurements MRM are not required for crosswalk block markings .
T Sign Installation T. Pedestal or Pole Shaft Mounted Provide each pedestal or pole shaft mounted sign with two standard sign mounting bracket assemblies using a stainless steel band at least ¾ in wide .
Mount on the pedestal or pole shaft at the height as directed by the Engineer .
Drill and tap shaft and mount signs as directed and as approved by the Engineer .
Mount pedestal and pole shaft signs with a clearance of at least ft from the bottom of the sign to the finished walking surface or ground surface at the base of the pole .
T. Mast Arm Mounted Provide each mast arm mounted sign with mast arm mounting bracket assemblies in accordance with the mast arm sign mounting details in the Standard Signs Manual Detail A and mounted at the specified location on the mast arm as approved by the Engineer .
T Sign Post Mounted Use Uchannel sign posts to mount sign post mounted sign panels as specified in the Contract .
T. Sign Panel Warning Stickers Install Department furnished warning stickers on new sign panels in accordance with MnDOT .H .
U Traffic Control Signal Cabinet Installation Securely mount cabinets on equipment pads to the concrete as approved by the Engineer .
Install rubber gasket sections Department or Contractor provided between the bottom of the aluminum cabinet flange and the equipment pad .
Leave a ½ in gap in the gasket for water drainage .
V Fiber Optic Cable Installation Install fiber optic cable in accordance with .A .
W Emergency Vehicle Preemption EVP Installation W. Installation Install EVP detectors and EVP confirmatory indicator light atop traffic control signal mast arms and if specified in the Contract atop traffic control signal pedestal shafts in accordance with the following Install the detector confirmatory indicator light wiring and connections in accordance with manufacturers instructions Inform the Engineer of obstructions in line with the detector before installation Attach the detector and confirmatory indicator light to the traffic control signal mast arm or traffic control signal pedestal shaft to the satisfaction of the Engineer Provide any extension hardware with the same outside diameter as the traffic control signal bracketing framework and use a reducer conduit fitting to attach the detector and indicator light assembly to the traffic control signal mast arm Paint extension hardware the same color as the traffic control signal mast arm .
Do not paint the detector and confirmatory indicator light assembly Securely tighten hardware .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Install and mount the detector and confirmatory indicator to ensure the watertight integrity of the assembly Provide a in vertical separation between the detector and confirmatory indicator light combination Install the detector shield tube with the drain hole at the bottom Do not splice detector cables from the EVP detector on the mast arm to the traffic control signal cabinet Mark the detector cable in the traffic control signal cabinet with its street and direction association Make oneway or twoway EVP detectors and oneway or twoway EVP indicator lights operational when the signal system is initially turned on and Ensure each approach of the intersection detects an approaching Emergency Vehicle at a minimum distance of ft. W. EVP Confirmation Lamp Holder Modification Disassemble the rubber washer and stainless steel holding clip on the lamp side of the MnDOT approved lamp holder .
Remove the fiber washer from behind the rubber washer .
Reinstall the rubber washer and stainless steel holding clip .
Install LED EVP confirmation indications in each confirmation lamp holder .
Apply manufacturer supplied dielectric grease to the indication base threads and pin at the time of installation .
X Painting If specified in the Contract provide mast arm poles traffic control signal mast arms luminaire vertical pole shaft extensions and luminaire mast arms painted at the manufacturer .
Paint metal structures and metal components of traffic control signal systems with finish coat paint if specified in the Contract and in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System and the following Apply exterior dark green meeting the requirements of Exterior Polyurethane Paint on the traffic control signal pedestal bases and mast arm pole transformer bases .
Apply sign yellow baking and Air Dry meeting the requirements of Exterior Polyurethane Paint on cast aluminum vehicle and pedestrian signal indication housings mast arm pole vertical pole shafts traffic control signal pedestal shafts pedestal slipfitter collars pedestal reinforcing collars wind collars all signal brackets and pipe fittings and pedestrian push button stations .
For the first two coats apply aluminum paint meeting the requirements of Aluminum Polyurethane Paint to traffic control signal mast arms luminaire vertical pole shaft extensions and luminaire mast arms .
Remove any protective wrap provided by the manufacturer during shipping immediately after receipt of the shipment on the project .
Protect the factory applied finish when erecting the painted mast arm pole .
Provide a collar for handling the pole made of a material that will protect the painted finish of the pole .
Except for touchup painting do not field paint the mast arm poles .
Use touch up paint provided by the manufacturer to repair and restore nicks scratches paint chips or other damage to the finish as approved by the Engineer .
Do not field paint unpainted aluminum components of a traffic control signal system .
If a manufacturers shop coat paint is accepted or specified in the Contract make every effort during installation to protect the factory applied finish .
Repair and restore damage to the finish as approved by the Engineer .
Use equivalent manufacturers shop coat paint and field touchup any damaged finish as approved by the Engineer .
Y Existing Materials and Electrical Equipment Y .
Removing and Salvaging Remove and salvage electrical systems in accordance with Removing Pavement and Miscellaneous Structures and as specified in the Contract at locations specified in the Contract or directed by the Engineer .
Do not damage the removed and salvaged materials and electrical equipment during removal .
Take ownership of materials and electrical equipment of an existing electrical system required to be removed but not salvaged and dispose of the materials and equipment outside the rightofway subject to .. D. Disposal outside Right of Way and as specified in the Contract .
Y. Reinstalling Where installing salvaged materials and electrical equipment at new locations provide and install materials required to complete the new installation .
If the Engineer determines that existing materials and electrical equipment are unsatisfactory for reuse replace the unsatisfactory material with new materials and electrical equipment .
If the salvaged material was not damaged by removal the cost of the new material and equipment will be paid for as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
Y. Stockpiling The Contractor may stockpile materials and equipment of an existing electrical system required to be removed and not reused on the project until its removal outside the rightofway .
Stockpile as approved by the Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Z Field Testing Before completing the work perform a functional test demonstrating to the Engineer that the traffic control signal components are fully functional .
Do not activate the traffic control signal until completion of all field tests and the Engineer approves the results .
Before final acceptance provide the Engineer manufacturers warranties instructions and wiring diagrams of the materials and equipment provided to the Project .
AA Activating Signals Before activating traffic control signal systems aim vehicle and pedestrian signal heads as directed by the Engineer .
Notify the Engineer at least h before the scheduled traffic control signal activation .
Department personnel will activate the traffic control signal system unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
Provide assistance at the time of the turn on to ensure the traffic control signal system is operating correctly and safely .
Provide parts and labor to correct malfunctioning components of the traffic control signal system .
This requirement does not include Department provided material and components except if damaged by the Contractor .
Do not activate the signal system before the Engineer approves the operational signal system and its components including the emergency vehicle preemption and the traffic control interconnection .
Do not turn the signal system ON OFF or in flashing mode unless approved by and in the presence of the Engineer .
BB Restoration and Cleanup Replace or repair sidewalks curbs gutters pavements base materials sod or plants damaged or removed during the Contractors operations as approved by the Engineer .
Maintain reconstruction work as approved by the Engineer until final acceptance .
CC Available Fault Current Calculations Provide available fault current calculations as required by Article .
of the NEC and as follows Provide calculations for the available fault current at the line side of the meter socket for each service Provide and install labels for the calculation results meeting the following requirements .
Selfadhering label .
Machine printed numbers and letters .
Suitable for placement in damp locations .
Paper based labels are not acceptable .
Placed in the inside of the service cabinet on the dead front door so it is visible when the dead front door is closed .
Containing the following information .. Transformer Size in KVA ..
Available fault current in amps at the terminations of the utility transformer ..
Available fault current in amps at the line side of the meter socket and ..
The date the calculations were made . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Contract unit price for an Emergency Vehicle Preemption System is the cost of providing and installing the complete emergency vehicle preemption EVP system as specified herein and is measured as an integral unit complete in place and operating .
The Contract unit price for an Traffic Control Interconnect is the cost of providing and installing the complete traffic control interconnect system as specified herein and is measured as an integral unit complete in place and operating .
The Contract unit price for an APS Push Button Station includes the cost of the complete push button station assembly .
The Complete assembly is comprised of the base aluminum shaft aluminum dome cap mounting of hardware and components anchor adhesive wiring connections the APS push button and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the APS push button station with APS push button .
The Contract unit price for an APS Push Button and Sign is the cost of the complete push button unit including sign with Braille message mounting mounting hardware wiring connections mounting of the APS push button and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the APS push button and sign .
The Contract unit price for an APS Cabinet Control Unit is the cost of the complete APS cabinet control unit including interface boards and required wiring harnesses mounting hardware wiring connections mounting and installation of the APS cabinet control unit and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the APS cabinet control unit. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Contract unit price for an APS Pole Mounting Adaptor is the cost of the APS pole mounting adaptor mounting mounting hardware wiring connections mounting of the APS push button and sign and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the APS push button and sign mounted on an APS push button mounting spacer .
The Contract unit price for an APS Push Button Mounting Spacers is the cost of the three three APS push button pole mounting spacers mounting mounting hardware wiring connections mounting of the APS push button and sign and other miscellaneous items required for a complete installation of the APS push button and sign mounted on a set of APS push button mounting spacers .
The Engineer will measure the new Traffic Control Signal System as an integral unit complete in place and operating .
The complete installation at one intersection is considered as one unit . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will pay for new traffic control signal systems on the basis of the following schedule Item No Item Unit .
Emergency Vehicle Preemption System lump sum .
Traffic Control Interconnect lump sum .
APS Push Button Station each .
APS Push Button and Sign each .
APS Cabinet Control Unit each .
APS Pole Mounting Adaptor each .
APS Push Button Mounting Spacers each .
Traffic Control Signal System system PLANT INSTALLATION AND ESTABLISHMENT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing planting and establishing trees shrubs vines and perennials of the species variety grade size or age and root category specified for the locations shown on the plans including planting or transplanting plants provided by the Department .
Perform this work in accordance with the current edition of the Inspection and Contract Administration Manual for MnDOT Landscape Projects ICAMMLP. . MATERIALS A Nursery Plant Stock Provide plants of the species shown on the plans in the variety grade and size or age indicated .
A .
Investigations and Supply of Planting Stock and Materials By submitting a proposal and accepting award of the contract in accordance with Examination of Proposal Package and Site of Work the Contractor assures familiarity with the project site and contract documents commitments from suppliers and delivery of the plant stock and materials required to complete the contract .
A .
Plant Stock and Materials Documentation Provide the following plant stock and materials documentation At or before the preconstruction conference provide the Engineer with a MnDOTpreliminary Certificate of Compliance for Plant Stock Landscape Materials and Equipment copy of form provided in the current edition of ICAMMLP .
At least one week before plant stock delivery to the project provide the Engineer with the following .
A copy of a valid nursery stock dealer or grower certificate registered with the Minnesota Department of Agriculture MDA a current nursery certificate or license from a state or provincial Department of Agriculture for each plant stock supplier or both .
Documentation certifying that plant material shipped from outofstate nursery vendors subject to state and federal quarantines is free of currently regulated pests including Emerald Ash Borers and Gypsy Moths .
To determine if Minnesota vendors are subject to quarantines call the MDA Supervisor of Nursery Inspection and Export Certification at and .
An updated Certificate of Compliance signed by the Contractors authorized representative .
Upon delivery of plant stock and materials to the project provide the Engineer with the following .
Bills of lading or shipping documents for plant stock and landscape materials delivered to the project and .
An updated and signed Certificate of Compliance if necessary to reflect deviations from the original Certificate of Compliance documentation submitted at or before the preconstruction conference. . Minnesota Standard Specifications As a condition for authorization of payments provide the Engineer with vendor invoices or billing statements for plant stock and materials used on the project .
The Engineer will consider work performed with plant stock materials or equipment that was misrepresented in the documentation as unauthorized work .
If the Contractor does not provide the documentation required by this section the Engineer may consider subsequent work unauthorized and the Department may assess a daily charge of .
on a calendar day basis until the Contractor achieves compliance .
A. Substitutions The Engineer may allow substitutions in accordance with Substitute Materials .
Before requesting substitutions provide written documentation that plants shown on the plans are not available in quantities to fulfill the contract requirements from the individual suppliers on the Partial List of Nursery Dealers and Growers in the most current edition of the ICAMMLP .
The Engineer in consultation with the project designer may authorize specific substitute plants or may extend the contract time to ensure availability of the plants shown on the plans .
Provide substitutions equal to or better than the initially specified materials .
B Department Furnished Stock and Transplant Stock Obtain Department provided stock and transplant stock from sources shown on the plans or specified by the special provisions .
C Incidental Materials and Work The Department considers incidental materials and work specified nonspecified replacement or miscellaneous to include materials and work that are incidental to payment for the individual plant installation contract items and for which the Department does not make direct payment .
C. Specified Incidental Materials and Work Supply install and maintain incidental materials as required for plant installation and establishment in accordance with the special provisions plans and standard plans .
C. Nonspecified Incidental Materials and Work Supply install and maintain nonspecified incidental materials for plant installation and establishment success in accordance with product labeling manufacturers instructions and applicable laws regulations and ordinances .
C. Replacement Materials and Work Provide materials and work to replace unacceptable or missing plants materials and incidental items in accordance with the special provisions plans and standard plans .
Provide replacement materials and work that is equal to or better than the initially specified materials and work .
C. Miscellaneous Incidental Materials Equipment and Work Miscellaneous incidental materials equipment and work include the following Mobilization Traffic control Protection and restoration of vegetation and property Layout and staking Soil cultivation Compost Mulch Rodent protection Staking and guying Seedling shelters Temporary erosion control Mowing Application of herbicides insecticides fungicides and water and Other materials equipment and work necessary to install maintain and establish plants as shown on the plans and in a healthy vigorous and weedfree condition. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General A .
Landscape Specialist Provide a Landscape Specialist certified by the Department to perform or supervise plant installation and establishment work .
Provide documentation of the Certified Landscape Specialist at or before the preconstruction conference .
Landscape specialists may obtain certification by completing the oneday Department Landscape Project Inspection and Administration Training Class and passing a test administered by the Departments Environmental Planning and Design and Roadside Vegetation .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Management Units .
Full certification is valid for years .
Landscape Specialists may obtain provisional certification for year by passing a test without completing the training class .
A .
Notices by Contractor Notify the Engineer at least calendar days before planned deliveries of initial and replacement planting stock to the project to allow for inspection scheduling .
Notify the Engineer at least hours before beginning or changing distinct operations .
Include the following in the notice The project number Engineers name Notification date Intended dates and times for the operations and The planned locations of work .
Provide notifications in writing using confirmable email or facsimile transmissions .
A .
Unauthorized Work and Penalties for Noncompliant Operations The Engineer will consider work performed as follows to be unauthorized work Without required and acceptable documentation and notifications Without supervision by a certified landscape specialist Without conducting required and acceptable competency tests or In conflict with the working hours of the contract .
In the case of noncompliant operations the Department may assess a daily charge of .
on a calendar day basis until the Contractor achieves compliance .
A .
Required Equipment Provide equipment meeting the requirements of Methods and Equipment and with the following available on the project at all times At least one portable compaction tester capable of measuring compaction in the soil to at least in mm deep At least one soil recovery probe for assessment of soil moisture conditions and At least one tree caliper with measurement readings in inches .
B Preconstruction Work Preconstruction work includes Attending a preconstruction conference Submitting preconstruction documentation Mobilizing equipment and supplies to the project Protecting existing vegetation resources and property in accordance with the plans special provisions and Protection and Restoration of Property Field Office and Laboratory Fencing and Protection and Restoration of Vegetation .
C Staking Planting Holes and Beds Stake the exact locations and layouts for the Engineers approval .
To remedy unanticipated localized problems and seasonal conditions that may hinder plant establishment the Contractor may request the Engineers approval to perform the following in accordance with the standard plans and options shown on the plans Relocate plantings Make plant substitutions or Modify soil or drainage characteristics .
Locate plantings to provide the following A clear sight distance in front of traffic signs .
Clear zones and safety sight corners and lines shown on the plans free of plants with ultimate growth diameter of cm or greater .
D Preparing Planting Holes and Planting Beds To prevent site compaction and damage do not work in planting holes and bed areas if the soil moisture is greater than field capacity. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Utilities Before cultivating soil or excavating holes on the project meet the requirements of Utility Property and Service .
The Contractor may request the Engineers approval to relocate plantings to avoid unanticipated conflicts with utilities .
D. Weed Control and Soil Cultivation Apply herbicide to actively growing vegetation beginning in spring or fall .
Before cultivating individual planting holes and bed areas kill turf and weed growth within the limits of planting areas that will receive mulch in accordance with the following Mow existing vegetation to at least in mm at least one week before spraying herbicide .
Remove the cuttings .
Allow the vegetation to regrow to a height from in to in mm to mm before applying the herbicide .
At least three days before applying herbicide submit to the Engineer labels of the intended herbicides and a copy of a valid MN Pesticide Applicator License including Category A and Category J. Spray and kill turf and weeds including the top growth and roots only within designated areas using a non selective nonresidual post emergent herbicide containing percent glyphosate as the active ingredient .
Ensure personnel licensed by the MDA and experienced in the use of chemical pesticides perform the work in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and recommendations .
Apply the herbicide to dry foliage on actively growing vegetation .
Apply the herbicide in August or early September before the fall or spring Plant Installation Period PIP as required by the contract .
If an August or September application is not possible for the spring PIP apply the herbicide in late April or early May .
If precipitation occurs within hours after applying herbicide reapply herbicide as needed to achieve percent kill .
Before beginning soil cultivation work schedule and perform a Competency Test to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The Engineer considers a satisfactory Competency Test one that demonstrates acceptable soil cultivation incorporation of soil additives compaction levels and soil drainage in one planting bed area and one individual tree planting area .
Before placing soil additives as shown on the plans use a spading machine to deep cultivate the planting hole and bed areas by loosening the soil to at least in mm deep and a compaction level of no more than psi kPa to this depth as measured from the finished grade elevation of the soil .
The Engineer may approve other equipment to address site constraints if requested by the Contractor .
For hydraulic spadetype machinemoved treetransplanting the Engineer will not require planting hole cultivation other than loosening the soil outside the soilball perimeter in accordance with the standard plans shown on the plans .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans add in mm of Grade compost in accordance with Compost and other soil additives shown on the plans or as requested by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer over the cultivated planting hole and bed areas and use a spading machine to incorporate it to a depth of at least in mm as measured from the finished grade elevation of the soil .
Use a compaction tester to ensure compaction in the planting hole and bed areas does not exceed psi kPa to a depth of at least in mm .
If Contractoroperations result in zones of hardpan or excessively compacted soil repeat deep cultivation or decompact the subsoil in accordance with .. H Finishing Operations specifically the requirements for turf establishment areas at no additional cost to the Department .
Ensure drainage in the planting hole and bed areas .
For suspected drainage problems perform a percolation test by filling a in mm deep planting hole with water and measuring the time it takes the water to drain from the hole .
The Engineer considers adequate drainage equal to or greater than a percolation rate of ½ inh mmh .
If drainage does not meet these requirements request approval from the Engineer to relocate or delete affected planting locations or proceed with Extra Work using one or a combination of the standard plans for poorly drained soils as shown on the plans .
Apply temporary erosion control measures in accordance with the NPDES permit SWPPP notes and Storm Water Management .
The Contractor may use Type wood chip mulch at a depth no more than in mm for temporary erosion control in prepared planting bed areas .
D. Wet Soils Rock and Debris If the Contractor encounters excessively wet soils bedrock or excessive quantities of boulders and construction debris the Contractor may request the Engineers approval to relocate or delete plantings or modify soil or drainage characteristics in accordance with the alternative options in the standard plans shown on the plans .
E Delivery and Storage of Plants Before installation the Engineer will provide for inspection and acceptance of plant stock delivered to the project in accordance with the current edition of the ICAMMLP and Plant Stock .
Install plant stock on the day of delivery to the project unless using temporary storage methods .
Before installation keep the roots of plants completely covered with a moistureholding material consisting of wood chips straw sawdust moss or soil .
Keep the moistureholding material continuously moist and protect it from drying winds direct sunlight excessive heat freezing low humidity inadequate ventilation and animal or human harm .
Remove tree trunk sleeves prior to inspection acceptance and planting .
Sleeves must be removed with a method that does not injure the tree .
The Engineer will consider plants with damage that occurred or was discovered during temporary storage unacceptable .
Do not store plants from one planting season to the next. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E. Pruning Top Growth and Roots Immediately before planting prune the roots of bareroot plants except seedlings and the top growth of deciduous plants .
Cutback broken or badly bruised roots and dry root tips to sound healthy tissue .
Prune to remove dead rubbing damaged diseased and suckering branches and to improve plant symmetry structure and vigor .
Prune coniferous trees and shrubs only to remove damaged growth or a competing leader .
Prune in accordance with the horticultural practices specified in the current edition of the ICAMMLP and the standard plans on the plans .
Do not prune oak trees during the oak wilt season from April through July to prevent the spread of oak wilt disease .
Immediately treat accidental cuts or wounds to oaks with a wound dressing in accordance with the standard plans shown on the plans .
Keep wounddressing material on the project during the oak wilt season .
E. Buried Root Flares The Engineer will consider containergrown and balled and burlapped plant stock unacceptable if provided with more than in mm of soil depth above the root flare .
The Engineer may accept plants provided with no more than in mm excess soil above the root flare if the excess soil can be removed without damaging the root system of the plants .
E. Excessive Roots Reject containerized or balled and burlapped plants with roots extending at least in mm beyond the container or burlap .
F Installation of Plants F General Before proceeding with plant installation work schedule and perform a competency test demonstrating acceptable plant installation methods to the Engineers satisfaction and in accordance with the plans and standard plans for each plant pay item and root category on the project .
The Engineer considers a satisfactory competency test to be one that demonstrates acceptable handling of plants digging of holes and beds installation of plants initial watering installation of protection materials and mulching .
Before digging planting holes rake temporary erosion control wood chip mulch off prepared planting areas to prevent wood chip contamination of the planting soil in the holes .
The Contractor may respread wood chip mulch formerly used as temporary erosion control around plants to a depth no greater than in mm following plant installation if newly provided and acceptable Type mulch is applied over the top to the depth shown on the standard plans in the plans .
Dig planting holes to the configuration and minimum dimensions shown in the standard plans on the plans .
If the soil moisture is greater than field capacity do not work in planting holes and beds .
Ensure drainage in the planting hole and bed areas .
For a suspected drainage problem perform a percolation test by filling a in mm deep planting hole with water and measuring the time it takes the water to drain from the hole .
The Engineer considers adequate drainage equal to or greater than a percolation rate of ½ inh mmh .
If drainage does not meet these requirements request approval from the Engineer to relocate or delete affected planting locations or proceed with extra work using one or a combination of the standard plans for poorly drained soils as shown on the plans .
F. Individual Plant Stock Types and Installation Requirements Install plants in accordance with the steps and requirements in the standard plans shown on the plans and specific to each plant stock type .
G Watering Provide watering equipment and forces on the project capable of completely watering plants as often as necessary to maintain soil moisture in the root zones .
Within hours of installation saturate the backfill soil of each plant with water .
After settling provide additional backfill to fill in the voids .
H Mulch Before placing mulch fine grade and level the planting bed soils with hand tools .
Place mulch material in accordance with the standard planting detail shown on the plans no more than seven days after plant installation .
The Engineer will consider placement of mulch contaminated with soil or other materials and not complying with the requirements of Mulch Materials unacceptable .
Remove unacceptable mulch from the project .
I Protection of Installed Trees Use protective materials to ensure the healthy growth and survival of installed trees .
Tree protection measures to address fallwinter environmental conditions must be removed the following spring. . Minnesota Standard Specifications I. Staking and Guying Unless staking and guying is shown on the plans only stake and guy trees if necessary to maintain the trees in a plumb condition .
The following circumstances may warrant staking and guying Excessive soil moisture Lighttextured soil Steep slopes Exposure to excessive wind and The likelihood of vandalism .
Install staking and guying in accordance with the standard plans shown on the plans .
Remove staking and guying within year of initial installation .
I. Rodent Protection Place rodent protection around deciduous pine and larch trees in accordance with the standard plans shown on the plans .
I. Seedling Tree Shelters Install seedling tree shelters in accordance with the standard plans shown on the plans .
J Cleanup and Restoration Work Perform the following cleanup and restoration work on an ongoing basis and as the final step of the initial planting operations Remove excess materials rocks and debris from the project Repair turf in disturbed areas with seed mixes as shown on the plans or to match inplace turf .
immediately before sowing seed or laying sod prepare soil as specified in .
Construction Requirements .
Uniformly broadcast a Type natural base fertilizer as specified by .. B .
Type Natural Based Fertilizer that provides nitrogen at an application rate of lbacre .
Lay sod or uniformly broadcast seed at .
times the rate specified in Table Seed Mixes .
Provide seed in accordance with the requirements of Seed and perform seeding in accordance with Season of Planting. . Rake and firm seeded areas to ensure seed contact with the soil .
Broadcast or disc anchor Type mulch in all seeded areas Install erosion control measures to prevent erosion .
K Plant Establishment Period K. Establishment Period A Plant Establishment Period PEP of at least calendar years begins on the date that initial planting operations on the project are completed and continues until final acceptance of the project unless otherwise shown on the plans .
K. Establishment Work Keep plants in a healthy growing condition in accordance with the current edition of the ICAMMLP throughout the establishment period and submit MnDOT Landscape Contractor Scouting Reports in accordance with item of .. K .. a All Plants .
Perform plant establishment work throughout the growing seasons from April through October and as necessary during the dormant seasons from November through March .
The Engineer may perform random inspections throughout the PEP to verify compliance .
The Engineer will consider the Contractor noncompliant if the Contractor does not maintain plants throughout the PEP and does not submit scouting reports .
The Department may assess a daily charge of .
for noncompliance on a calendar day basis until the Contractor achieves compliance .
K .. a All Plants In plant establishment work perform the following Scout to assess the condition of the plants and the planting site and factors that may influence plant health vigor and establishment success .
Scout these conditions at least every two weeks during the growing season and at least every month during the dormant season Submit a written scouting report to the Engineer via email by the st and th of each month during the growing season from April to October and by the st of each month during the dormant season from November to March .
The Engineer will use the reportfrequency and content to assess plant establishment compliance. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The report may include scanned copies of the plan sheets with the Contractor notes copies of the report form found in the current edition of the ICAMMLP or both .
Include the following in the report .
The project number .
Engineers name .
Name of Contractors responsible scout or representative .
Dates work was performed .
Work locations .
Work completed .
Prevailing weather conditions .
Soil moisture assessments .
Insect animal vehicular weather or other damage .
Disease problems .
Treatment recommendations and .
Assessment of overall plant conditions including weed competition and control .
Maintain soil moisture in accordance with the watering guidelines of the standard plans shown on the plans Repair adjust or replace staking and guying mulch material planting soil rodent protection seedling tree shelters tree paint and other incidental items in accordance with the plans Maintain healthy vigorous plants free of harmful insects fungus and disease without the use of systemic insecticides such as neonicotinoids .
Remove dead dying and unsightly plants .
Provide and install replacement plants in accordance with .. K .. b Replacement Requirements Maintain plants in a plumb condition at the planting depth shown on the standard plans in the plans Maintain planting areas in a weedfree condition as follows .
Remove weeds top growth and roots within the mulch limits by hand pulling .
Prewater mulched areas to ensure weed top growth and roots are entirely removed .
Ensure weeding operations do not contaminate the mulch or project with weed seed weedladen soil or propagating weed parts .
Remove State and County regulated noxious weeds to at least ft mm beyond the mulch limits .
Remove weed parts or weedladen material from the project to avoid the spread of weed infestations .
Do not spray chemicals for weed control in mulched planting areas during the PEP .
The Contractor may apply a nonselective nonresidual postemergent herbicide containing percent glyphosate as the active ingredient with a surfactant on a spot treatment basis with a brush or wick applicator .
The Contractor may also apply a broadspectrum dichlobenil based granular preemergent herbicide in accordance with product labeling and manufacturers recommendations .
Do not weed whip or weed clip as weed control .
Mow turf bands around the mulch limits at least ft mm beyond the limits and at least in mm high if the turf height exceeds in mm adjacent to mulched planting areas .
Mow turf areas installed as part of the project when the growth exceeds in mm high .
Mow turf from in mm to in mm high .
Control State and Countylisted noxious weeds Prune to remove dead rubbing damaged or diseased branches unwanted suckers and to improve plant form and structure Prevent or repair rutting and other damage that may lead to soil erosion and weed infestation Perform plant establishment operations consistent with plant care and horticultural practices detailed in the current edition of the ICAMMLP and Remove excess material obsolete temporary erosion control devices rocks and debris from the project .
K .. b Replacement Requirements Within the first year of the year PEP determine which plants need replacing .
Replace dead defective or missing plants and incidental materials in accordance with initial installation requirements including plants lost due to accidents vandalism theft rodent damage damage caused by the Contractor or if ordered by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
Conduct plant replacement operations during the month of May or September based on the start of the PEP .
At least one week before plant replacement submit a summary report of proposed plant replacements to the Engineer .
Include by attachment copies of plan sheets with the proposed replacement quantities and locations identified and a MnDOT Certificate of Compliance for Plant Stock Landscape Material and Equipment in the report .
Using brightly colored paint mark on site plants requiring replacement .
Provide replacement plants and incidental materials that are equal to or better than the initial material required by the contract .
If less than a full year remains in the PEP do not replace plants unless the PEP is extended by a supplemental agreement or change order to provide at least one full year of establishment care .
L Acceptance of Work For acceptance at full payment ensure each plant meets the Criteria For Accepting Plant Size shown in the current edition of the ICAMMLP. . Minnesota Standard Specifications L. Acceptance of Preconstruction Work The Engineer will accept the preconstruction work after the Contractor secures commitments for required materials submits a MnDOT Certificate of Compliance for Plant Stock Landscape Materials and Equipment participates in a preconstruction conference obtains the Engineers approval for the progress schedule moves equipment and supplies to the project and provides protection for existing plants .
L. Acceptance of Preparation of Planting Holes and Beds For the Engineers acceptance of preparation of planting holes and beds complete a competency test other specified staking initial weed control soil cultivation including incorporation of additives and temporary erosion control work .
L. Acceptance of Initial Planting Operation The Engineer will provisionally accept initial planting operations based on the following Plant stock acceptance Completion of a competency test Installation of individual plants and All incidental material and work items shown in the initial planting operations chapter of the current edition of the ICAMMLP including initial but not limited to watering tree protection materials mulching proper drainage pruning staking and guying fertilizing erosion control seeding and clean up .
L. Final Acceptance As a condition for terminating the PEP and conducting the final inspection the Engineer may require the Contractor to bring the plant establishment work into compliance .
On or about the date of termination of the PEP the Engineer will perform a final inspection of the project .
The Engineer will determine which plants to accept for payment at the contract unit price at a reduced payment or with no payment .
Upon final acceptance the Engineer will not require further Contractorcare of plantings .
The Engineer will make final acceptance at the completion of the twoyear PEP and based on a final inspection of the completed project . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure plants separately by the number of acceptable plants for each contract item in accordance with .. G Payment Schedule . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will make payment for plant installation and establishment at a percentage of the contract unit price per item unit of measure for all costs relating to furnishing installing and maintaining the required plants and associated incidental materials as specified and shown on the plans .
The Engineer may require additional materials and work beyond that specified or shown in the contract .
The Department will make payment for the additional materials and work as extra work .
The Department may make full payment reduced payment or no payment of no more than the maximum eligible partial payment percentage at any payment phase initial interim final based on the performance of the Contractor see Payment Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
A Full Payment The Department will make full payment of percent of the contract unit price for each plant the Engineer considers acceptable upon inspection if the Contractor fully achieves all Payment Criteria as defined in the Payment Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
B Reduced or No Payments The Department will make a reduced payment or no payment of the contract unit prices for each plant if the Contractor does not achieve all Payment Criteria as defined in the Payment Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
C Initial Payment The Department will make partial payment up to percent of the contract unit price for each plant for completion of the following work C. Preconstruction Work The Department will pay no more than percent of the contract unit price for each plant with the completion and acceptance of preconstruction work as defined in the Preconstruction Work Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Preparation of Planting Holes and Beds The Department will pay no more than percent of the contract unit price for each plant with the completion and acceptance of preparation of planting holes and beds work as defined in the Preparation of Planting Holes and Beds Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
C. Initial Planting Operations The Department will pay no more than percent of the contract unit price for each plant with the completion and acceptance of initial planting operations work as defined in the Initial Planting Operations Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
D Interim Payment At the end of the first calendar year of the PEP and after completion and acceptance of the Contractors work and continuous compliance with the plant establishment requirements as defined by the Plant EstablishmentYear One Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP the Engineer may authorize no more than percent of the contract unit price for each plant .
E Final Payment The Department will make final payment after final inspection and acceptance of the completed project at the end of the PEP .
The Engineer may authorize no more than percent of the contract unit price for each plant as defined by the Plant Establishment Year Checklist in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
The total final payment includes the Plant Establishment Year payment assessments and reduced payments if any and bonus payment if eligible .
The Department will not pay for replacement plants unless authorized by the Engineer .
The Department may continue to withhold any percentage of initial and interim payments from the final payment .
The Department will not reimburse any assessments charged during the contract period at the final payment .
If the final voucher shows that the total of initial and interim payments made exceeds the total amount due the Contractor promptly refund the Department for the overpayment .
F Bonus Payment When percent or more of all plants installed within the initial plant installation period PIP and related contract operations have been continuously acceptable throughout the contract period the Department will make a bonus payment of percent of the total final contract unit price for plant installation and establishment .
The Department considers replacement plants replaced during the initial PIP to be initially installed plants .
Replacement plants made during the PEP are not eligible for bonuses .
G Payment Schedule The Department will pay for plant installation and establishment on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Coniferous tree size root category tree .
Deciduous tree size root category tree .
Ornamental tree size root category tree .
Coniferous shrub size root category shrub .
Deciduous shrub size root category shrub .
Vine age or size root category vine .
Perennial age or size root category plant .
Transplant tree spade size tree .
Transplant shrub shrub .
Transplant vine vine .
Transplant perennial plant NOTE State Root Category Seedling Bare Root Machine Moved Container Grown Balled and Burlapped Spade size in in in in in .
PROTECTION AND RESTORATION OF VEGETATION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of protecting and preserving vegetation from damage and restoring vegetation damaged by the Contractors operations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
MATERIALS A Plant Materials and B Temporary Fence Provide temporary fence meeting the following characteristics and requirements At least ft Conspicuous in color see Standard Detail Sheet for Protection and Restoration of Vegetation and Commercially available snow fence or other fencing material approved by the Engineer .
C Water .. C. D Rooting Topsoil Borrow E Tree Growth Retardant TGR Provide the TGR paclobutrazol or an equal approved by the Engineer. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Protecting and Preserving Protect and preserve the following Specimen trees Threatened and endangered plants listed on the Federal and state threatened and endangered species list Vegetation as required by the contract Trees brush and natural scenic elements within the rightofway and outside the limits of clearing and grubbing in accordance with .
Clearing and Grubbing Construction Requirements and Other vegetation as directed by the Engineer .
Do not place temporary structures store material or conduct unnecessary construction activities within ¼ ft outside of the dripline of trees designated for preservation unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Do not place temporary structures or store material including common borrow and topsoil outside of the construction limits in areas designated for preservation as required by the contract or as approved by the Engineer .
Do not place or leave waste material on the project including bituminous and concrete waste that would interfere with performing the requirements of .. C Preparation of Embankment Foundation or Establishing Turf and Controlling Erosion .
The Department defines concrete waste as excess material not used on the project including material created from grinding rumble strips .
Dispose of excess material in accordance with .. D Disposal of Material and Debris .
A .
Temporary Fence Place temporary fences to protect vegetation before starting construction .
Place temporary fence at the construction limits and at other locations adjacent to vegetation designated for preservation as required by the contract or as approved by the Engineer .
The Department will provide tree protection signs .
Place tree protection signs in accordance with the following Along the temporary fence at ft intervals At least two signs per fence or As directed by the Engineer .
Do not remove the fence until all work is completed or until approved by the Engineer .
Ensure the fence prevents traffic movement and the placement of temporary facilities equipment stockpiles and supplies from harming the vegetation .
A .
Clean Root Cutting Cleanly cut tree roots at the construction limits as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer .
Immediately and cleanly cut damaged and exposed roots .
Cut back damaged roots of trees designated for protection to sound healthy tissue and immediately place topsoil over the exposed roots .
Immediately cover root ends exposed by excavation activities with in of topsoil as measured outward from the cut root ends .
Immediately within minutes treat cut oak roots with a wound dressing material consisting of latex paint or shellac .
Limit cutting to a minimum depth necessary for construction .
Use a vibratory plow or other approved root cutter in accordance with the Standard Detail Sheet for Protection and Restoration of Vegetation before excavation. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A. Watering Water rootdamaged trees during the growing season that root damage occurs and water specified trees if required by the contract or directed by the Engineer .
Maintain adequate but not excessive soil moisture by saturating the soil within the undisturbed portion of the dripline of impacted or identified trees to a depth of in .
Use a soil recovery probe to check the soil moisture to a depth of in and adjust the intervals and frequency of watering in accordance with prevailing moisture and weather conditions .
A. Rooting Topsoil Borrow Place Rooting Topsoil Borrow instead of common borrow fill within the dripline of specimen trees as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer .
Place the topsoil to avoid overcompaction as approved by the Engineer .
Establish turf consistent with the adjacent areas as approved by the Engineer .
A .
Utility Construction Bore under roots of trees designated for preservation for utility installations within the tree protection zone in accordance with the following Table Tree Protection Zone Tree diameter at .
ft above ground in Minimum distance from face of tree trunk ft Minimum depth of tunnel ft . Do not perform open trenching within the tree protection zone .
Bore under areas of native prairie and protected plant species as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer .
A. Blank A. Pruning Provide an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture to prune trees as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer in accordance with .. E. Pruning Top Growth and Roots .
Ensure the arborist removes dead broken rubbing branches and limbs that may interfere with the existing and proposed structures .
A .
Destroyed or Disfigured Vegetation Restore vegetation designated on the plans for preservation that is damaged or disfigured by the Contractors operations at no additional cost to the Department .
Restore the damaged vegetation to a condition equal to what existed before the damage .
The Engineer may assess damages against the Contractor for damage to vegetation not restored to the previous condition .
The Engineer will assess the value of damages to trees and landscaping at not less than the appraisal damages as specified in the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers Guide for Plant Appraisal .
The Engineer will determine and assess damages of other vegetation .
A. Oak Trees Avoid wounding of oak trees during April May June and July to prevent the spread of oak wilt .
If the Engineer determines that work must take place near oak trees during those months immediately within minutes treat resulting wounds with a wound dressing material consisting of latex paint or shellac .
Blend paint colors with the bark color .
Maintain a supply of approved wound dressing on the project at all times during this period .
A .
Tree Growth Retardant TGR Provide an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture to treat trees with the TGR as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer .
Ensure the arborist applies the TGR paclobutrazol as a basal drench or soil injection and in accordance with the label directions .
Provide the Engineer with the product label and material safety data sheet for the product used .
A. Blank .
Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Other Vegetation Protection Measures Provide other vegetation protection measures including root system bridging compaction reduction aeration irrigation systems Jbarriers for specimen tree protection and retaining walls as required by the contract or as directed by the Engineer .
B Quarantined Wood .. D. C Plant Installation D Disposal of Material and Debris .. D . METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Temporary Fence The Engineer will measure temporary fence placed maintained and removed by length along the bottom of the fence between end posts .
B Clean Root Cutting The Engineer will measure clean root cutting by length along the plow line .
The Engineer will determine the beginning and ending points for clean root cutting as the intersection of the construction limit and the dripline of the tree or brush or in accordance with lines shown on the plans .
C Water The Engineer will measure water by volume used to protect and restore vegetation .
The Engineer will not measure water otherwise used in performing the work such as for maintenance of sod .
D Rooting Topsoil Borrow The Engineer will measure Rooting Topsoil Borrow by loose volume as required by the contract .
E Pruning The Engineer will measure pruning by the hours of actual pruning work .
F Tree Growth Retardant TGR The Engineer will measure TGR by volume of material applied for the size of the tree treated .
The Engineer will determine the volume of TGR required by the diameter at breast height DBH of each tree treated .
DBH is defined as .
ft above ground level .
The Engineer will use a diameter tape measure to measure DBH . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The Department will include the cost of the following with other relevant contract items Boring under roots in the tree protection zone dressing of wounds and disposal of material and debris and Pruning made necessary to allow for the Contractors operations .
The Department will pay for protection and restoration of vegetation based on the following unit prices in the absence of contract unit prices Table Protection and Restoration of Vegetation Items Item Unit Price Temporary fence .
per ft Clean root cutting .
per ft Water .
per gal Prune trees .
per h Tree growth retardant .
per diameter in The Department will pay for protection and restoration of vegetation on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Temporary Fence linear foot .
Clean Root Cutting linear foot .
Water gallon .
Prune Trees hour .
Tree Growth Retardant gallon The Department will pay for Rooting Topsoil Borrow on the basis of the schedule in .B. . Minnesota Standard Specifications STORM WATER MANAGEMENT .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of managing storm water runoff and project related water discharges to minimize sediment pollution and managing the discharges associated with dewatering and basin draining activities. . MATERIALS A Blank B Water Treatment C Mulch D Silt Fence E Flotation Silt Curtain F Temporary Slope Drain G Sandbags H Sediment Control Log I Flocculants J Filter Berm .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Manage stormwater by routing of water temporary diversionsflumes bypasses and avoidance measures .
Schedule construct maintain or install temporary sediment control and storm water management measures as required by the contract .
Adjust the installation location of temporary stormwater management and sediment control devices as shown on the plans to better accommodate the actual field conditions and increase the effectiveness of a device .
A .
Erosion Control Supervisor Provide an Erosion Control Supervisor with a valid Minnesota Erosion and Stormwater Construction Site Management certification authorized to represent the Contractor regarding meeting contractual requirements for Erosion and Stormwater Management and work in public waters .
The certification is obtained from a MnDOT approved provider .
The Erosion Control Supervisor shall be available to the work site within hours of initial disturbance and at the site daily when work is taking place until final stabilization .
The following list describes the duties of the Erosion Control Supervisor Implements the quality control program per Air Land and Water Pollution Ensures proper installation functionality and maintenance cleanup and removal of all erosion and sediment control Best Management Practices BMPs and in accordance with manufacturers recommendations Implements the erosion and sediment control schedule Coordinates the work of subcontractors and ensures the full execution of erosion and sediment control measures for each operation and stage of work Oversees the work of subcontractors and ensures the subcontractors undertake erosion and sediment preventive measures at each stage of the work Attends construction meetings to discuss the erosion control schedule and inspections Provides for erosion and sediment control methods for temporary work not shown on the plans Ensures effective preventative BMPs are in place recommends BMP changes for the Engineers approval and amends the SWPPP per Definitions or construction plan sheets to document changes Ensures acquisition of and compliance with applicable permits for borrow pits dewatering and temporary work in rivers lakes and streams Ensures the full installation of erosion and sediment control work before suspension of the work Coordinates with federal state and local regulatory agencies on resolution of erosion and sediment control issues resulting from the work Ensures that proper cleanup occurs from vehicle tracking on paved surfaces locations where sediment leaves the rightofway Ensures daily compliance with environmental laws permits and contract requirements and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Ensures that installers of erosion and sediment control have proper certifications per .. A ..
The Erosion Control Supervisor is authorized to install fix or repair erosion or sediment control practices when a certified installer is unavailable .
A .
Certified Installers Provide a certified installer to install or to direct installations of erosion or sediment control practices and for the following Seeding Sodding Mulching Silt fence or other perimeter sediment control device installations Rolled Erosion Control Products RECP installation Hydraulic Erosion Control Product installation Silt curtain installation Ditch check installation and Compost installation .
Provide at least one installer with a valid Minnesota Erosion and Stormwater Construction Installer Certification at the time of installation .
The certification is obtained from a MnDOT approved provider .
A .
Areas of Environmental Sensitivity Schedule and phase construction in and around Areas of Environmental Sensitivity AES as shown on the plans to minimize the potential of sediment entering into these areas .
Use measures such as hand clearing and grubbing limiting bare soil exposure time expediting construction activities and immediately establishing final vegetation to minimize sediment loss potential .
A .
Construction of Temporary Sediment Basins and Traps Construct temporary sediment basins concurrently with the start of soil disturbing activities .
Direct storm water runoff from drainage areas to the basins .
Stabilize the exposed side slopes of the basins .
Provide an outlet to the basin that discharges water from the surface separates floatables and provides scour protection or energy dissipation .
A .
Temporary Sediment Control Measures Install perimeter inlet and exit sediment control measures before or in conjunction with soil disturbing activities .
Recover sediment restore property to the preexisting conditions for loss of sediment off the project or both at no additional cost to the Department .
A. Dewatering and Pumping Provide a water treatment plan for turbid or sediment laden water .
Submit the water treatment plan to the Engineer before pumping .
Do not begin work until the Engineer accepts the water treatment plan including any contractor required permits .
Include in the water treatment plan the use of sediment traps vegetative filter strips flocculants or other water treatments per Water Treatments .
Protect the discharge location of the dewatering process from erosion .
Unless otherwise required by the contract provide and install the BMPs to control erosion and suspended sediment during the dewatering or pumping operation .
A .
Suspension of Grading Shape exposed soil and incorporate temporary and permanent erosion control measures as approved by the Engineer before suspending grading operations .
A .
Related Work Control drainage erosion and pollutants on the work related to the Project including haul roads temporary construction waste disposal sites plant and storage locations and borrow pits other than commercially operated sources .
Maintain the area shape the area install temporary BMPs replace topsoil and establish vegetative cover on areas where the potential for pollution has been increased due to the Contractors operations .
Waste disposal sites borrow pit areas or other related work located outside of the RightofWay may require separate permits .
B Silt Fence Installation B .
Type PA Preassembled Install preassembled silt fence with attached wooden stakes in small areas less than ¼ acre .
Pound stakes at least .
ft. into the ground .
Install the geotextile with the selvage edge on top .
Place the bottom edge of the geotextile into a trench in .
deep and in .
wide .
Backfill and tamp the trench for compaction. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Type MS Machine Sliced Mechanically install the geotextile with the selvage edge on top .
Place the geotextile directly behind the soilslicing blade as it works to achieve consistent placement and depth .
Do not plow soil if using the slicing method .
Roll the wheels of a tractor or skid steer on each side of the geotextile at least times to compact the soil immediately next to the geotextile Install posts adjacent to the back face of the geotextile with the post studs facing away from the geotextile fabric .
Secure each post by inserting three plastic ties through the geotextile .
Space the posts a maximum of ft. on center .
B .
Type HI Hand Installed Install the geotextile by hand with the selvage edge on top in areas inaccessible by a machine .
Install the bottom in .
to in .
of the geotextile with one of the following methods Place the geotextile fabric into a trench in .
deep and in .
wide with the bottom edge of the geotextile wrapping back up to the soil surface .
Backfill and compact soil or In areas where soils prohibit hand trenching place the geotextile on the ground on the front face and covered with crushed rock or pgravel at least in .
wide and in .
high to provide for as a filter .
Install posts adjacent to the back face of the geotextile with the post studs facing away from the geotextile fabric .
Insert three plastic ties to secure it to each post .
Space the posts a maximum of ft. on center .
B .
Type SD Super Duty Place the bottom edge of the geotextile from in .
to in .
underneath the face of the median barrier exposed to direct storm water runoff .
Place the median barriers end to end to minimize the gap between each barrier .
Attach the geotextile to the face of the barrier with wire or plastic ties and tie to each eyelet on the barrier .
B .
Type TB Turbidity Barrier Use turbidity barriers to isolate the work zone from the watercourse .
Install the turbidity barrier as close to the work area as possible but not in expected water depths greater than ft. deep includes wave heights .
Do not trench the geotextile into the watercourse .
Anchor at least a ft. flap folded upgradient with sandbags per Sandbags to seal the bottom edge .
In the top edge insert a steel support cable into a in .
double stitch sleeve and fastened to steel fence posts per HotRolled Steel Fence Posts .
Install posts adjacent to the back face of the geotextile with the studs facing away from the geotextile fabric .
Secure each post by inserting three plastic ties through the geotextile .
Before removing the turbidity barrier remove and dispose of material not originally in the isolation zone in a location approved by the Engineer .
C Bale Barrier Installation Trench bales into the ground in .
and stake with two wood stakes per bale .
Provide the stakes in a length that allows the placement of the stake so the top of the stakes remains flush with the top of the bale when embedded into the ground at least in .
Provide Type mulch per Mulch Material for bale material unless otherwise specified in the plans .
Place bale joints tight together .
Provide a category erosion control blanket as a wrap around the bales extending ft. at the base on each side .
Provide staples to secure blanket to ground .
D Sandbag Barrier Installation Install sandbags on a level contour .
Sandbags installed a minimum of ft. back from the toe of the slope to allow ponding and to provide room for sediment storage .
Stack sandbags at least three bags high .
Butt ends of bags tightly together and overlap butt joints of rows beneath with each successive row .
Stack bags in trapezoidal shape with respect to the side profile .
E Filter Berm Installation E. Type Type Compost Slash Mulch For slope breaks and perimeter control install filter berms along the contour of the slope and perpendicular to sheet flow .
Install the filter berms so the beginning and end of the installation points slightly up the slope to create a J shape at each end to contain runoff from above and prevent it from flowing around the ends of the berm .
For slopes that receive runoff from above place a filter berm at the top of the slope to control the velocity of the flow running onto the slope and to spread the runoff into sheet flow .
For ditch checks install perpendicular to the ditch gradient such that the top of the berm in the middle of the ditch is lower in elevation than the bottom of the terminating points on the ditch side slopes .
Upon formation immediately seed compost filter berms. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E. Type Rock Weeper Line the bottom of the rock weeper with a Type IV geotextile per Geotextiles .
Provide a rock weeper that forms a trapezoidalshaped berm .
Install coarse filter aggregate per Granular Material on the front half of the berm .
Install Class I riprap per Riprap Material on the back half of the berm .
For ditch checks install perpendicular to the ditch gradient .
Construct the center section of the rock weeper in .
lower than the end points of the weeper at the ditch side slopes to form a weir .
For permanent ditch checks reduce the height to in .
and modify the side slopes to VH .
E. Type Topsoil For perimeter control construct a topsoil berm using topsoil salvaged from the project .
Immediately following formation stabilize the berm with seed and mulch or an equivalent approved by the Engineer .
E. Type Rock Install Class II riprap on top of a Type IV geotextile liner per Geotextiles .
Configure riprap in a trapezoidal shaped berm .
For ditch checks install perpendicular to the ditch gradient .
Construct the center section of the rock berm in .
lower than the end points of the rock berm at the ditch side slopes to form a weir .
For permanent ditch checks reduce the height to in and modify the side slopes to VH .
F Sediment Control Log Installation F. Straw Wood Fiber and Coir Place logs on smooth prepped soils and prepare a shallow trench for the sediment control log to be placed .
Backfill and compact the upgrade side of the sediment control log with soil .
Stake logs through the back half of the log at a degree angle with the top of the stake pointed upstream .
Stakes shall be spaced every ft .
If using more than one sediment control log for length overlap the ends in .
and stake both ends .
F. Wood Chip Compost and Rock Place logs on smooth prepped soils or paved surfaces and ensure no gaps are between logs and soil or paved surface .
Install logs along contours with ends turned up slope in a Jhook manner .
F. Wood Fiber and Blanket System For Ditch checks install Category wood fiber Erosion Control Blanket ECB per Rolled Erosion Control Products or as show in plan at least one role width perpendicular to the ditch flow .
Burry the leading edge in a trench in .
deep and in .
wide .
Backfill and compact the trench with soil .
Staple the ECB at spacing no greater than ft. on center .
Place the Sediment Control Log type Wood Fiber per .F .
without the trench on top of the ECB .
If using more than one sediment control log for length overlap the ends in and stake both ends .
Follow additional ditch check installation as per .F .. F. Ditch Checks Follow installation above for sediment control log type Wood Fiber Wood Chip Compost or Rock and place perpendicular to flow and in a crescent shape with ends facing upstream .
Use logs with a center section of the ditch check one log diameter lower than the ends .
Space stakes every ft .
Provide stakes in a crisscross pattern at each location with the sediment control log in between .
G Blank H Blank I Flotation Silt Curtain Installation Provide a flotation silt curtain meeting the following requirements and characteristics Contains connecting devices at each end so that sections can be joined together Contains connecting devices designed to prevent silt from permeating through the connection and at the specified strength to prevent ripping out Installation shall reach the bottom of the water body and Offset connection joints between rows when more than one row is installed .
I .
Still Water Secure both ends of a Light Duty Floating Silt Curtain to land with steel fence posts per HotRolled Steel Fence Posts and extend the curtain at a degree angle from both ends .
Anchor the curtain in the waterway with at least lb. . Minnesota Standard Specifications anchors at intervals no greater than ft. along the length of the curtain .
Mark each anchor with a buoy in navigable waters .
Keep the curtain as tight to the work area or shoreline as possible not to exceed onefourth of a stream width .
I .
Moving Water Secure both ends of a Heavy Duty Floating Silt Curtain per Flotation Silt Curtain to land with steel fence posts per HotRolled Steel Fence Posts and extend the curtain at a degree angle from both ends .
Anchor the curtain in the waterway with at least lb .
anchors at intervals no greater than ft. along the length of the curtain .
Mark each anchor with a buoy in navigable waters .
Keep the curtain as tight to the work area or shoreline as possible not to exceed onefourth of a stream width .
J Blank K Construction Exit Controls Select Exit controls from the following list of stabilized construction exits Slash mulch Crushed Rock Temporary paving Reinforced geotextile Sheet pads Floating road Timber pad Rumble pad .
Use construction exit control BMPs at exit locations to minimize vehicle tracking of sediment from the project onto paved surfaces .
Install BMPs during the initial phase of the project .
Select construction exit BMP based on project site conditions soil type vehicle size time of year and duration of use .
Used materials generated by the project as construction exit controls whenever possible .
Maintain exit controls during the project .
Clean paved streets at the end of each working day or more frequently as necessary to provide safety to the traveling public .
K. Wheel Wash Off Provide a wheel wash off system in addition to stabilized exit controls when project site conditions warrant .
L Culvert End Controls L Inlet Provide culvert inlet end sediment trap and volume controls consisting of the BMPs and devices for temporary impoundment and treatment of construction stormwater upstream .
Culvert inlet end controls apply to median culverts centerline culverts box culverts and entrance culverts .
L. Outlet Provide culvert outlet ends with energy dissipation devices transition devices or both .
M Storm Drain Inlet Protection Implement BMPs and devices to protect storm drain inlets for all stages of work to prevent passage of sediments into and through underground drainage systems .
Protect storm drain inlets including manholes catch basins curb inlets and other type inlets constructed for the ingress of surface water runoff into underground drainage systems .
Install storm drain inlets with sediment capture devices before soil disturbing activities .
Provide effective storm drain inlet protection until the completion of paving or final stabilization of soils .
Prevent or minimize the potential for unsafe flooding or siltation problems .
Clean out devices regularly and provide devices with an emergency overflow to reduce the flooding potential .
Place devices without creating driving hazards or obstructions .
N Flocculants Apply flocculants in conjunction with installed sediment and erosion control BMPs .
Do not apply flocculants directly to public waters i.e .
lakes wetlands streams .
Apply flocculants in a contained area and assure thorough mixing into the water .
Before applying a flocculant test the pH and temperature of the storm water .
Apply flocculant within the manufacturers specified ranges .
Allow from to min retention time for clay size particles to settle ensuring that the discharge of the treated water is visually the same as the receiving water. . Minnesota Standard Specifications N. Liquid Flocculant Hydraulically apply liquid flocculant over the surface of the water to be treated .
Dilute the liquid flocculant concentrate to form a stock solution .
Apply the stock solution at the manufacturer recommended rate to yield ppm in the final treated water volume .
N. Flocculant Sock Securely anchor the flocculant sock in an area where the water to be treated will flow over the sock .
Do not leave flocculant socks in standing stagnant water .
N. Granular Flocculant Mix granular based flocculant with water in a tank to form a stock solution .
Hydraulically apply the stock solution at the manufacturers recommended rate to yield ppm in the final treated water volume .
O Temporary Slope Drains Provide temporary slope drains to convey concentrated runoff down the face of a cut or fill slope to reduce erosion on or below the slope .
Provide a minimum slope on pipe of .
Size the pipe to the appropriate drainage area .
Maximum allowable drainage area is acres per slope drain .
Provide an earthen dike to channel the flow to the temporary slope drain .
Construct the top of the earth dike foot higher than the top of the inlet pipe .
Provide anchors for the pipe and space no greater than ft. apart .
Use a watertight connection to attach the flared end section to the inlet end of drain pipe .
Extend temporary pipe beyond the toe of slope and terminate in a foot level section where practicable .
Provide a riprap apron outlet and sediment trap for energy dissipation .
P Maintenance Keep all devices functioning properly and maintained in accordance with the Contract .
Repair or replace plugged torn displaced damaged or nonfunctioning devices .
Remove sediment from sediment control devices when the sediment reaches one half of the height of the device .
Replace or repair devices damaged or compacted by equipment .
Perform repair or sediment removal within hours of discovery or as soon as field conditions allow access .
P. Filter Berms Expand enlarge or augment the filter berm with additional erosion and sediment control practices if concentrated flows bypass or breach the berm or to maintain the dimensions of the berm .
P. Sediment Basins and Traps Drain the basin and remove the sediment when the depth of sediment collected in the basin reaches percent of the storage volume determined by the outfall device .
Complete drainage and removal within hours or as soon as field conditions allow access .
Remove sediment to the original designed or excavated grade or as necessary to restore the function of the device .
Restore stabilized condition of side slopes and access road .
Clean out and shape temporary sedimentation basins intended for use as permanent water quality management basins as shown on the plans .
P. Storm Drain Inlet Protection Devices Clean remove sediment or replace storm drain inlet protection devices on a routine basis to ensure the full functionality of the devices for the next rainstorm event .
P. Culvert Inlet End Control Devices Clean remove sediment or replace culvert inlet end control devices on a routine basis to ensure the full functionality of the devices for the next rainstorm event .
Q Water Treatments Use properly sized floating head skimmers to withdraw collected waters from the surface .
Tether floating skimmer to maximize surface water withdraw and maintenance functionality .
Install stop system to prevent floating head embedment into sediment .
Install and attach skimmer pipe outfall to new or existing structure berm underdrain or as site conditions allow .
R Removal of Temporary Devices Remove temporary sediment control devices after completing the work unless otherwise required by the contract or directed by the Engineer .
All removed materials become the property of the Contractor .
Spread accumulated sediment to form a suitable surface for turf establishment or dispose of the sediment .
Shape the area to permit natural drainage as approved by the Engineer .
Remove the silt curtain upon completion of work .
Do not allow resuspension of sediment or loss of trash and oil into the water during the silt curtain removal. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Remove Sediment Control Logs upon completion of work .
Outer shell material must be removed completely and contents of logs may be left in place and spread out over the ground to decay .
S Workmanship and Quality To qualify for payment perform corrective actions when the quality and workmanship fails to meet the material installation or maintenance requirements in the contract . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Bale Barriers The Engineer will measure the bale barriers by the length installed .
The Erosion Control Blanket wrap is included in the linear measurement .
B Silt Fence The Engineer will measure silt fence along the base of the fence from outside to outside of the end posts for each section of fence .
C Sandbag Barriers The Engineer will measure sandbag barriers by surface area based on actual measurement taken along the length of the barrier times its height .
If the Contractor installed more than one thickness of sandbags the Engineer will measure the surface area of each layer of thickness and add it to the quantity .
D Flotation Silt Curtain The Engineer will measure flotation silt curtain by length installed .
E Temporary Sediment Traps The Engineer will measure sediment trap excavation by volume .
The Engineer will measure overflow devices separately .
F Temporary Slope Drains The Engineer will measure temporary slope drains by length installed .
The diversion mound and apron inlet of the pipe are incidental to the slope drain installed .
The Engineer will measure materials used to provide an outlet separately .
G Sediment Removal The Engineer will measure sediment removal from temporary sediment traps and basins by backhoe hours or vactruck hours .
The spreading and hauling of sediment is incidental to the backhoe hour removal .
H Sediment Control Logs The Engineer will measure types straw wood fiber coir wood chip compost and rock by the effective length installed .
The Engineer will not include overlaps in the measurement .
The Engineer will measure types Wood Fiber and Blanket System by length installed .
The Engineer will not include overlaps in the measurement .
I Blank J Culvert Inlet End Controls J .
Each The Engineer will measure culvert inlet end controls by measuring the number of individual culvert inlet ends protected throughout the work regardless of the type or number of devices used at each culvert end .
K Storm Drain Inlet Protection K. Each Storm Drain inlet The Engineer will measure storm drain inlet protection by the number of individual inlets protected over the life of the contract regardless of the types of number of devices used at each storm drain inlet .
K. Lump Sum The engineer will measure storm drain inlet protection as Lump sum .
Lump sum shall include all materials and labor necessary to provide proper inlet protection thru the life of the contract regardless of quantities and types required .
L Flocculants The Engineer will measure liquid flocculant by the volume of liquid flocculant concentrate used .
The Engineer will not include the water used to dilute the concentrate .
The Engineer will measure flocculant sock by each provided. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will measure granular flocculant by the weight used and placed .
The Engineer will not include the water used to dissolve and dilute the granular flocculant .
M Blank N Construction Exit Controls The Engineer will measure construction exit controls by the lump sum including the cost of protecting each exit over the life of the contract regardless of types or quantities .
Wheel wash of systems will be measured separately .
O Water Treatment The Engineer will measure Floating Head Skimmer by the each that includes the cost of size determination and associated material work and connections to the outfall drainage structures for the life of the contract regardless of adjustments made for rate control and sediment accumulation . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract pay items for stormwater management will include the material equipment installation maintenance and removal as required by the contract to complete the work .
For items of work not included in the schedule of Contract Pay Items the Department will pay Unit Prices for the relevant items of work .
The Department will provide partial payment of temporary sediment control devices properly installed at no greater than percent of the contract unit price for each relevant pay item unless otherwise required by the contract .
The Department will pay the remaining partial payment after proper maintenance and removal of the device .
The Department will withhold from monies owed to the Contractor for each improperly installed or maintained device where the Contractor failed to remove sediment and the Engineer has ordered this corrective action .
A Filter Berms The contract pay item for Topsoil filter berm includes seed and mulch .
The contract pay item for rock or rock weeper filter berm when converted from temporary to permanent conditions includes the cost to modify the berm dimensions .
B Storm Drain Inlet Protection The contract pay item for the inlet protection devices includes the cost of removing and disposing of trapped sediment or sediment deposited in or plugging drainage systems protected by the devices .
C BLANK D Silt Fence The contract pay item for the silt fence includes removal and disposal of trapped sediment .
D. Reductions The Department will withhold from monies owed to the Contractor for each section of silt fence not maintained at discharge points or where damaged by the public or the Contractor and the Engineer has ordered this corrective action .
E Water Treatments The lump sum price for Water Treatments includes the development of the water treatment plan protection of trees repair and replacement of damaged sections and removal of sediment deposits .
F Construction Exit Controls The wheel wash systems will be paid for separately for each system .
G Sediment Traps The Department will pay for removal of sediment from sediment traps by backhoe or vactruck hour .. Sediment spreading and disposal are incidental .
H Erosion Control Supervisor The Department will provide partial payment no greater than percent of the contract lump sum price for Erosion Control Supervisor upon satisfactory completion of either half the allowable project working days or half the anticipated project duration time as approved by the Engineer .
If providing partial payment the Department will pay the remaining percentage upon performance of duties as approved by the Engineer and completion of the work .
H. Reductions The Department will withhold from monies owed to the Contractor for failure to provide a certified erosion control supervisor or failure to perform erosion control supervisor duties. . Minnesota Standard Specifications I Pay Items The Department will pay for temporary sediment control items on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Erosion Control Supervisor lump sum .
Water Treatment lump sum .
Stabilized Construction Exit lump sum .
Storm Drain Inlet Protection lump sum .
Culvert Inlet End Control each .
Flocculant Sock each .
Storm Drain Inlet Protection each .
Water Treatment Type ___ each .
Wheel Wash Off each .
Bale Barrier linear foot .
Filter Berm Type ___ linear foot .
Floatation Silt Curtain Type ___ linear foot .
Sediment Control Log Type ___ linear foot .
Silt Fence Type ___ linear foot .
Temporary Slope Drain linear foot .
Sandbag Barrier square yard .
Sediment Trap Excavation cubic yard .
Liquid Flocculant gallon .
Granular Flocculant pound .
Sediment Removal Backhoe hours .
Sediment Removal Vac Truck hours SOIL PREPARATION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing temporary shaping and grading and preparing the soil for permanent turf establishment to reduce the risk of soil erosion .
Temporary shaping and grading includes directing water flow and breaking up soil fine enough to install temporary erosion control materials .
Preparing the soil for permanent turf includes soil tilling and soil additives. . MATERIALS A Lime B Topsoil Borrow C Fertilizer D Compost E Soil and Root Additives .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Prepare the soil to minimize soil erosion and to provide a media for plant and root establishment .
Perform soil preparation operations for permanent seed and sod and for temporary conditions .
A. Erodible Surface The Department shall withhold per acre within the grading construction limits excluding the roadbed areas where clearing and grubbing operations expose soils to erosion .
The Engineer will determine the areas open to erosion before approving each partial estimate .
Release erodible area withholdings per table .
A .
Temporary Grading Shape embankment to remove clods of soil greater than inches diameter and ruts erosion rills or washouts deeper than in prior to installing temporary erosion control materials in locations where the final grading grade has not been established. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Soil Tracking Perform soil tracking on embankments to create horizontal grooves on an exposed slope using a stairstepping backhoe bucket procedure or run tracked construction equipment up and down the slope .
Perform the stairstepping procedure parallel to the contour of the land .
Perform subsoil tracking on slopes steeper that VH to scarify the surface per .. G Finishing Operations or for temporary grading operations .
Perform topsoil tracking on topsoil for slopes steeper than VH when placing topsoil in those areas .
A .
Soil Bed Preparation Prepare the soil surface to provide a smooth moist and evenly textured foundation before sowing seed or placing sod .
Complete the tilling after applying soil amendments to the soil .
Use cultivating equipment such as disks harrows field diggers or tillers capable of loosening the soil to a depth of at least in .
on all areas except for slopes steeper than VH .
Till the soil surface to remove track imprints from wheeled or tracked equipment .
Operate cultivating equipment on slopes at right angles to the direction of surface drainage .
Soil clods lumps and tillage ridges in .
high or less may remain in place for seeding operations .
Soil clods lumps and tillage ridges .
in .
high may remain in place for sodding operations .
Multiple passes of the equipment may be needed to meet these requirements .
A. Subsoiling Deep rip soils before placing topsoil on areas where topsoil placement depth is greater than in .
otherwise after topsoil is placed in the following areas Where the subsoil has been compacted by equipment operations and Staging areas old road beds to be vegetated .
Subsoil infiltration basins before placing topsoil borrow Type G per Topsoil Borrow .
Deep rip soil in in one direction on the contours perpendicular to the flow of water or as shown in the plans .
Use a multishanked parallelogram or single tooth implement to create channels .
Do not use disc cultivators chisel plows or springloaded equipment to perform subsoiling .
Space channels from in .
to in .
apart except as shown on the plans .
Create channels to provide a depth from in .
to in .
or as shown on the plans. . For saturated soil delay subsoiling operations until soil dries to at least field capacity .
Observe a minimum setback as directed by the Engineer for the following subsoiling exceptions Areas within the dripline of existing trees Over utilities Where trenching or drainage lines are installed Where compaction is required by design abutments footings or inslopes and Inaccessible slopes .
B Infiltration Filtration and Bioretention Areas Construct sites after stabilizing contributing drainage areas .
Stabilize areas draining to infiltration sites .
Prevent sediment laden runoff from entering infiltration site during construction .
Use light tracked equipment to excavate grade shape and place soil loosely as shown on the plans .
Minimize tracking and compacting over the infiltration areas .
Prevent excavated material from reentering the basin during the work .
C Topsoil Place and shape topsoil to the depths as shown on the plans .
Remove all rocks and debris exceeding in .
on topsoil surface .
Salvaged Topsoil Excavation Material per Excavation and Embankment shall be stockpiled on the project site or at a suitable location approved by the Engineer .
Test stockpiled topsoil in accordance with the testing procedures for soil fertility in Topsoil Borrow .
Complete the testing at least month before placement .
Use these test results to determine pH adjustments and fertilizer soil additives and compost needs for plant establishment .
The Engineer will determine adjustments to the existing topsoil for plant establishment based on the test results .
Topsoil Material sources must be approved by the Engineer prior to blending and delivery .
Before blending individual components to create a topsoil borrow verify that each component meets the specification requirements .
D Applying Soil Amendments Do not place commercial fertilizer liming material and soil additives on frozen ground or snow .
Apply fertilizers after the runoff from spring snowmelt. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Use mechanical spreading devices to uniformly apply fertilizers compost liming materials and additives at the rates required by the contract before placing seed or sod .
Till the soil at least once within hours of placing fertilizer compost lime or soil additives .
Apply seed within hours of fertilizing .
The Department based the lime application rates on lb Effective Neutralizing Power ENP per ton of agricultural liming material .
Adjust the actual lime application rate to meet the above rate .
The Contractor may use Grade compost instead of commercial fertilizer as approved by the Engineer .
Apply the compost at an equivalent nutrient application rate to the rate for commercial fertilizer shown on the plans .
E Acceptance of Work Notify the Engineer at least hours before beginning and changing soil preparation operations .
Till soil amendments into the soil before seeding operations .
The Engineer will reject soil preparation not verified by inspection as unauthorized work per Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
The Engineer will accept filter topsoil when placed in infiltration filtration or bioretention areas after an infiltration test demonstrates an acceptable infiltration rate per Topsoil Borrow .
F Workmanship and Quality The Engineer may require corrective action for the conditions not meeting contract requirements to qualify for payment .
Perform corrective actions when the quality and workmanship fails to meet the material installation maintenance or removal requirements . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Fertilizer The Engineer will measure fertilizer by the weight of each type applied .
If the Contractor provides fertilizer with different type than as shown on the plans the Engineer will adjust the application rate of the fertilizer provided to meet the equivalent type proportions of the fertilizer shown on the plans .
B Lime The Engineer will measure agricultural lime by weight applied .
C Soil and Root Additives The Engineer will measure soil and root additives by the weight or volume applied .
D Compost The Engineer will measure Grade compost by weight applied .
The Engineer will measure Grade and Grade compost by loose volume .
E Topsoil Borrow The Engineer will measure topsoil borrow by loose volume as required by the contract .
F Subsoiling The Engineer will measure subsoiling by area successfully loosened .
G Soil Tracking Topsoil tracking is incidental to soil preparation operations .
Subsoil tracking is incidental to finishing operations per Excavation and Embankment .
Measure tracking on slopes not part of soil preparation or finishing operations by the area .
H Soil Bed Preparation The Engineer will measure soil bed preparation by area . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract pay items for soil preparation will include the material and installation as required by the contract to complete the work .
For items of work not included in the schedule of Contract Pay Items the Department will pay Unit Prices for the relevant items of work .
A Erodible Acres Partial Payment The Engineer may divide the project into separate control areas for release of the withholding .
The Department may make partial payments for erodible surface area based on withholding reductions approved by the Engineer and in accordance with Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Partial Release Control Area Surface Condition Withholding Reduced Possible erosion damage or water pollution exists No release until fixed Rough grading completed and permanent topsoil placed percent Permanent stabilization completed percent Vegetation established and accepted Full release B Payment Schedule The Department will pay for soil preparation on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Soil Bed Preparation acre .
Soil Tracking acre .
Subsoiling acre .
Compost Tea gallon .
Plant Hormones gallon .
Compost Grade or cubic yard .
______ Topsoil Borrow cubic yard .
Fertilizer Type ____ pound .
Activated Charcoal pound .
Hydrophilic Polymers pound .
Iron Sulfate pound .
Mycrorrhizal Inoculum pound .
Rhisobium Inoculum pound .
Compost Grade ton .
Lime ton ESTABLISHING VEGETATION AND CONTROLLING EROSION .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of applying temporary soil covers and establishing a perennial ground cover to reduce the risk of soil erosion .
Temporary soil covers include mulch establishment of an annual vegetative cover erosion control blanket and hydraulic soil stabilizers .
Establishment of a perennial vegetative cover includes seeding sodding mulching and any other specified work. . MATERIALS A Seed B Compost C Sod D Riprap Material E Blank F Mulch G Rolled Erosion Control Products H Geotextiles I Hydraulic Erosion Control Products J Poly Sheeting .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General Minimize soil erosion and prevent damage from sedimentation by using the Best Management Practices BMP to cover bare soils in temporary and permanent conditions .
Use temporary erosion control BMPs including limiting the amount of exposed erodible soils and providing for proper exposed soil stabilization for slopes ditches storm drain and culvert outlets and storm water discharge points from erosion .
Use permanent erosion control BMPs to provide the final stabilization of exposed slopes .
Properly prepare soils in accordance to Soil Preparation .
A .
Exposed Soil Stabilization Stabilize areas of exposed soils that are larger than acres in size using temporary seed mixtures and erosion control products .
Use rapid stabilization methods to temporarily stabilize contiguous areas of exposed soil that are less than two acres in size and are Within feet of a surface water Within feet of Areas of Environmental Sensitivity AES Required by the contract Schedule construct or install stabilization measures on exposed soil areas as shown on the plans or as required by the contract .
A .
Growing Seasons Schedule and install temporary and permanent seed or sod in areas at the optimum growing time for proper turf establishment A .. a Seeding Dates Plant seed mixtures during the seasons of planting for the various seed mixtures in accordance with Table Table Season of Planting Seed Mixture Number Spring Fall Aug. Oct. May Aug. April July .
July Oct. April June July Sept. April Sept. Any mix beginning with a April July Sept. Oct. For the portion of Minnesota north of and including T.H .
plant seed mixtures to from April to September .
Provide temporary stabilization when outside the season of planting dates of the specified permanent seed mixture Request to adjust dates in writing by no more than calendar days to shorten or extend the exclusion dates when conditions warrant .
The engineer may approve the request or direct the contractor to seed outside the seeding dates .
A.b Sodding Dates Sod growing days are any calendar day between April and November .
Avoid installing Lawn and Mineral sod between June and August .
Avoid installing Salt tolerant Sod between June and November .
The engineer may adjust these dates to shorten the excluded periods when conditions are favorable to active growth or to lengthen the excluded period when conditions for establishment are unfavorable .
Provide temporary stabilization when outside the sodding dates .
A .
Winter Season During the winter season perform erosion control operations to protect the site through the end of the spring snowmelt season .
Such practices include dormant seeding and sodding snow seeding and mulching and frozen ground mulching .
Both dormant seeding and sodding are performed during the period when soil temperatures will not allow seeds to germinate and when normal plant rooting will not occur .
A. Substitutions The Engineer may allow substitutions in accordance with Substitute Materials for the following products Mulch Erosion Control Blankets Turf Reinforcement Mats and Hydraulic Erosion Control Products .
The Engineer in consultation with Office of Environmental Stewardship Erosion Control and Storm Water Management Unit may authorize requested substitutions .
Provide substitutions equal to or better than initially specified material .
B Placing Seed Store the seed from time of purchase until installation at F and percent humidity .
Protect the seed from moisture until sowing .
Do not use wet or moldy seed .
Apply seed within hours of fertilizer application. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Sow the seed uniformly at the adjusted bulk rate of application for each mixture .
Adjust the bulk seeding rate needed to achieve the required PLS rate for the mixture in accordance with Seed and the following formulas Bulk Application lb .
PLS PLS lb PLS germination purity Immediately after seeding firm the seedbed with a cultipacker to provide seed to soil contact .
Do not broadcast seed with wind velocities greater than mph .
B .
Temporary Seeding Perform temporary seeding in addition to temporary mulching on graded areas with topsoil and unable to receive permanent seeding or slopes and topsoil berms left idle for longer than days .
Use cover crop and midterm stabilization seed mixtures as shown in Seed Table for temporary seeding .
Prepare the soil in accordance with .. A and .. B except for stockpile and berms where no soil preparation is needed .
B. Seeding Turf Mixes Mechanically sow or hydraulically apply nonnative seed mixes any mix beginning with a number uniformly at the adjusted bulk application rate of each mixture .
Only use hand operated mechanical spreaders on areas too small for or inaccessible by the specified equipment .
If using an agricultural type seed drill operate the drill in a general direction at right angles to the direction of surface drainage and sow the seed shall to a depth no greater than ⅜ in .
B. Seeding Native Mixes Seed native mixes any mix beginning with a number with a native seed drill a drop type seeder or a hydro seeder uniformly at the adjusted bulk application rate of each mixture .
Use a drill capable of accurately metering the types of seed planted and capable of maintaining a uniform mixture of seeds during drilling .
Use a drill with disk furrow openers and a packer assembly to compact the soil directly over the drill row .
Seed native mixes in rows spaced no greater than in .
apart .
Place seeds to a final planting depth from ⅛ in .
to ⅜ in .
Perform drill seeding at a right angle to surface drainage .
A drop type seeder equipped with a separate seed box for the fluffy seed and a soil packer assembly may be used in lieu of a drill with disc openers .
Use a cyclone or spinner type seeder on areas no greater than acre or on areas inaccessible to other equipment as approved by the Engineer .
B. Hydroseeding Use a hydroseeder capable of continuous agitation action to uniformly distribute the seed at the adjusted bulk application rate of each mixture .
Add a lb .
of Type Hydraulic Mulch per Mulch Material as a tracer for each gal .
of water in the hydroseeder tank .
Use flood type nozzles and Manufactures recommended water volume .
Once the seed has been added to the tank mixture a one hour time limit is set for spreading the mixture on the soil .
Once the one hour is passed the excess mixture must be discarded .
Perform hydroseeding separate from placing Hydraulic Erosion Control Products hydromulching .
B. Interseeding Perform interseeding if seeding into temporarily mulched areas or if drilling additional seed into previously seeded areas .
Use an interseeding drill containing trash rippers and at least one box for fine seed and one box for larger seeds or fluffy seeds .
Operate the drill to slice through the thatch layer and make a furrow in .
wide and from ⅜ in .
to in .
deep in the underlying soil .
Place seeds in the furrows through the drill seed disk openings .
Drop the seed onto the ground surface from the fine seed box .
Place the large or fluffy seed to a final planting depth from ¼ in .
to ⅜ in .
B .
Permanent Seeding into Temporarily MulchedBlanketed Areas Permanently seed areas previously temporarily mulched .
Without performing additional tillage or site prep work the Contractor may use an interseeding drill to drill seed directly into temporarily mulched or temporarily seeded areas .
In lieu of using an interseeding drill the Contractor may lightly disc the mulched areas before seeding .
Apply fertilizer within hours before interseeding or light disking .
Leave the existing cover in place as serve as mulch .
Permanently seed into areas temporary blanketed using the hydroseeding application as mentioned above .
Hydroseed into the installed blanket with the nozzle ft. from blanket forcing the seed and water through the blanket .
B .
Winter Seeding Dormant seed after the fall seeding date and when soil temperatures in .
below surface are no greater than F. Perform snow seeding over the top of snow allowing the seed to melt through the snow to the soil and germinate upon warm up in the spring. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Applying Mulch Mechanically spread mulch to provide a uniform distribution over all exposed soil at the application rate to provide percent uniform soil coverage .
If nonuniform distribution occurs remulch areas or remove the excess coverage .
Do not operate mulchblowing equipment on slopes steeper than .
VH or on slopes that will rut the soil surface .
Use blower attachments to apply the mulch without traversing the slopes .
Do not mulch with wind velocities greater than mph .
Areas within ft. of the shoulder immediately mulch and anchor the mulch in a continuous operation after seeding .
If traffic or wind dislodges the seed or mulch due to delays in the continuous operation reseed and remulch the affected areas .
Areas outside ft. of the shoulder shall be mulched within hours after seeding .
C. Temporary Mulching Perform temporary mulching on contiguous areas of .
acres and greater to protect the site from erosion when left idle for more than one week and during nonseeding periods and when outside the seeding and sodding dates .
For areas less than two acres mulch in accordance with .. M Rapid Stabilization .
C. Type Type Type and Type Mulch Use blower equipment to place Type Type Type and Type mulch at a target application rate of ton per acre .
Apply the mulch at an actual rate as directed by the Engineer to match varying material or project conditions .
Apply the mulch to ensure percent coverage of the soil surface .
C. Type Mulch Apply Type mulch as a dual operation with the Type mulch blown on the soil surface at ½ tons per acre and immediately overspray with Stabilized Fiber Matrix at lbs .
per acre .
C. Type Mulch Apply Type mulch at a rate of cu .
yd .
per acre as specified in the plans as an erosion control material .
C. Type Mulch Apply Type mulch at the rate shown on the plans or special provisions .
C. Type Mulch Apply Type mulch at a rate required by the contract .
Before placing mulch uniformly compact and smooth the foundation cover the foundation with Type geotextile per Geotextiles and uniformly spread the aggregate mulch to the thickness shown on the plans without harming the foundation .
Level the finished aggregate surface flush with adjacent areas .
C. Winter Mulching Perform frozen ground mulching on bare frozen soils .
Place Type Type and Type mulch materials with no modifications to meet the requirements of frozen ground mulching .
Place Type Type or Type mulch materials with the following modifications to meet frozen ground mulching At temperatures above F use Type Natural or Synthetic Tackifier in lieu of disc anchoring At temperatures below F delay mulching until ground is snow covered and perform snow mulching .
Perform snow mulching at any time over the top of snow .
No disc anchoring is required .
Apply Snow mulching prior to or during a snowfall event .
D Disk Anchoring Anchor Type Type and Type mulches with a disk anchoring tool as required by the contract immediately after placement unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Punch the mulch into the soil to a depth from in .
to in .. Space the blades and discs on the anchoring tool no greater than in .
apart .
Use Hydraulic Erosion Control Products to anchor the mulch in lieu of disc anchoring in areas inaccessible by disc equipment .
E Placing Hydraulic Erosion Control Products Protect public and private investments and properties from overspray by suitable means and methods including appropriate shields covers and avoidance measures .
Accidental overspray must be cleaned up at the time of installation occurrence .
Perform after and separate from hydroseeding .
Provide an Applicators Certification from the manufacturer before applying the Polyacrylamide Tackifier Organic Fiber Matrix Bonded Fiber Matrix and Reinforced Fiber Matrix .
E. Tackifiers Use natural tackifiers alone as an additive to other soil stabilizers or as an overspray on mulched areas. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E .. a Type Natural Tackifier Use the manufacturers recommended rate of application and mix ratios based on use site conditions and time of year .
Allow from to hours of dry time before subject to rain .
Uniformly distribute the tackifier over the target area .
E .. b Type Synthetic Tackifier Dilute synthetic tackifier at a rate of parts water to part polymer and apply to the soil at a rate of gal per acre .
E .. c Type Polyacrylamide PAM Do not use polyacrylamide PAM on pure sand or gravel without fine silts or clays .
Do not apply PAM over snow cover or to slopes that flow directly into a wetland or state waters .
Apply PAM as recommended by the manufacturer .
Provide certification of the following Percent of pure PAM present by weight Percent activity Average molecular weight and Charge density of the PAM .
Provide a material safety data sheet for prepackaged PAM .
The Contractor may include PAM as a part of a polymer stabilized fiber matrix .
Apply PAM in its pure form on slopes and channels at a rate no greater than lb .
per acre and no later than hours prior to rain .
E. Matrices E .. a Type Organic Fiber Matrix OFM Apply organic fiber matrix with hydraulic spray equipment in a waterslurry mixture .
The tank must have jet or mechanical agitation for mixing .
The dry material targeted application rate is lb per acre .
Use the water to bale ratio as recommended by the manufacturer .
E .. b Type Mulch Apply hydraulic mulch with hydraulic spray equipment in a waterslurry mixture .
The dry material targeted application rate is lb .
per acre .
Use the water to bale ratio as recommended by the manufacturer .
Increase the application rate and percent tackifier to roughened soils for complete coverage .
The Engineer may inspect the tank loading and spray application to verify that the applied materials meet the manufacturer recommendations and the soil is percent covered .
E .. c Type Stabilized Fiber Matrix Do not field mix additives or components for stabilized fiber matrix as this mulch is a premanufactured matrix .
Apply stabilized fiber matrix at the targeted dry weight rate of lb .
per acre .
Adjustments made in the field based on site characteristics soil conditions and manufacturer recommendations .
E .. d Type Bonded Fiber Matrix BFM Apply BFM with hydraulic spray equipment by a manufacturers certified applicator .
The Contractor may apply seed and BFM in a single operation in small or inaccessible areas as approved by the Engineer .
Apply BFM at the targeted dry weight rate of lbs .
per acre .
Adjustments are made in the field based on site characteristics soil conditions and manufacturer recommendations .
Use the water to bale ratio recommended by the manufacturer .
Apply the BFM from at least two opposing directions and obtain continuous ground coverage .
Apply the BFM in two stages using one half of the material in each stage .
Allow the first stage application to dewater before applying the second stage .
Do not use BFM in water bearing soils or by itself in ditch bottoms carrying concentrated flows .
E .. e Type Reinforced Fiber Matrix RFM Apply FRM with hydraulic spray equipment by a manufacturers certified applicator .
Apply RFM at the targeted dry weight rate of lb .
per acre .
Adjustments made in the field based on site characteristics soil conditions and manufacturer recommendations .
Use the water to bale ratio recommended by the manufacturer .
F Placing Sod Before delivering sod to the work site prepare the soil per .. A to avoid delays in placing the sod .
Before placing the sod prewet the soil to a damp condition .
Provide proper notching into existing surfaces .
Hand tamp or roll sod to get complete ground contact .
Use straw or hydro mulch to stabilize exposed areas until installation of sod is within the specified sodding dates .
Incorporate any straw mulch into soil prior to sod installation .
Reseed or remulch damaged areas adjacent to the sod within working days after completing the sod placement and rolling or tamping operations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications F. Slopes Place sod strips starting at the bottom of the slope and progressing upward with long edges parallel to the contour .
Stagger joints alternately without space between .
Secure the sod to the slope with wire staples or another anchor system approved by the Engineer as per Table spaced no greater than ft. apart .
At the tops of slopes steeper than VH trench the sod in .
into the topsoil .
Shingle sod on slopes VH and steeper and at culvert ends overlap the upper piece by at least in .. Use wire staples to secure sod on the slope at in .
intervals .
Trench in .
of sod into the topsoil on the uppermost strip of sod .
F. Ditches In ditch bottoms and other areas with expected concentrated water flow i.e .
flumes place the sod parallel to the direction of water flow in the main channel .
Shingle sod overlapping the ends by at least in .
and the edges by at least inches .
Trench in .
of sod into the topsoil on the uppermost strip of sod on sideslopes steeper than VH .
In ditch bottoms with high flow velocities overlay shingled sod with jute a biodegradable netting or chain link fence .
Use stakes or staples to secure the jute netting or fence to the sod .
The jute biodegradable netting or the chain link fence will not require removal after maintenance period .
F. Dormant Sodding Dormant sod on slopes in ditches and at least ft. from the shoulder after the fall sodding date and soil freezeup meeting the following conditions The Engineer authorizes dormant sodding Provide Soil Preparation for sod Stake or staple the sod on slopes and in ditches Water the sod to saturation immediately after placement and Water the sod a second time from to calendar days after placement .
The second watering is not needed when the sod receives in .
of rain or snow cover .
Do not dormant sod in areas shown with Salt Tolerant Sod or within ft. from the shoulder including areas next to boulevards and areas receiving salt encrusted snow and ice from winter deicing operations .
Temporary stabilize these areas with mulch or Erosion Control Blanket .
G Placing Rolled Erosion Control Products G. Blank G. Erosion Control Blankets Place the blankets within hours after sowing of the seed on that area .
Blankets with netting on two sides place the side of the blanket with the majority of thread stitching on the bottom .
Roll out blankets flat and parallel or perpendicular to the direction of water flow .
Evenly spread the blankets without stretching allowing the fibers to come in direct contact with the soil over the entire area .
Shingle and overlap the edges parallel to water flow by at least in .. Shingle and overlap the edges perpendicular to water flow by at least in .
Staple overlaps on slopes at ½ ft. intervals see Table .
At the tops of slopes and at the beginning of each blanket in ditch bottoms bury the upgrade end of the blanket in a check slot in .
wide by in .
deep .
Insert the blanket end to the full depth of the check slot .
Backfill and compact the check slot .
For slopes longer than ft. dig a second check slot perpendicular to the slope gradient onethird of the slope length measured from the bottom of the slope .
Place the blanket to the full depth of the check slot .
Backfill and compact the check slot .
Staple blankets with the number of staples in accordance with Table or in accordance with manufacturer recommendations Table Stapling of Blankets Slope VH Minimum Number of Staples per sq .
yd Flatter than Channel or ditch applications G. Placing Turf Reinforcement Mats Shape and prepare the site by in accordance to .
Provide turf reinforcement mat meeting the requirements of the class as shown on the plans .
Soil fill turf reinforcement mats .
Place ½ the seed fertilizer and topsoil under the TRM and the other ½ on top .
Install the mat seed fertilizer topsoil and Category erosion control blanket in one continuous operation .
Roll out or lay the mat parallel to the direction of water flow .
Evenly spread the mat without stretching allowing the fibers to come in direct contact with the soil over the entire area .
Bury and staple the beginning edge of each mat in a check slot in .
wide by in .
deep .
Overlap adjacent strip edges by at least in .. Staple the mat to provide .
staples per sq .
yd. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Directly seed and fertilize with the amounts as shown on the plans .
Soil fill with Sand Clay Loam Topsoil per Topsoil Borrow or as an alternative Grade compost per Compost to a depth from ½ in .
to in .
If equipment must operate on the mat use only rubber tired type .
No tracked equipment or sharp turns are allowed on the mat .
Smooth out soil to just expose the top netting of the matrix .
Install Category erosion control blanket per .. G. on top of the seeded topsoil .
For Steep slopes or greater hydraulically fill the cells of the TRM with seed and fertilize and mulch and tackifier into the mat with Reinforced Fiber Matrix at a rate of lbsac or to just fill the TRM cells but not over fill .
G. Winter Installation Install erosion control blankets over frozen ground and use the appropriate anchors in as shown in Table .
G. Placing Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat Shape and prepare the site in accordance to Soil Preparation or as shown in the plan .
Furnish and install Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat at the locations specified on the plans according to the standard specifications the manufacturers installation guidelines and in accordance with .
Prepare the subgrade as smooth and free of all rocks stones sticks roots other protrusions or debris of any kind .
The prepared surface shall provide a firm unyielding foundation for the mats with no sharp or abrupt changes or breaks in the grade .
Apply seed directly to the prepared soil prior to installation of the Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat .
Install Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat to the line and grade shown on the plans and according to the manufacturers installation guidelines for head and side trenching shingle overlap and rebar anchoring spacing .
G. Placing Concrete Fabric Mat Provide concrete fabric mat at the thickness shown in the plans .
Shape and prepare soil for concrete fabric mat .
At the edges of the mat bury the upgrade end of the mat in a check slot in wide by in deep .
Install anchoring pins at to ft spacing along the edges and seams .
Overlap all edges by at least in and secure with anchoring pins .
Apply a bonding seal agent to the seams for a water tight seal .
Apply sufficient water to allow proper saturation and hydration and setting of mat and cover as per manufacture recommendations .
Apply additional water hour later on fabrics thicker than .
inches ditch grades greater than percent slopes greater than and temperatures greater than degrees Fahrenheit to complete the hydration process .
Concrete Fabric Mat has a working time of hours after hydration .
H Shoulder Mulch Overspray Perform shoulder mulch overspray by spraying Tackifier over seeded and mulched areas on a strip ft. wide immediately abutting a gravel or paved shoulder as shown on the plans .
During placement perform the following Seed Cultipack the seedbed Place Type mulch Immediately disk anchor the mulch as required by the contract and Uniformly overspray with Type natural Tackifier as a continuous operation .
Use a distributer spray bar to spray the .. A Tackifiers at an application rate of lbs .
per acre that provides percent ground coverage .
I Compost Blanket Uniformly apply a in .
deep layer of Grade compost per Compost as a compost blanket over the soil after preparing the soil per Soil Preparation .
Distribute the compost by hand with a shovel spreader unit or pneumatic blower .
Incorporate seed into the compost or broadcast the seed over the top after uniformly spreading the compost .
When placing compost blanket adjacent other erosion control products or existing vegetation provide an overlap of at least ft ..
When placing compost blanket on a VH slope place and anchor open weave textile netting over the top .
J Weed Control Control and prevent the spreading of state listed Noxious Weed NW and or invasive weeds as per contract or as directed by the Engineer .
The current state listed NW species is determined by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture .
Identify mark map and monitor weed infestation areas and apply treatments at the appropriate time in order to prevent seed production and spreading .
Obtain a permit from the County Agricultural Inspector or Minnesota Department of Agriculture to transport material or equipment containing propagating parts of NW .
Follow the permit requirements .
Submit to Engineer a copy of the permit .
Submit a plan for reducing the spread of NW at preconstruction meeting .
The Plan must include methods and sequence of work .
Plans including the use of herbicides submit a copy of the Commercial Applicator License with categories for CORE and RightsofWay and list of herbicides to be used .
The Inspector must approve herbicides used on MnDOT rightofway prior to use .
Movement and reuse of topsoil from infested areas shall be limited to the confines of identified infested areas. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Delineate weed infested areas indicated on the Plan on the Project and when appropriate fence off from any work vehicles or equipment .
Minimize the spread of weed seed and other propagules from designated infested areas by minimizing disturbance and by cleaning vehicles and equipment .
Cleaning shall remove soil and vegetation debris from vehicles and equipment before moving out of infested areas or moving into project limits .
Stockpile of NW infested soils shall be separate from noninfested stockpiles .
K Maintenance K. Sod Sod maintenance period is calendar days .
The maintenance period is suspended when soil temperature falls below degrees Fahrenheit and resumes after snow melt and soil temperature is above degrees Fahrenheit .
Water within ½ hour after sod is laid on soil and provide in .
of water .
Water sod as needed to maintain soil moisture for the first calendar days .
For the remainder of the calendar days water sod to supplement rainfall to provide in .
per week .
Apply all water at a rate that prevents runoff to occur .
During the maintenance period replace sod dried dead damaged displaced or weakened or sod infested with over percent weeds .
Maintain areas replaced with new sod for at least calendar days after replacement .
After maintenance period has ended and as directed by the Engineer apply additional water to supplement rainfall not to exceed in .
per week until soil temperature falls below degrees .
K. Rolled Erosion Control Products Maintain the erosion control blanket installation for calendar days if required by the contract or if substituting erosion control blankets and seed for sod as approved by the Engineer .
Maintain turf reinforcement mats for calendar days if required by the Contract .
Water the blankets and mat systems immediately after placement at a rate of at least gal .
per acre and appropriately to establish vegetation .
Control erosion and establish a permanent vegetative cover as approved by the Engineer until contract acceptance .
Restore areas with seeding failure or erosion during the maintenance period at no additional cost to the Department .
K. Seed Repair damage within the area caused by Contractor operations and within the Contractors control at no expense to the Department .
Reseed areas where the original seed has failed to grow as directed by the Engineer .
K. Mulch Remulch areas where the original mulch has eroded washed away or blown off and reseed areas where the original seed has failed to grow as directed by the Engineer .
Use the seed mixture shown on the plans or other seed mixture approved by the Engineer to perform reseeding .
K. Mowing and Weed Spraying Perform the work required to control the Department of Agriculture State listed Prohibited Noxious Weeds either on the areas seeded or sodded under the Contract .
The weed spray mixture to be furnished and used shall be as required for that weed control .
The engineer shall approve all work and weed control material prior to the start of work .
The equipment used shall not be so heavy that it causes soil slips or ruts on the slopes or in the ditches .
Perform the work at such time and in such a manner that will avoid spray drift outside the areas designated for spraying L Turf Establishment Turf Establishment by a lump sum is for establishing permanent vegetation on small areas of ½ acres or less per Contract .
Such work shall include soil bed preparation fertilizer sod or mulch blanket seed and repair of erosion rills of in .
or greater in width or depth .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans establish vegetative cover by sodding or by seeding and mulching .
Fertilize the areas with a Type slow release fertilizer in accordance with .. B at a rate derived from a topsoil fertility test .
If seeding provide and place seed Mixture as specified in Seed and provide Type mulch with disc anchoring or Category Erosion Control Blanket on slopes and steeper and ditch bottoms .
The Engineer will accept the area after the perennial seed germinates vegetation is at least inches in height and cover is uniform .
If the seeding fails to germinate correct and reseed failed areas to establish turf .
If using sod place and maintain sod in accordance with .
F and K. The Engineer will accept sod in accordance with .. N. L. Subsurface Drain Outlets As per Subsurface Drains place seed mixture in accordance with Seed or the seed mixture as shown in the plans .
Place Category erosion control blanket per Rolled Erosion Control Products or as shown in the plans for that area .
Center the headwall along the width of the blanket .
Extend the blanket ft. above the headwall and ½ ft. below the headwall or to the toe of slope whichever is the shorter distance .
Place anchor staples at intervals no greater than ½ ft. apart .
If placing a headwall at a location that will be sodded as required by the contract delete the seed and erosion control blanket. . Minnesota Standard Specifications M Rapid Stabilization Perform rapid stabilization at any time when work is stopped temporarily and there is a risk that sediment will enter the resource waters due to stormwater runoff .
Provide the materials for the methods of rapid stabilization in accordance with Table Table Rapid Stabilization Method Materials Type mulch placed at a rate of ton per acre with disc anchoring .
Type mulch placed at a rate of .
ton per acre .
Stabilized Fiber Matrix placed at a rate of lb per acre .
Stabilized Fiber Matrix placed at lb .
per gal .
of slurry mix .
Seed mixture placed at a rate of lb .
per gal .
of slurry mix .
Type Slow Release Fertilizer placed at a rate of lb .
per gal .
of slurry mix .
Water placed at a rate of gal per gal of slurry mix .
Apply mixture at a rate of gal per acre .
Category erosion control blanket .
natural net if required in plan for permanent blanket Seed mixture placed at a rate of lb .
per sq .
yd .
Type Slow Release Fertilizer placed at a rate of lb .
per sq .
yd .
Rip Rap Class II .
Geotextile Type III .
M. Placement M .. a Method Use Method to place mulch on a coverage area from ½ acre to acre .
Loosen the soil surface before placement to allow anchoring the mulch .
Place the mulch to obtain percent ground coverage .
Use blower equipment to place mulch .
In areas inaccessible to a blower place mulch by hand .
Immediately after placement use a disc anchoring tool to anchor the mulch .
M .. b Method Use Method to place mulch on a coverage area from ½ acre to acre .
Loosen the soil surface before placing the mulch .
Place mulch to obtain percent ground coverage .
Use blower equipment to place mulch .
In areas inaccessible to a blower place mulch by hand .
Immediately after placement overspray the mulch with Type Hydraulic Mulch at a rate of lb .
per acre .
M .. c Method Use Method to place slurry on a coverage area from ½ acre to .
acres .
Apply material in quantities to obtain percent soil surface coverage .
In inaccessible areas pump the mix through a hose .
Do not place on snow covered areas .
Do not use when material is left in the tank overnight .
M .. d Method Use Method to place fertilizer seed and erosion control blanket on a coverage area from sq .
yd .
to sq .
yd .
Bury the upgrade end of each blanket strip at least in .
in a vertical check slot .
Place staples at seams and throughout the blanket spaced no greater than ft. apart .
M .. e Method Use Method to place class II riprap and geotextile to cover areas .
N Acceptance of Work Notify the Engineer at least hours before beginning or changing turf establishment operations .
N. Seeding The Engineer will accept permanent seeding in area increments after the placement of seed in accordance with the specifications .B .
For hydroseeding acceptance will be based on uniform soil coverage .
N. Mulching Mulching will be accepted calendar days after initial placement .
Remulch areas where the mulch has blown off or washed away during the calendar day period at no additional cost to the Department .
N. Sod After expiration of the sod maintenance period the Engineer will inspect the work and will accept living sod that is placed in accordance with .F.and when pulled does not lift from soil. . Minnesota Standard Specifications N. Erosion Control Blankets and Turf Reinforcement Mats For contracts not requiring maintenance the Engineer will accept blankets and mulch control netting and mats when installed in accordance to .. N. Hydraulic Erosion Control Products The Engineer will accept hydraulic erosion control products providing percent exposed soil coverage .
The Engineer will accept areas covered by BFM and Type RFM at percent exposed soil coverage .
O Restoration After the Engineer accepts the turf establishment in an area restore areas damaged by erosion and sedimentation beyond the Contractors control as directed by the Engineer .
Scarify grade shape excavate and till to restore eroded areas and clean up sedimentation as directed by the Engineer .
Shape fill and compact depressions and washouts resulting from erosion with suitable topsoil borrow meeting Topsoil Borrow as approved by the Engineer .
Remove deposited sedimentation as directed by the Engineer .
Spread or dispose of sediment removed as approved by the Engineer .
Use seed mulch erosion blankets and sod in the restoration as approved by the Engineer .
P Temporary Poly or Geotextile Coverings Cover exposed soils with poly sheeting or Type Geotextile fabric and secure tightly in place using an anchoring system of sand bags or other methods accepted by the engineer .
Trench at the top of slope and secure adequately to maintain cover during reasonably expected conditions in the area .
Provide a water diversion above to direct water away from areas and prevent undermining .
Provide toe protection to control drainage from areas covered so that the discharge does not cause erosion .
Q Workmanship and Quality To qualify for payment perform corrective actions when the quality and workmanship fails to meet the material installation or maintenance requirements in the contract . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Seeding Measure seeding by the area seeded regardless of the seed mixture or quantity of seed used and regardless of whether the seed was furnished by the Contractor or the Department .
Areas reseeded by order of the Engineer after the original seeding of the area was accepted will be measured and added to the area originally seeded .
B Seed Measure seed by the weight of pure live seed PLS by PLS mass of each mixture or species placed C Mulch Measure mulch in accordance with the following Type Type and Type mulch by weight of each type provided and applied in accordance with .. C Applying Mulch Type mulch by area covered with material provided and installed in accordance with .. C Applying Mulch Type and Type mulch material by loose volume of the material provided and installed in accordance with .. C Applying Mulch Type aggregate mulch by volume based on the area of aggregate provided and a placed in accordance with .. C Applying Mulch to the thickness shown on the plans and Additional mulch materials ordered and accepted by the Engineer in remulched areas .
D Water Measure water used by volume for turf establishment of seeded or sodded areas .
E Disk Anchoring Measure disk anchoring for Type Type and Type mulch by the area of mulch disked in accordance with .. D Disk Anchoring .
F Sod Measure sod by the surface area based at the time of installation .
Include the overlapped portion of shingled sod in the measurement .
G Hydraulic Erosion Control Products .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Measure tackifiers by the area covered in accordance with .. E Hydraulic Erosion Control Products .
Measure all other hydraulic erosion control products by dry weight of each type .
H Turf Establishment Measure turf establishment by lump sum no measurement will be made of any individual turf establishment item .
Included are all materials and labor as necessary to accomplish the work regardless of quantities involved .
I Rolled Erosion Control Products Measure separately blankets of each kind by the area covered .
Overlapped portions in the area measured for erosion netting or blankets will not be included .
Measure Turf Reinforcement Mats by the area covered .
Overlapped portions in the area measured will not be included .
Measure separately the seed fertilizer topsoil and erosion control blankets .
J Rapid Stabilization Measure Method and Method rapid stabilization by the acre acceptably installed .
Minimum measure is ½ acre and in acre increments per area measured .
Measure Method rapid stabilization by the Mgal .
of slurry furnished and acceptably placed .
Minimum measure is Mgal .
and in Mgal .
increments acre equivalent .
Measure Method rapid stabilization will be measured by the square yard of blanket acceptably installed .
Minimum measure is sq yd and in sq yd increments per area measured .
Measure Method rapid stabilization will be measured by the ton of rock provided and acceptably installed .
K Temporary Poly or Geotextile Coverings Measure temporary coverings by the sq yd for each areas covered include all materials and labor necessary to provide proper slope protection for the life of the contract of that area covered .
L Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat Measure installed and maintained Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat by the surface area covered including the overlaps head trench and toe trench areas .
M Concrete Fabric Mat Measure Concrete Fabric Mat by the surface area covered and cured in place . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract pay items for establishing turf and controlling erosion will include all labor materials equipment and other incidentals to compete the work .
The contract pay item will include maintenance replacement and repair when required by contract .
For items of work not included in the Schedule of Contract Pay Items the Department will pay unit prices for the relevant items of work .
A Erosion Control Items When the contract requires maintenance the Department will pay for installation in a partial payment no greater than percent of the contract unit price .
The Department will pay the remaining partial payment after proper maintenance and final acceptance by the engineer .
B Blank C Seed The Department will pay for seed by the PLS weight of each mixture or species measured .
D Hydroseeding The Department will not pay for seed mixture or seedfertilizer mixture that is unused and left in the hydroseeder for longer than hour .
E Mulch The contract unit price for Mulch Material Type includes the cost of the geotextile fabric for the area covered .
The contract unit price for mulch material type includes Hydraulic Stabilized Fiber Matrix. . Minnesota Standard Specifications G Rapid Stabilization The contract unit prices for rapid stabilization will include the cost of mobilization .
The contract acre price of Rapid Stabilization Method or Method includes the cost of disc anchoring or hydraulic erosion control products .
The contract Mgal .
price for Rapid Stabilization Method includes the cost of seed fertilizer and hydraulic erosion control products .
The contract square yard square meter price for Rapid Stabilization Method includes the cost of seed and fertilizer .
The contract ton metric ton price for Rapid Stabilization Method includes the cost of geotextile .
H Shoulder Mulch Overspray The Department will pay for Hydraulic Erosion Control Products Type Tackifier separately from Type mulch and disk anchoring for Shoulder Mulch Overspray I Compost Blanket The contract unit price for compost blanket will include compost and all work to perform the task .
J Turf Establishment The contract unit item includes all costs incurred to complete the work .
The cost of restoring disturbed areas includes tilling fertilizing mulching and establishment of vegetative cover .
The Department will provide partial payment of percent of the contract unit item .
The Department will pay the remaining partial payment after proper maintenance and acceptance of the vegetative cover .
K Mowing and Weed Control Payment for mowing and weed spraying at the Contract prices per unit of measure will be compensation in full for all labor and equipment employed in the work and for all materials used except that separate payment will be made for the weed spray mixture furnished and applied in conjunction with the item of weed spraying .
L Payment Schedule The Department will pay for establishing and maintaining turf and controlling erosion on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Turf Establishment lump sum .
Compost Blanket square yard .
Concrete Fabric Mat square Yard .
Erosion Control Blanket Category ___ square yard .
Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat square yard .
Hydraulic ___ Tackifier square yard .
Mulch Material Type square yard .
Rapid Stabilization Method square yard .
Sod Type ___ square yard .
Temporary Poly or GeotextileCovering square yard .
Turf Reinforcement Mat Category ___ square yard .
Disk Anchoring acre .
Mowing acre .
Rapid Stabilization Method _______ acre .
Seeding acre .
Weed Spraying acre .
Weed Spray Mixture gallon .
Mulch Material Type ___ cubic yard .
Hydraulic ___ Tackifier pound .
Hydraulic ___ Matrix pound .
Shoulder Mulch Overspray pound .
Seed Mixture ___ or Species pound .
Mulch Material Type ___ ton .
Rapid Stabilization Method ton .
Water M gallons .
Rapid Stabilization Method M gallons If maintenance applies the Department will place the sub note Includes Maintenance on the pay item shown in the summary of quantities on the plans .
Minnesota Standard Specifications SOIL BIOENGINEERED SYSTEMS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of installing vegetation with geosynthetic or natural materials to stabilize areas susceptible to erosion .
The Contractor may use soil bioengineering as a permanent soil stabilization system in ditches along stream banks on shorelines or on slopes .
This work also consists of providing and installing a composite system on the project. . MATERIALS A Seed mix as specified B Mulch Type as specified C Rolled Erosion Control products D Blank E. Nursery plant stock F. Sediment Control Logs G. Riprap .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A General The installation locations and layouts shown on the plans are approximate .
The Engineer will determine the exact locations and layouts of bioengineered systems .
Provide a qualified nurseryman landscape specialist or experienced crews working under the direct supervision of a qualified nurseryman or landscape specialist to harvest and install plant material .
Do not begin planting operations or deliver planting stock to the project until the Engineer determines that weather and soil conditions are suitable for planting and preparations for planting are complete .
During placement install components until complete .
Prevent overnight drying out of plant stock by storing in water .
On slopes begin installing material at the bottom of slope and proceed in horizontal layers upward .
On shorelines and banks begin installing material below the water line and proceed up the bank .
During the work prevent siltation and turbidity of flowing or impounded waters of the State .
If working in water protect the work site with curtains barriers or other containment devices to prevent sediment and debris from entering the receiving water body .
B Harvesting Plant Stock Obtain plant stock and cuttings from the regions zones or both shown on the plans .
At least three days before harvesting planting stock for the project notify the Engineer of the harvest date to allow for inspection .
C Season of Placement Refer to Table for the dates for seasonal placement .
The Engineer may adjust a date specified in Table by no more than calendar days based on the prevailing weather conditions .
Provide plant material in a dormant stage before buds burst open in the spring or after leaves change color and drop in the fall .
Table Approximate Season of Placement System Spring Fall Wattling Before April After Nov Brush Layering Before April After Nov Live Stake Before April After Nov RootRap April June July Sept . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Wattling Dig trenches along the contours of the slope place bundles of dormant plant cuttings into the trenches and tamp loose soil over the bundles .
Before trenching drive wooden stakes in .
on center along each trench location .
Provide stakes with a diameter of in .
and a length of ft. Drive the stakes to a firm hold with the tops in mm above grade .
Dig trenches no more than h before installing plant materials to minimize drying of soils .
Leave the overall soil surface in a rough condition with clods and ridges for maximum resistance to erosion .
Immediately following trenching place bundles of dormant plant cuttings into the trench .
Lay cuttings in bundles together with the butt ends located at alternate ends of the bundle and tightly tied with binder twine at least three points along the bundle .
Provide bundles consisting of dormant woody cuttings from ⅜ in to in .
in diameter and from ft. to ft. long .
Provide bundles from in .
to in .
in diameter .
Overlap wattle ends in the trench .
Drive additional stakes through bundles at a spacing no greater than ft. on center .
During placement of the bundles cover the bundles with loose soil working it into the wattles leaving a uniform fringe of plant material exposed to a height from in .
to in .
E Brush Layering Make trenches along the contour of the slope and embed dormant green plant cuttings into the slots and tamp loose soil over the cuttings .
Make trenches ft. deep angled downward into the slope .
Provide plant cuttings consisting of stems ft. long and from ½ in to in .
in diameter .
Transport cuttings in containers of water and keep cuttings in the containers until installation .
As soon as possible after making the trenches place the plant cuttings into the trenches with the butt end placed into the trench and at least in mm of the cuttings protruding out of the trench .
Place the stems randomly with some crisscrossing .
While placing plant cuttings immediately backfill the trench cuttings with soil and firm the backfill to meet the Engineers approval .
F Live Stakes Insert dormant live cuttings into the soil and tamp soil lightly around the cutting .
Provide cuttings consisting of stems at least ft. long and from in .
to in .
in diameter .
Transport cut material in containers of water and keep material in water until installation .
Insert the bottom end of the cuttings so the bottomend is at right angles to the slope face for at least twothirds to threequarters of the cutting length and tamp .
Do not split the ends or damage the bark of the cuttings .
Place cuttings ft. on center using a triangular spacing .
Place cuttings at a density of two to four stakes per square yard square meter .
If rip rap is less than ft. thick stake the riprap joint planting .
Make a pilot hole by driving a tool such as a pry bar or rebar through the rip rap and filter layer to reach the ground soil .
Use a dead blow hammer to tamp the cuttings and avoid damaging the bark .
Place the cuttings in a random configuration ft. on center .
G Placing Coir log Place Sediment Control log type coir for stabilizing shorelines .
Before installing the coir log drive wooden stakes with a diameter of in .
and a length of ft. ft. on center along the planned alignment of the coir log .
Ensure the stakes extend from in .
to in .
above the elevation of the water surface shown on the plans .
After placing the stakes install the coir log so the upper surface of the coir log is parallel to the water surface and in .
protrude above the normal water level .
Lace coir logs together end to end with woven nylon twine ⅛ in .
in diameter to create a continuous length .
Bury both ends of the coir rolls ft. laterally into the bank .
H RootRap Place a soil filled riprap liner and overseed or plant vegetation in accordance with the details typical sections and elevation controls as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will stake the actual alignment .
During the work continuously place the granular channel lining or riprap and shape the channel .
Begin seeding or planting within hours of shaping the channel or as required by contract .
I Blank J Root Wad Place a large tree trunk with root attached for stabilizing higher velocity river and stream banks .
Tree trunk shall be a minimum diameter of in .
and length of to ft. with attached roots .
Provide footer boulders between to lbs .
and to in .
diameter in accordance to specifications Riprap Material .
Support root wad with footer log burry footer boulder to support root wad and burry tree trunk into stream bed root end facing stream .
Top of root wad shall be at bank full elevation and tree trunk should be angled down at a slope of VH into the bank .
K Acceptance of Work Upon satisfactory installation of the bioengineered systems the Engineer will authorize partial payment not to exceed percent of the contract unit prices .
The remaining percentage shall not become due and payable until after the day maintenance period. . Minnesota Standard Specifications L Workmanship and Quality To qualify for payment perform corrective actions when the quality and workmanship fails to meet the material installation or maintenance requirements in the contract .. .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Wattling The Engineer will measure wattling by the linear foot of each trench made and planted .
If several trenches are made and planted the Engineer will add each length of trench planted and accepted to the total .
B Brush layering The Engineer will measure brush layering by the linear foot of each horizontal trench made and planted .
If several trenches are made and planted the Engineer will add each length of trench planted and accepted to the total .
C Coir log The Engineer will measure coir log by the linear foot provided and installed including buried portions .
D Root Wad The engineer will measure root wad by the each installed including the footer log and footer boulder .
E Root rap The Engineer will measure root rap by the cubic yard and includes the riprap and topsoil material .
Seeding and stabilization will be measured separately . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract Pay item for Bioengineering systems will include all labor materials equipment and other incidentals to compete the work .
For items of work not included in the schedule of Contract Pay Items the Department will pay unit prices for the relevant items of work .
If the contract does not include pay items for bioengineered systems the Department will pay for bioengineered system items as extra work in accordance with Contract Revisions .
A Wattles The costs of plant cuttings bundles and stakes and rope to fasten logs are included in the contract unit price for wattling .
B Brush Layering The costs of plant cuttings and stakes and rope to fasten logs are included in the contract unit price for brush layering .
C Coir Logs The costs of stakes and rope to fasten logs are included in the contract unit price for coir logs .
D Pay Items The Department will pay for bioengineered system items on the basis of the following schedule Item No Item Unit .
Live Stakes each .
Root Wad each .
Brush Layering linear feet .
Wattling linear feet .
Root Rap Cubic yard INTERIM PAVEMENT MARKING .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of placing interim pavement markings on those pavements prior to opening them to traffic where the inplace surface is to be covered by a subsequent paving course or the permanent lane markings are to be placed at a future date. . MATERIALS A Removable Preformed Plastic Pavement Marking inch wide Tape in accordance with MnDOT . . Minnesota Standard Specifications B MultiComponent Liquid Pavement Markings in accordance with MnDOT and .
C WaterBased Traffic Paint in accordance with MnDOT and .
D Temporary Raised Pavement Markers TRPMs in accordance with the Temporary raised pavement markers ApprovedQualified Products List. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Application When centerline or lane markings excluding edge lines are removed apply the interim pavement markings prior to opening the roadway to traffic .
Apply edge lines within calendar days of opening roadway to traffic .
Apply the interim pavement marking on a clean dry pavement surface free of dirt and foreign matter as recommended by the material manufacturer and as required by contract .
Follow the manufacturers specifications for all other installation procedures and materials .
When final markings are to be multicomponent liquid and paint is used for interim solid lines a mil thick layer application of a waterbased traffic marking paint shall be used .
With a mil layer of paint applied beads should be applied at a rate of lbsgal .
Removal of the mil layer of paint is not required prior to placing the multicomponent liquid .
If the layer of paint is greater than mils removal is necessary prior to placing the multicomponent liquid .
Interim markings shall consist of center line markings including no passing zone markings painted islands and lane lines excluding edge lines crosshatching and pavement messages in accordance with the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MN MUTCD .
Provide interim markings with a width equal to the corresponding permanent pavement marking and with a cycle length as indicated in the Plan .
Lateral placement of the markings from centerline shall be as directed by the Engineer .
B Tolerance Conform with the following interim striping tolerances A tolerance of plus ¼ in and minus in from the specified width will be allowed for striping provided the variation is gradual and does not detract from the general appearance .
Lengths for the broken line segments may vary no more than plus or minus in .
Place all longitudinal markings in in from the edge of pavement or longitudinal centerline joint .
Also pertaining to the cycle length the total allowance for the line segment and gap shall be no more than plus or minus in .
Establishment of application tolerances shall not relieve the Contractor of their responsibility to comply as closely as practicable with the planned dimensions .
Interim markings on the final pavement surface shall match the location of the final markings .
In the event the Engineer determines the interim striping is out of tolerance take corrective action .
Remove pavement markings utilizing equipment that is not detrimental to the final surface as required by the Engineer .
All costs associated with removing and restriping the interim markings will be at the Contractors expense .
This would include any costs associated with repairing damage caused to the wearing course after pavement marking removal .
If the Contractor is negligent in adhering to the above provisions heshe shall be subject to an hourly charge assessed at a rate of .
per hour for each hour or any portion thereof which the Engineer determines that the Contractor has not complied .
C Temporary Raised Pavement Markers When TRPMs are used as interim markings install per the Plan or the TRPM usage document found on the Temporary raised pavement markers ApprovedQualified Products List .
Removal of TRPMs shall be incidental .
D Maintenance and Removal Maintain and replace the interim markings without additional compensation until they are covered by the next paving course are replaced with permanent pavement markings or final acceptance of the Project is made .
Remove TRPMs and Pavement Marking Tape between pavement courses except for TRPMs used with seal coats .
Remove all TRPMs used as Interim Pavement markings .
Remove any solid line delineations on the final pavement surface marked with Pavement Marking Tape prior to placing the Permanent Pavement Markings .
The Engineer may require the removal of any Interim Pavement Markings that will interfere with the placement of the permanent markings or could cause confusion to the traveling public if left in place .
Removal of interim pavement markings if required shall be incidental and shall be in accordance with MnDOT .
Waste from installation removed marking material and removal media shall become property of the Contractor .
Dispose of the removed marking material off the right of way in accordance with Laws to be Observed . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT Interim pavement markings will be measured by the actual length in linear feet of each line marked as indicated in the Plan and will not include the gap between line segments .
No additional quantity will be included for repair or renewal work .
Measurement for TRPMs will be made according to the length of line being simulated. . Minnesota Standard Specifications At the Engineers discretion work will be construed to be included in a single Lump Sum payment .
No measurement will be made of any individual pavement markings placed maintained and removed . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT Payment for Interim Pavement Marking at the Contract price per unit of measure shall be compensation in full for all costs of furnishing and placing the marking removal if required and all necessary maintenance and renewal work .
Payment for Interim Pavement Marking will be made on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Interim Pavement Marking lump sum .
Interim Pavement Marking linear foot REMOVABLE PREFORMED PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing placing maintaining and removing temporary pavement marking material on pavement open to traffic and without permanent traffic markings. . MATERIALS Provide removable preformed pavement marking tape for traffic lane delineation and legends in accordance with Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS Placemaintain and remove removable preformed pavement marking tape as shown on the plans or as directed by the Engineer before modifying traffic flow .
Place the marking tape on a clean and dry surface in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Waste from installation removed marking material and removal waste shall become property of the Contractor .
Dispose off the rightofway in accordance with Laws to be Observed .
The Department will base acceptance of pavement marking materials on the certification and quality control testing verified by the Materials Laboratory testing of verification samples and spot checks on samples obtained from contractor stock or from the project site in accordance with the Pavement Marking Qualification and Acceptance Program . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT The Engineer will measure removable preformed pavement marking tape by the actual length of pavement marking provided placed maintained and removed as required by the contract .
The Engineer will base the measurement of removable preformed pavement marking tape on equivalent lengths of inch wide marking regardless of the color or type .
The Engineer will adjust the measured length of removable preformed pavement marking tape with a width differing from the inch width by the ratio of the actual tape width to the in width .
The Engineer will measure line segments by the actual length of material placed .
The Engineer will not measure gaps between the line segments . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract linear foot price for Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape includes the cost of providing placing maintaining replacing removing and disposing of the marking tape .
The Department will pay for removable preformed pavement marking tape on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
Removable Preformed Pavement Marking Tape linear foot PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
DESCRIPTION This work consists of providing permanent and temporary pavement markings for roadways including pavement messages linear pavement markings and crosswalks .
The Department defines pavement messages as word and symbol pavement markings installed in the roadway including word and symbol messages that are not line segments or crosswalks. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Department defines linear pavement markings as line segments of various widths installed in the roadway including lane lines center lines no passing zone lines edge lines airplane markings and stop lines .
The Department does not consider crosswalks or pavement messages as linear pavement markings .
The Department defines crosswalks as blocks installed in the roadway parallel to the direction of travel in a pattern that is transverse to the direction of travel. . MATERIALS A Preformed Pavement Marking Tape for Permanent Traffic Lane Delineation and Legends PREF TAPE B Preformed Thermoplastic PREF THERMO C MultiComponent Liquid Pavement Markings MULTI COMP D WaterBased Traffic Paint PAINT E DropOn Glass Beads Provide and use pavement marking materials listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
For Wet Reflective WR materials use the Wet Reflective Marking Materials ApprovedQualified Products List .
Do not change the following unless approved by the Department Product identification Chemical composition as indicated by infrared spectrophotometry or chemical analysis or Application requirements .
Submit proposed changes to the Materials Laboratory for further evaluation. . CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS A Certification of Materials The Department will base acceptance of pavement marking materials under the Pavement Marking Qualification and Acceptance Program on the product certification and quality control testing verified by Materials Laboratory testing of verification samples and spot checks on samples obtained from contractor stock or from project sites .
B Application Apply on a clean dry pavement surface free of dirt and foreign matter and as required by the contract .
Apply all surface treatments prior to pavement marking installation .
Notify Engineer one business day prior to installation of pavement markings .
B .
Manufacturers Specifications Apply the pavement marking as recommended by the material manufacturer in regards to pavement type pavement composition environmental conditions placement within a rumble and other relevant factors in order to meet the requirements detailed in .. C Acceptance .
B .
Concrete Surface Preparation Before applying MULTI COMP or PAINT markings on new portland cement concrete surfaces remove surface treatments or laitance unless the marking is recessed per .B .. B. Bituminous Surface Cure Before applying nonrecessed permanent pavement markings allow bituminous pavement to cure a minimum of days or follow manufacturers specifications for pavement cure time whichever is greater unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
B. Thickness Requirements For MULTI COMP markings apply the multicomponent liquid marking with a wetfilm thickness of at least mil .
Apply at a greater wetfilm thickness as recommended by the material manufacturer based on pavement type pavement composition environmental conditions placement within a rumble and other relevant factors .
B .
Manufacturer Installation Certification For PREF TAPE or PREF THERMO obtain manufacturer certification for installation .
Certification is typically achieved by attending an application training seminar .
The training shall address surface preparation and all application requirements and techniques necessary for successful marking tape applications .
Upon completion of the seminar for these personnel the .
Minnesota Standard Specifications manufacturer of the PREF TAPE or PREF THERMO shall provide written certification of approval to each person approved .
Present a valid training certification card upon request of the Engineer or other state project personnel .
B .
Assembly of Preformed Markings For PREF TAPE or PREF THERMO Pavement Messages and Crosswalks utilize precut messages symbols and blocks meeting the requirements of the Minnesota Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the MnDOT Standards Signs Manual .
Kits provided by the manufacturer are acceptable .
Do not use line material to piece together individual letters symbols or crosswalk blocks unless manufacturer specifications allow .
Two strips of line material may be used to form crosswalk blocks of width .
Do not use narrower line material to piece together wider lines .
For PREF THERMO taper the external edge of the marking to minimize risk of plow damage .
For PREF TAPE over cracks or joints lay over crack or joint then cut on each side of crack or joint .
B. Recessing For Ground In GR IN pavement markings recess the pavement marking utilizing the following equipment and details Recessing Equipment For PREF TAPE or PREF THERMO the recessing shall be performed by a selfpropelled machine equipped with gang stacked diamond cutting blades mounted on a floating head with controls capable of providing uniform depth and alignment .
The cutting heads shall consist of stacked inch to inch wide diamond tipped cutting blades .
The spacers between each blade must be such that the raise in the bottom of the finished recess between the blades is less than of the recessed depth .
The resulting bottom of the recess shall have a fine corduroy finish .
If a coarse tooth pattern is present increase the number of blades andor decrease the thickness of the spacers on the cutting head .
For all other materials the recessing shall be performed by either a selfpropelled machine equipped with gang stacked diamond cutting blades mounted on a floating head with controls capable of providing uniform depth and alignment .
The cutting heads shall consist of stacked inch to inch wide diamond tipped cutting blades .
The spacers between each blade must be such that the raise in the bottom of the finished recess between the blades is less than of the recessed depth .
The resulting bottom of the recess shall have a fine corduroy finish .
If a coarse tooth pattern is present increase the number of blades andor decrease the thickness of the spacers on the cutting head .
Or a selfpropelled machine equipped with carbide cutting blades with controls capable of providing uniform depth and alignment .
The equipment shall be capable of recessing the total width of the recess in one pass or be capable of recessing uniform depths with multiple passes .
The maximum number of passes is detailed below .
If multiple passes are used the ridge between passes shall be mechanically removed prior to recess cleaning and pavement marking application .
The equipment shall be capable of recessing double lines simultaneously or parallel lines to a uniform depth with two passes .
The equipment shall be selfvacuuming and leave the cut recess ready for pavement marking installation .
Dry cut recessing without a vacuum will only be allowed if markings run perpendicular to the roadway such as Stop Bars .
Use the equipment and method approved by the pavement marking manufacturer .
Recessing Details The recessing shall be performed within the following tolerances .
Failure to meet these tolerances will result in the suspension of work until the Contractor can demonstrate that these tolerances can be met to the satisfaction of the Engineer .
The pavement marking system shall be applied so that it is centered within the recess .
RECESS WIDTH AND MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PASSES MARKING WIDTH RECESS WIDTH MAX NUMBER OF PASSES inches inches inches inches inches .
Minnesota Standard Specifications FULL DEPTH RECESS LENGTHS Full Depth Recess Length Broken Line feet inches Space Between Double Lines inches inch For PREF TAPE GR IN or PREF THERMO GR IN provide a recess depth of mil mil .
For MULTI COMP GR IN or PAINT GR IN pavement markings provide a recess depth of mil mil .
For MULTI COMP GR IN WR or PAINT GR IN WR provide a recess depth of mil mil .
Since pavements are irregular the depth of recess across the width may vary .
To compensate for this the depth of the recess shall be measured from the bottom of the recess to a straight edge placed on the recess edges extended over the recess .
Place the recess in in from the edge of joints or seams along edge or centerline unless otherwise indicated in the Plan .
Recess alignment deviations from the control guide or existing lines specified by the Engineer shall not exceed inches .
Clean the recess completely prior to pavement marking application using an air compressor with at least CFM air flow and PSI air pressure .
The compressor must be equipped with a moisture and oil trap and can not have more than feet of ¾ inch ID hose between the compressor and the air nozzle .
The air nozzle must have an inside diameter of ½ inch or greater .
Place all pavement markings to be recessed in accordance with pavement marking or retroreflective media manufacturers instructions except for recess depth .
Do not construct a recess in new bituminous pavement unless the pavement is cured enough to handle the weight of the equipment .
Recessing operations are incidental to the pavement marking unit price .
If the pavement markings are to be installed in the same location where there are existing pavement markings including interim or temporary the removal of the existing pavement markings shall be incidental .
The Contractor may cut the recess and remove the existing marking in a simultaneous operation .
B. Retroreflective Media For PAINT linear markings that are not WR apply glass beads specified in DropOn Glass Beads immediately after applying a PAINT line at a rate of at least lb per gal .
Apply beads at a greater rate if recommended by the manufacturer to achieve the minimum levels of retroreflectivity in accordance with Table .
For MULTI COMP linear markings that are not WR apply glass beads specified in DropOn Glass Beads at a rate of at least lb per gal .
Apply beads at a greater rate if recommended by the material manufacturer to meet the required minimum levels of retroreflectivity in accordance with Table .
For WR markings apply wet reflective media per manufacturers specifications .
Evenly distribute retroreflective media on pavement markings .
C Acceptance C. Alignment Provide linear pavement marking in the width specified in the contract varying by no greater than ¼ in per ft .
Provide broken line segments with lengths varying by no greater than in .
Provide alignment deviating from the control guide or existing lines specified by the Engineer by no greater than in .
Ensure the transverse position of linear markings varies by no greater than in per ft. Do not apply pavement marking material over a longitudinal joint .
C. Color Provide pavement markings in the color specified in .
Materials for the respective material .
C. Retroreflectivity Initial pavement marking retroreflectivity is defined as the pavement marking retroreflectivity as measured between days and days after pavement marking installation prior to snow and ice maintenance operations .
Provide pavement markings meeting the following minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity when tested using m geometry in accordance with ASTM E . Measurement of pavement message retroreflectivity is done via ASTM DDM .. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow PREF TAPE mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux PREF THERMO mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux PREF THERMO ESR Enhanced Skid Resistance mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux MULTI COMP mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux PAINT mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux Remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values in accordance with Table as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost the Department .
If the retroreflectivity deficiency is no greater than percent per tenth mile segment the Engineer may accept the work at a unit price reduced by the percent of retroreflectivity deficiency .
D Pavement Marking Warranty For permanent pavement markings transfer pavement marking warranties to the Department or other appropriate road authority after construction .
E Correction of Defects Remove and replace pavement markings not meeting the contract requirements as approved by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
F Pavement Marking Installation Record For permanent pavement markings provide a record of the pavement marking installation .
The Department will not pay for pavement markings unless the Contractor has submitted the installation record .
F. Striper Computerized Data Logging System for Liquid Markings DLS For projects with a liquid pavement marking material such as PAINT or MULTI COMP and is at least centerline mile in length utilize a Striper Computerized Data Logging System for Liquid Markings .
The pavement marking device shall have an onboard monitoring system for the purpose of managing the amount of striping materials being applied to the pavement surface .
Collect data for any pavement marking application of feet drive length or greater .
The following data shall be included in the documentation from the DLS .
State Project Number .
For every highway marked a. the route system abbreviation I US or MN b. the highway number c. the beginning and ending reference points rounded to the nearest hundredths of a mile and the beginning and ending coordinates determined by a Global Positioning System receiver with meter accuracy including the direction of travel in terms of increasing or decreasing reference points .
Date and beginning and ending time of application .
Product binder and reflective material .
Lot numbers of product used .
Striping contractor striper code .
Designation of the marking being applied LEL Left Edgeline REL Right Edgeline CL Centerline LL Lane Line Broken or Dotted LL left most LL in multilane LL second to left most LL in multilane etc .
Width of marking being applied .
Presence of groove or rumble strip report if majority of line is installed in groove or rumble strip within that segment The following data shall be reported as an average for each drive mile or other Engineer approved segment installed .
Application vehicle speed to the nearest .
MPH .
Weight LBS andor volume GAL as measured through a positive displacement pump mechanism or flow meter of liquid materials used by color .
Weight LBS of reflective material used .
Ratio of reflective material used weight per liquid material used volume reported as LBSGAL .
Ambient air temperature in degrees Fahrenheit .
Road surface temperature in degrees Fahrenheit .
Humidity .
The system shall record the average material application rates and film thickness calculated over the section striped. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide the measurement report in the form of an electronic database file or delimited text file containing all raw data collected .
Submit the data to the email address PMdata.dotstate.mn.us and copy Engineer .
Provide a printed summary to the Engineer .
The formats of the required data file and summary can be found at the following website httpwww.dot.state.mn.ustrafficengpavementpavementmarkingmanagement.html .
The DLS equipment shall be operational calibrated and in use during pavement marking operations .
Pavement marking installation without the use of a DLS shall constitute unauthorized work under .
Upon request provide to the Engineer the DLS manufacturers recommendations for equipment calibration frequency and provide certification that the equipment meets manufacturers recommended calibration .
Verify that the physical and electronic measurement of distance travelled is consistent by travelling a foot distance prior to the start of pavement marking operations .
The Striper Computerized Data Logging System shall be incidental .
F. Construction Striper Operations Daily Log For projects with a liquid pavement marking material such as PAINT or MULTI COMP and is less than centerline mile in length utilize either a DLS from .F .
Striper Computerized Data Logging System for Liquid Markings DLS or complete the Construction Striper Operations Daily Log form after applying the pavement markings .
This form can be found at the website httpwww.dot.state.mn.usproductspavementmarkingspdfconstructionstriperoperationsdailylog.pdf .
For nonliquid linear pavement markings such as PREF TAPE Pavement Messages of any material and Crosswalks of any material complete the Construction Striper Operations Daily Log form after applying the pavement markings .
This form can be found at the website httpwww.dot.state.mn.usproductspavementmarkingspdfconstructionstriperoperationsdailylog.pdf .
The Construction Striper Operations Daily Log shall be incidental . .
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT A Pavement Messages The Engineer will measure pavement messages by the area in square feet of material installed as required by the contract .
B Lines The Engineer will measure pavement marking lines by the length in feet of each type constructed in place as required by the contract .
The Engineer will measure broken and dotted lines by the actual length of line marked .
The Engineer will not include the gaps between the broken and dotted lines in the measurement .
C Crosswalks The Engineer will measure crosswalk blocks by type and by the area in square feet of material installed as required by the contract . .
BASIS OF PAYMENT The contract unit price for pavement markings includes the costs of materials installation traffic control surface preparation and primers as required by the contract .
The Department will pay for pavement markings on the basis of the following schedule Item No .
Item Unit .
___in β linear foot .
Pavement Message β square foot .
Crosswalk β square foot Specified type of line Specified material Specified if markings are Ground In Specified if markings are WR β Specified if markings are Contrast Specified if markings are Enhanced Skid Resistant ESR Minnesota Standard Specifications DIVISION III MATERIALS Cementing Materials PORTLAND CEMENT .
SCOPE Provide portland cement material for use in concrete applications . .
REQUIREMENTS Supply portland cement from the certified source listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Include the following standardized cement certification statement with delivery invoices insert company name certifies that the cement produced at insert plant and location conforms to AASHTO M and MnDOT Specification for Type insert type cement .
Do not change the source or color or both of cement on a project without the written approval of the Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
Measure fineness in accordance with the air permeability test in AASHTO M . SLAG CEMENT .
SCOPE Provide slag cement or slag material for use in concrete applications . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide slag from the certified source listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Include the following standardized slag certification statement with delivery invoices insert company name certifies that the slag produced at insert plant and location conforms to AASHTO M and MnDOT Specification for grade insert grade slag .
Do not change the source or color or both of slag on a project without the written approval of the Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
BLENDED HYDRAULIC CEMENT .
SCOPE Provide blended hydraulic cement material for use in concrete applications . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide blended hydraulic cement from the certified source listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Type IS or Type IP or Type IL and the following modifications Fly ash constituent of the blended cement no greater than percent Slag constituent of blended cement no greater than percent Silica fume constituent of blended cement no greater than percent and Include the following standardized cement certification statement with delivery invoices insert company name certifies that the cement produced at insert plant and location conforms to AASHTO M and MnDOT Specification for type insert type cement. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Do not change the source or color or both of blended cement on a project without the written approval of the Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
BAGGED PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PATCHING MIX U AND UM .
SCOPE Provide dry bagged concrete patching mix U for repairing Portland cement concrete pavement and UM for repairing portland cement concrete bridge decks bridge deck overlays and approach panels . .
REQUIREMENTS A Materials Provide materials for patching mix meeting the following requirements A .
Cement A .
Fine Aggregate A. Coarse Aggregate A. Blank A. Admixtures Mix UM utilizes air entraining and water reducing admixtures .
Provide the manufacturers Technical Data Information Sheet and the Materials Safety Data Sheet MSDS for the proposed dry admixtures when submitting the Quality Plan for approval .
B Quality Control QC Program Prior to producing concrete patching mix each construction season a Department Representative shall perform a thorough onsite inspection of the plant with a MnDOT Certified Plant Level or Level Technician representing the Producer .
Maintain an approved Quality Control Program including a Quality Plan for the production of Bagged Portland Cement Concrete Patching Mix .
The Producer will perform Quality Control QC as part of the production of Grade U and UM concrete .
The Engineer will perform Quality Assurance QA as part of the acceptance process .
B .
Quality Plan Requirements Submit a quality control plan to the Concrete Engineer for review and approval prior to producing U and UM .
The Quality Plan includes the following QC Procedures a Moisture Content b Batch Weight Verification c Aggregate Gradation Testing d Blending e Addition of dry admixtures to UM f Documentation and Submittals B. MnDOT Certified Personnel Provide a MnDOT Aggregate Production Technician to perform moisture content and aggregate gradation testing .
Provide a MnDOT Concrete Plant Level or Plant Level Technician to review batch tickets test results and oversee all quality control requirements of and the QC Program .
B .
Daily Production Requirements Each day U or UM bag mix is producted a Perform moisture content and gradation testing on all aggregates .
b The Producers Aggregate Technician will complete MnDOTs Bagged Mix Quality Control Worksheet and sign .
c The Producers Plant Level or Plant Level Technician will review and sign the Bagged Mix Quality Control Worksheet .
d Electronically submit all Bagged Mix Quality Control Worksheets and batch tickets to MnDOT the day following production .
C Mix Proportioning Proportion the mix in accordance with Table .
Use of any other size bag requires approval of the Concrete Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Mix Proportions Weight lb Material Gradation Requirements lb bag lb bag lb bag Type I Cement . . Coarse Aggregate ASTM or CA . . Fine Aggregate MnDOT . . D Blending Dry the coarse and fine aggregates as approved by the Engineer before blending with the cement .
Blend all materials completely before bagging the mix .
Provide a blending device meeting the following characteristics and requirements Capable of producing the required mix proportions within percent Equipped with a warning device to indicate when the system is outoftolerance Capable of stopping the flow of cement to allow sampling of the blended coarse and fine aggregate and Designed to allow cement and aggregate to discharge separately for checking material weights .
E Bags and Batch Identification Provide moistureproof bags resistant to tearing .
Print the following on the bags The phrase MnDOT U CONCRETE PATCH MIX or MnDOT UM CONCRETE PATCH MIX Weight of the bag in pounds Mix date Mixing instructions .
SAMPLING AND TESTING The Producer and Engineer will sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
HYDRATED LIME .
SCOPE Provide hydrated lime for use in soil drying or stabilization and for use in mortar for nonsewer applications or road pavement mixes . .
REQUIREMENTS A Soil DryingStabilization Provide hydrated lime for use in soil drying or stabilization meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . B Mortar for Other Applications For use in mortar provide Type S hydrated lime meeting the requirements of ASTM C . . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide sample at rates and sizes as required by the Schedule of Materials Control and the contract .
MASONRY MORTAR .
SCOPE Provide masonry mortar for use in sewer and other applications . .
REQUIREMENTS A Sewer Application Provide bag mixed mortar meeting the following requirements A .
Bag Mix Provide a dry preblended airentrained Type S or Type M bagged mortar mix meeting the requirements of ASTM C Standard Specification for Mortar for Unit Masonry and ASTM C Standard Specification for Packaged Dry Combined Materials for Mortar and Concrete .
Purposely airentrain the bagged mortar mixture to an air content of at least percent. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A. Mixing Do not exceed the manufacturer allowable mixing water .
Mix mortar onsite for the minimum time stated by the manufacture .
If the manufacture does not recommend a minimum mixing time mix the mortar for a minimum of minutes .
The Engineer will not allow retempering mortar mixture and will reject mortar mixtures not placed within minutes of mixing .
B Other Applications For applications other than for sewers provide masonry mortar in accordance with ASTM C based on the type of mortar required by the contract .
Mix in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations. . SAMPLING AND TESTING For bag mixed masonry mortar provide a statement of compliance meeting the requirements of ASTM C for airentrained mortar .
Label the type of mortar mix either Type S or Type M on each bag .
For site mixed masonry mortar provide a statement of compliance meeting the requirements of ASTM C . Label the type of mortar mix either Type S or Type M on each bag .
Provide samples for site mixed masonry mortar as required by the contract .
For applications other than for sewer applications provide samples as required by the contract .
ADMIXTURES FOR CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide admixtures for use in concrete applications. . GENERAL Provide admixtures in accordance with the following A Class I Accelerating Retarding and WaterReducing Admixtures Type A Waterreducing Type B Retarding Type C Accelerating Type D Waterreducing and retarding Type E Waterreducing and accelerating Type F Waterreducing high range Type G Waterreducing high range and retarding Type S Specific performance admixtures B Class II AirEntraining Admixtures C Class III Calcium Chloride .
REQUIREMENTS A Materials Provide Class I admixtures from the ApprovedQualified Products List meeting the requirements of ASTM C . Provide Class II admixtures meeting the requirements of AASHTO M except the tests for bleeding bond strength and volume change are not required .
Provide Class III admixtures from the ApprovedQualified Products List meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . B Acceptance Submit certified test reports including a print of the materials safety data sheet MSDS infrared spectrum and onequart sample for the proposed Class I or Class II admixture from a CCRL Laboratory for each admixture .
The Department will use the certified test results to determine if the admixtures meet the requirements of this section. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Take samples as specified in the Schedule of Materials Control .
The Department may perform tests on samples taken from the product proposed or on samples submitted and certified by the manufacturer as representative of the admixture to be supplied .
Minnesota Standard Specifications FLY ASH FOR USE IN PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide fly ash for use in concrete applications . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide fly ash from the certified source listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List meeting the requirements of ASTM C Class F or Class C except as modified by the following table Table MnDOT Modified Fly Ash Requirements Requirement Class F Class C Loss on ignition . . Calcium Oxide CaO . .
The use of fly ash produced at plants where lime is directly injected into the boiler for sulfur removal is prohibited in Portland cement concrete .
Ensure the following standardized Fly Ash Certification Statement is included with delivery invoices insert company name certifies that the fly ash produced at insert power plant and location conforms to ASTM C and MnDOT Specification for Class insert class fly ash .
Do not change the source or color or both of fly ash on a project without the written approval of the Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule for Materials Control .
Aggregates FINE AGGREGATE FOR PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide fine aggregate for use in portland cement concrete . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide fine aggregate consisting of clean sound durable particles uniform in quality and free from wood bark roots and other deleterious material .
The Engineer may consider the following as the basis for acceptance of fine aggregate for portland cement concrete Results of laboratory tests Behavior under natural exposure conditions Behavior of portland cement concrete with aggregate from the same or similar geological formations or deposits and Any other tests or criteria as deemed appropriate by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
Provide fine aggregate from natural sand .
If producing fine and coarse aggregates simultaneously from natural gravel deposits during the same operation the Contractor may provide fine aggregate containing particles of crushed rock with the approval of the Concrete Engineer .
B Quality B .
Washing Wash the fine aggregate. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B. Deleterious Material Provide fine aggregate containing a cumulative quantity of deleterious materials in accordance with Table .
Table Deleterious Materials Quality Test Maximum Percent by Weight Shale Alkali Mica and Soft and Flaky Particles Cumulative Total .
Coal and Lignite Cumulative Total .
B. Organic Impurities Provide fine aggregate free of injurious quantities of organic impurities .
The Concrete Engineer will reject aggregates that produce a color darker than the standard color when tested in accordance with AASHTO T unless the mortar specimens pass the mortar strength requirements specified in .. B .
Structural Strength .
B .
Structural Strength The Engineer will test the structural strength of fine aggregate in mortar specimens in accordance with AASHTO T and Table .
The Engineer will prepare control mortar specimens using Ottawa sand with a Fineness Modulus FM from .
to .
for comparison with the proposed fine aggregate .
Table Structural Strength in Fine Aggregate Mortar Specimens Containing Compressive Strength Type III Portland Cement of control at days Type III Portland Cement of control at days C Gradation Requirements Produce fine aggregate in accordance with the gradation requirements in Table .
Table Fine Aggregate Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No . .
Percent passing by weight through square opening sieves .
D Requirements for Uniformity of Grading The uniformity of grading is determined by the Fineness Modulus FM of the fine aggregate .
Both the Engineer and Contractor will determine the FM of fine aggregate in accordance with the MnDOT Concrete Manual .
The established FM is available on the MnDOT Concrete Engineering website .
Maintain the FM of the fine aggregate between .
and .. Do not allow the material to deviate from the FM by greater than ..
Contact the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer for an adjustment if the FM approaches the tolerance limit. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide fine aggregates in accordance with Table .
Table Preliminary Fine Aggregate Testing Aggregate Notification and Testing Required New source Notify the Engineer at least month before use .
Perform new source concrete aggregate testing .
Previously tested aggregate Notify the Engineer at least weeks before use .
Perform additional testing as required by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Sample and test fine aggregate in accordance with Table .
Table Fine Aggregate Test Methods Test Testing Method Sampling Concrete Manual Sieve analysis Concrete Manual Deleterious substances Laboratory Manual Method Quantity of material passing the No .
sieve Concrete Manual Organic impurities color plate AASHTO T Structural strength AASHTO T Specific gravity and absorption Laboratory Manual Method Alkali silica reactivity Laboratory Manual Method FINE AGGREGATE FOR BITUMINOUS SEAL COAT .
SCOPE Provide fine aggregate for use in bituminous seal coat . .
REQUIREMENTS A Composition Provide aggregate for use in bituminous seal coat meeting the following requirements Consisting of sound durable particles of sand gravel or crushed stone Clean Uniform in quality Free of deleterious materials and Meeting the requirements of Class A B or C in accordance with .. B Classification .
Only one source of aggregate may be used .
B Gradation and Quality Provide fine aggregate for bituminous seal coat meeting the following gradation requirements Table Fine Aggregate for Bituminous Seal Coat Passing by Weight Sieve Size FA FA FA½ FA FA½ Job Mix Formula Tolerance ½ in ⅜ in ¼ in No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No. . . . . . . . . . . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide fine aggregate for bituminous seal coat meeting the following quality test requirements Table Fine Aggregate Durability for Bituminous Seal Coat Meeting the Requirements of AASHTO T Modified by MnDOT Material Tests FA FA FA½ FA FA½ Shale Flakiness index One Face Crush .
Insoluble residue for the portion of quarried carbonate aggregates passing the No .
sieve Los Angeles Rattler loss Bulk Specific Gravity Required for Mix Design Submittal and verification .
Verification tolerances between the Contractor and Agency are .
for Bulk Specific Gravity poundscf for Loose Weight of Aggregate and .
for Absorption .
Loose Weight of Aggregate Absorption Test aggregate retained on each sieve if weight of retained aggregate comprises at least percent of the total sample weight .
For Class C aggregates only. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK Report the No .
sieve results to the nearest .
percent and all other sieve results to the nearest percent .
A Sampling Sieve Analysis MnDOT Bituminous Manual B Flakiness Laboratory Manual Method C Shale Tests Laboratory Manual Method D Los Angeles Rattler Loss Laboratory Manual Method E Crushing Test Laboratory Manual Method F Loose Weight of Aggregate MN Seal Coat Handbook MNRC G Bulk Specific Gravity Laboratory Manual Method H Insoluble Residue Laboratory Manual Method I Coarse Aggregate Absorption AGGREGATE FOR USE IN MASONRY MORTAR .
SCOPE Provide fine aggregate for use in masonry mortar . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide aggregate for use in masonry mortar meeting the requirements of ASTM C . The gradation requirements of ASTM C are shown in Table .
Table Mortar Aggregate Gradation Limits Sieve Size Percent Passing No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer may allow aggregate meeting the gradation requirements of .. G Gradation Requirements for joints thicker than ½ in. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK INTERMEDIATE AGGREGATE FOR PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide intermediate aggregate for use in portland cement concrete .
The Concrete Engineer classifies intermediate aggregate as an aggregate fraction with a maximum size of ½ inch .
The Contractor may combine intermediate aggregates with other aggregates to create a Job Mix Formula JMF . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide intermediate aggregate consisting of clean sound durable particles uniform in quality and free from wood bark roots and other deleterious material .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer may consider the following as the basis for acceptance of intermediate aggregate for portland cement concrete Results of laboratory tests Behavior under natural exposure conditions Behavior of portland cement concrete with aggregate from the same or similar geological formations or deposits and Any other tests or criteria as deemed appropriate by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
B Classification Provide intermediate aggregate meeting the requirements of .. B .
Table designates the intermediate aggregate as one of the following Coarse Intermediate Aggregate CIA Fine Intermediate Aggregate FIA Coarse Sand CS Fine Sand FS Table Intermediate Aggregate Designations for Concrete percent by weight passing square opening sieves Sieve Sizes Intermediate Aggregate Designation Coarse Intermediate Aggregate CIA Fine Intermediate Aggregate FIA Coarse Sand CS Fine Sand FS ½ in ⅜ in No .
No .
C Washing Wash the intermediate aggregate .
D Quality If the CIA is from the same source as the ¾ in fraction the coarse aggregate quality is determined based upon the composite of the in and the CIA otherwise quality requirements are based on each individual fraction .
D. Intermediate Aggregate for General Use Provide CIA in accordance with .. D ..
Provide FIA CS and FS in accordance with . . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Intermediate Aggregate for Bridge Superstructure Provide CIA in accordance with .. D ..
Provide FIA CS and FS in accordance with .
D. Intermediate Aggregate for Concrete Pavement Provide CIA in accordance with .. D. except as modified in Table .
Table Intermediate Aggregate for Concrete Pavement Quality Test Maximum Percent by Weight Coarse Intermediate Aggregate CIA b Carbonate in Class C aggregates by weight If of total mixture .
If of total mixture .
Provide FIA CS and FS in accordance with .
E Gradation Perform all intermediate aggregate gradations in accordance with .. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Preliminary Intermediate Aggregate Testing Sample and test intermediate aggregate fractions separately in accordance with Table .
B Intermediate Aggregate Test Methods Sample and test CIA in accordance with Table .
Sample and test FIA FS and CS for general use concrete in accordance with Table .
MODIFIED AGGREGATE BASES .
SCOPE This specification lists the quality requirements for modified aggregate bases used for Full Depth Reclamation FDR . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Produce aggregate materials that have uniform appearance texture moisture content and performance characteristics .
B Gradation Provide modified aggregate bases for FDR mixtures in accordance with Table .
Table Gradation Requirements Sieve Size in Percent Passing Note Exclude rock that is larger the inches in the gradation calculations when it originates from material below the reclaimed bituminous pavement .
C Add Materials Supply materials as required by the contract. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Test the FDR mixture at the rates specified in the Schedule of Materials Control .
A SAMPLING AND SIEVE ANALYSIS GRADING AND BASE MANUAL Minnesota Standard Specifications DRAINABLE BASES .
SCOPE This specification lists the quality requirements for drainable bases types Open Graded Aggregate Base OGAB and Drainable Stable Base DSB used for Drainable Aggregate Base . .
REQUIREMENTS A Aggregate Composition Provide certified aggregate along with Form GB .
A. Virgin Aggregates Provide virgin aggregates meeting the following requirements Comprised of naturally occurring mineral materials and Does not contain topsoil organics or disintegrating rock as defined in Laboratory Manual section .
B Quality and Gradation Requirements Meet the requirements of Table .
Table Drainable Base Requirements Total Percent Passing Requirement Type OGAB DSB ½ in Sieve in Sieve ¾ in Sieve ⅜ in Sieve No .
Sieve No .
Sieve No .
Sieve No .
Sieve . . for class B or C . for class A Class per specification .
Quality Requirements OGAB DSB DD . .
Minimum Crushing Two face Maximum Los Angeles Rattler Loss LAR Maximum Acid Insoluble Residue IR Minus No .
sieve Maximum Spall Total Sample . . D is the diameter of the aggregate particle of which percent is smaller by weight .
D is the diameter of the aggregate particle of which percent is smaller by weight .
Material crushed from quarries is considered crushed material .
For drainable base composed of crushed carbonate quarry rock. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Test in accordance with the following procedures A Sieve Analysis Laboratory Manual Method B Coarse Aggregate Angularity Laboratory Manual Method C Los Angeles Rattler Loss Laboratory Manual Method D Insoluble Residue Laboratory Manual Method E Spall Laboratory Manual Method .
Minnesota Standard Specifications COARSE AGGREGATE FOR PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide coarse aggregate for use in portland cement concrete . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide coarse aggregate consisting of clean sound durable particles uniform in quality and free from wood bark roots and other deleterious material .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer may consider the following as the basis for acceptance of coarse aggregate for portland cement concrete Results of laboratory tests Behavior under natural exposure conditions Behavior of portland cement concrete with aggregate from the same or similar geological formations or deposits and Any other tests or criteria as deemed appropriate by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
B Classification Provide coarse aggregate meeting the requirements of one of the following classifications Class A Crushed quarry rock including quartzite gneiss and granite or mine trap rock including basalt diabase gabbro and other igneous rock types .
Class A aggregate may contain no greater than .
percent nonClass A aggregate .
The Department will not allow the intentional blending or adding of nonClass A aggregate .
Class B All other crushed quarry or mine rock types including carbonates rhyolite and schist .
Class C Natural or partly crushed gravel obtained from a natural gravel deposit .
Class D Mixture of at least two other classes of coarse aggregate .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine the suitability of the Class D aggregate for the proposed use including proportioning .
Class R Aggregate obtained from recycling concrete .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer will determine the suitability of the Class R aggregate for the proposed use including proportioning .
C Washing Wash Class B Class C Class D and Class R coarse aggregate .
Wash Class A aggregate as needed to comply with the requirements of Table .
D Quality Quality requirements are based on each individual fraction unless otherwise approved by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer except for the following If percent of the fractions from a single source pass the in sieve base quality requirements on the composite value of the combined aggregates .
If less than percent of the fractions from a single source pass the in sieve base the quality requirements in accordance with the following .
For fractions passing the in sieve base the quality requirement on the composite value of the combined aggregates .
For fractions greater than or equal to in base the quality requirement on each individual aggregate fraction .
Refer to Tables and to determine the appropriate coarse aggregate quality specification for the intended use .
D. Coarse Aggregate for General Use Provide coarse aggregate in accordance with Table unless otherwise specified in the Contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Coarse Aggregate for General Use Quality Test Maximum Percent by Weight a Shale Fraction retained on the ½ in sieve .
Fraction retained on the No .
sieve as a percentage of the total material .
b Soft iron oxide particles paint rock and ochre .
c Total spall materials Fraction retained on the ½ in sieve .
Fraction retained on the No .
sieve as a percentage of the total material .
d Soft particles .
e Clay balls and lumps .
f Sum of c total spall materials d soft particles and e clay balls and lumps .
g Slate .
h Flat or elongated pieces .
i Quantity of material passing No .
sieve Class A and Class B aggregates .
Class C and Class D aggregates .
j Los Angeles Rattler loss on total sample .
k Soundness of magnesium sulfate .
Includes the percentages retained by shale and soft iron oxide particles plus other iron oxide particles unsound cherts pyrite and other materials with similar characteristics .
Exclusive of shale soft iron oxide particles and total spall materials .
For total spall materials use the percent in the total sample retained on the No .
sieve .
Thickness less than percent of the maximum width .
Length greater than times the maximum width .
Each individual fraction at the point of placement consists of dust from the fracture and free of clay or shale .
For each individual fraction at the point of placement .
Loss at cycles for any fraction of the coarse aggregate .
Do not blend materials from multiple sources to obtain a fraction meeting the sulfate soundness requirement .
D. Coarse Aggregate for Bridge Superstructure Provide coarse aggregate in accordance with .. D. Coarse Aggregate for General Use except as modified by Table .
Table Coarse Aggregate for Bridge Superstructure Quality Test Maximum Percent by Weight a Shale Fraction retained on the ½ in sieve .
Fraction retained on the No .
sieve as a percentage of the total material .
b Soft iron oxide particles paint rock and ochre .
c Total spall materials Fraction retained on the No .
sieve as a percentage of the total material .
d Soft particles .
e Clay balls and lumps .
f Sum of c total spall materials d soft particles and e clay balls and lumps use the percent in the total sample retained on the No .
sieve .
g Absorption for Class B aggregate .
h Absorption for Class B aggregate for all concrete bridge decks and bridge barrier .
i Carbonate in Class C and Class D aggregates by weight .
Includes the percentages retained by shale and soft iron oxide particles plus other iron oxide particles unsound cherts pyrite and other materials with similar characteristics .
Exclusive of shale soft iron oxide particles and total spall materials .
For total spall materials use the percent in the total sample retained on the No .
sieve. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Coarse Aggregate for Concrete Pavement Provide coarse aggregate in accordance with .. D. Coarse Aggregate for General Use except as modified by Table for use in the following Concrete pavement and Concrete pavement rehabilitation .
Table Coarse Aggregate for Concrete Pavement Quality Test Maximum Percent by Weight a Absorption for Class B aggregate .
b Carbonate in Class C aggregate by weight .
E Gradation Provide coarse aggregate in accordance with Table including all sizes within the specified limits .
The Department defines coarse aggregate as the uniform product of the producing plant unless some sizes are removed to meet the gradation requirements .
Do not use broken or noncontinuous gradations .
If the coarse aggregate contains less than percent passing the in sieve use at least two fractions to proportion the coarse aggregate .
Base gradation requirements on the composite value of the combined coarse aggregates .
If producing Class R aggregate remove reinforcing steel from the concrete and any concrete material passing the No .
sieve .
Table Coarse Aggregate Designation for Concrete percent by weight passing square opening sieves Coarse Aggregate Designation Sieve Sizes ASTM ASTM ASTM ASTM CA CA in ½ in in ¾ in in ½ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
ASTM and ASTM Gradations are MnDOT Modified. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Preliminary Coarse Aggregate Testing Sample and test coarse aggregate fractions separately in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Preliminary Coarse Aggregate Testing Aggregate Notification and Testing Requirement New source Notify the Engineer at least month before use .
Perform new source concrete aggregate testing .
Previously tested aggregate Notify the Engineer at least weeks before use .
Perform additional testing as directed by the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer .
B Coarse Aggregate Test Methods Sample and test coarse aggregate in accordance with Table .
Table Coarse Aggregate Test Methods Test Testing Method Sampling Concrete Manual Sieve analysis Concrete Manual Shale test Laboratory Manual Method Quantity of material passing the No .
sieve Concrete Manual Specific gravity and absorption Laboratory Manual Method Density AASHTO T or Laboratory Manual Method Los Angeles Rattler loss AASHTO T Void content AASHTO T or Laboratory Manual Method Deleterious materials Laboratory Manual Method Soundness magnesium sulfate Laboratory Manual Method Soft particles Laboratory Manual Method Flat or elongated pieces ASTM D Clay balls or lumps Concrete Manual Base the void content on an ovendry and compactedbyrodding condition of the aggregate and a value of .
lb per cu .
ft for water .
AGGREGATE FOR SURFACE AND BASE COURSES .
SCOPE This specification lists the quality requirements for aggregates used for and . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Use aggregate sources meeting the requirements of Source of Supply and Quality .
Provide certified aggregate materials that have uniform appearance texture moisture content and performance characteristics .
Provide binder soils from sources meeting the requirements of Binder Soil .
Add binder soils during the crushing and screening operations .
B Virgin Materials Provide virgin aggregates meeting the following requirements Comprised of naturally occurring mineral materials and contains no topsoil organics or disintegrating rock as defined in Laboratory Manual section Class must be composed of crushed quarry rock and Conforms to the quality requirements of Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Quality Requirements for Virgin Materials Requirement Class and and and Q Max Shale if No .
by mass NA .
. . Max Shale if No .
by mass NA .
. .
Minimum Crushing Requirements NA NA Maximum Los Angeles Rattler LAR loss from carbonate quarry rock Maximum Insoluble residue for the portion of quarried carbonate aggregates passing the No .
sieve Material crushed from quarries is considered crushed material .
C Recycled Materials The Contactor may substitute recycled aggregates for virgin aggregates if meeting the following requirements Recycled aggregates contain only recycled asphalt pavement RAP recycled concrete materials recycled aggregate materials or certified recycled glass and Must meet the requirements of Table .
Table Quality Requirements for Recycled Materials Requirement Classes Q and Maximum Bitumen Content of Composite .
Maximum Masonry block Maximum percentage of glass Maximum size of glass ¾ in Crushing Class Q and for Class for Class Q and for Class Maximum amount of Brick .
Maximum amount of other objectionable materials including but not limited to wood plant matter plastic plaster and fabric .
Glass must meet certification requirements on the Grading and Base website .
Combine glass with other aggregates during the crushing operation .
If material RAP andor Concrete Class crushing requirement is met .
If material RAP andor Concrete Class Q crushing requirement is met .
If material RAP andor Concrete Class crushing requirement is met .
Material crushed from quarries is considered crushed material .
The ContractorSupplier may not knowingly allow brick and other objectionable material and must employ a QC process to screen it out before it becomes incorporated into the final product .
D Surfacing Aggregates Provide surfacing aggregates in accordance with .. A General .. B Virgin Materials and .. C Recycled Materials and meeting the following requirements of the material passes the ¾ sieve regardless of the class specified this modifies the requirements of Tables and for surfacing aggregates .
Does not use glass Recycled concrete materials may only be used for the roadway shoulders and There is no restriction on the bitumen content if used for shouldering .
Provide aggregate with a minimum clay content of and a Plasticity Index PI of .
The requirements for PI and minimum clay content are met if the bitumen content is or greater or the material is composed of at least recycled materials or the material is composed of at least crushed quarry aggregate .
Note Class must be composed of crushed quarry rock per .. B .. E Gradation Requirements For products containing less than percent recycled materials conform to Table .
For products containing percent or more recycled materials and less than recycled concrete conform to Table .
For products containing percent or more recycled concrete conform to Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Bituminous millings meeting a gradation of passing the .
sieve and passing the sieve may be used for the filletrollover outside of a paved shoulder for class and class .
Perform gradation tests prior to bituminous extraction .
Table Base and Surfacing Aggregate containing less than percent recycled aggregates Total Percent Passing Sieve Size Class Surfacing Class Surfacing β Class Subbase Class Subbase Class Base Class Q Base Class Base in ½ in in ¾ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
If product contains recycled aggregate add letters in parentheses for each aggregate blend designating the type of recycled products included in the mixture .
B Bituminous C Concrete G Glass BC Bituminous and Concrete BG Bituminous and Glass CG Concrete and Glass BCG Bituminous Concrete and Glass Recycled concrete when used for surfacing is only allowed for shoulders β Class must be composed of crushed quarry rock per .. B .. Table Base and Surfacing Aggregate containing or more recycled aggregates or less recycled concrete Total Percent Passing Sieve Size Class Surfacing Class Subbase Class Subbase Class Base Class Q Base Class Base in ½ in in ¾ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No .
. . . . . . . . Add letters in parentheses for each aggregate blend designating the type of recycled products included in the mixture .
B Bituminous C Concrete G Glass BC Bituminous and Concrete BG Bituminous and Glass CG Concrete and Glass BCG Bituminous Concrete and Glass Note For Class if the bitumen content is .
the gradation requirement is modified to for the sieve and .
for the sieve .
Recycled concrete is only allowed for shoulders .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Base and Surfacing Aggregate containing more than percent recycled concrete Total Percent Passing Sieve Size Class Surfacing Class Subbase Class Subbase Class Base Class Q Base Class Base in ½ in in ¾ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No. . . . . . . . Add letters in parentheses for each aggregate blend designating the type of recycled products included in the mixture .
B Bituminous C Concrete G Glass BC Bituminous and Concrete BG Bituminous and Glass CG Concrete and Glass BCG Bituminous Concrete and Glass Recycled concrete is only allowed for shoulders .
Sampling and Testing Report the No .
sieve results to the nearest .
percent and all other sieve results to the nearest percent .
A Sampling Sieve Analysis and Crushing Tests Grading and Base Manual B Los Angeles Rattler Loss Laboratory Manual Method C Shale Tests Laboratory Manual Method D Bitumen Content Laboratory Manual Method E Insoluble Residue Laboratory Manual Method F Reclaimed Glass AGI Visual Method AGI Data sheet .
and .
G Particle Size Analysis Laboratory Manual Method H Liquid Limit Determination Laboratory Manual Method I Plastic Limit Determination Laboratory Manual Method GRADED AGGREGATE FOR BITUMINOUS MIXTURES .
SCOPE Provide graded aggregate for use in bituminous mixtures. . PLANT MIXED ASPHALT REQUIREMENTS A Composition Provide graded aggregate composed of any combination of the following sound durable particles as described in .B .
Do not use graded aggregate containing objectionable materials including Metal Glass Wood Plastic Brick or Rubber .
Provide coarse aggregate free of coatings of clay and silt. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Do not add soil materials such as clay loam or silt to compensate for a lack of fines in the aggregate .
Do not blend overburden soil into the aggregate .
Feed each material or size of material from an individual storage unit at a uniform rate .
Do not place blended materials from different sources or for different classes types or sizes together in one stockpile unless approved by the Engineer as a Class E aggregate .
B Classification B .
Class A Provide crushed igneous bedrock consisting of basalt gabbro granite gneiss rhyolite diorite and andesite .
Rock from the Sioux Quartzite Formation may contain no greater than .
percent nonClass A aggregate .
Do not blend or add nonClass A aggregate to Class A aggregate .
B .
Class B Provide crushed rock from other bedrock sources such as carbonate and metamorphic rocks Schist .
B .
Class C Provide natural or partly crushed natural gravel obtained from a natural gravel deposit .
B .
Class D Provide percent crushed natural gravel produced from material retained on a square mesh sieve with an opening at least twice as large as Table allows for the maximum size of the aggregate in the composite asphalt mixture .
Ensure the amount of carryover material finer than the selected sieve no greater than percent of the Class D aggregate by weight .
B .
Class E Provide a mixture consisting of at least two of the following classes of approved aggregate Class A Class B and Class D. B .
Steel Slag Steel slag can not exceed of the total mixture aggregate and be free from metallic and other mill waste .
The Engineer will accept stockpiles if the total expansion is no greater than .
percent as determined by ASTM D B. Taconite Tailings Obtain taconite tailings from ore mined westerly of a northsouth line located east of Biwabik Minnesota RWRW or from ore mined in southwestern Wisconsin .
B .
Recycled Asphalt Shingles RAS Provide recycled asphalt shingles manufactured from waste scrap asphalt shingles MWSS or from tearoff scrap asphalt shingles TOSS .
Consider the percentage of RAS used as part of the maximum allowable Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP percentage .
See Table .
B .. A RAS Gradation MnDOT Laboratory Procedure Provide RAS in accordance with the following gradation requirements Table RAS Gradation Sieve size Percent passing ½ in No .
B .. B Binder Content Determine the binder content using chemical extraction meeting the requirements of MnDOT Lab Procedure or . . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .. C Bulk Specific Gravity The Contractor may use an aggregate bulk specific gravity Gsb of .
in lieu of determining the shingle aggregate Gsb in accordance with MnDOT Lab Procedure .
B .. D Waste Materials Do not allow extraneous materials including metals glass rubber nails soil brick tars paper wood and plastics greater than .
percent by weight of the graded aggregate as determined by material retained on the No .
sieve as specified in MnDOT Laboratory Procedure .
B .. E Stockpile Do not blend an RAS stockpile with other salvage material .
Do not blend MWSS and TOSS .
The Contractor may blend virgin sand material with RAS to minimize agglomeration if the Contractor accounts for the blended sand in the final mixture gradation .
B .. F Certification Ensure the processor provides RAS certification on the following Department form Scrap Asphalt Shingles from Manufacture Waste or TearOff Scrap Asphalt Shingles on the MnDOT Bituminous Engineering website .
B .
Crushed Concrete and Salvaged Aggregate The Contractor may incorporate no greater than percent of crushed concrete and salvaged aggregate in nonwear mixtures .
Do not use crushed concrete in wearing courses .
B. Ash Sewage sludge ash and waste incinerator ash are allowed as an aggregate source at a maximum of of the total weight of the mixture .
Sewage sludge ash for use as an aggregate source in wear or nonwear courses must be approved by examination with the Hazard Evaluation Process by MnDOTs Office of Environmental Stewardship .
B .
Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP B .. A Aggregate Angularity Provide combined RAP and virgin aggregates that meet the composite coarse and fine aggregate angularity for the mixture being produced .
B .. B Objectionable Material Do not use RAP containing objectionable materials including metal glass wood plastic brick or rubber .
B .. C Asphalt Binder Content Determine the asphalt binder content using the MnDOT Lab Manual Method and .
B .. D Bulk Specific Gravity Determine the bulk specific gravity in accordance with MnDOT Laboratory Procedure or .
C Quality C. Los Angeles Rattler Test MnDOT Laboratory Procedure Ensure a coarse aggregate loss no greater than percent .
C. Soundness Magnesium Sulfate MnDOT Laboratory Procedure Maximum loss after cycles on the coarse aggregate fraction material retained on No .
sieve for any individual source within the mix as follows Percent passing the ¾ in sieve to percent retained on the ½ in sieve Percent passing the ½ in sieve to percent retained on the ⅜ in sieve Percent passing the ⅜ in sieve to percent retained on the No .
sieve For the composite if all three size fractions are tested the composite loss and acceptance will be granted if .
If the Contractor meets the composite requirement but fails to meet at least one of the individual components the Engineer may accept the source if each individual component is no greater than percent of the requirement for that component . .
If the Contractor meets each individual component requirement but fails to meet the composite the Engineer may accept the source if the composite is no greater than percent of the requirement for the composite .
Coarse aggregate that exceeds the requirements in this section for material passing the No .
sieve can not be used .
C. Spall Materials and Lumps MnDOT Laboratory Procedure .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Spall is defined as shale iron oxide unsound cherts pyrite highly weathered andor soft phyllite and argillite may be scratched with a brass pencil and other materials having similar characteristics .
Lumps are defined as loosely bonded aggregations and clayey masses .
If the percent of lumps measured in the stockpile or cold feed exceed the specification limits stop asphalt production and determine compliance by dry batching .
This procedure may be repeated at any time at the discretion of the Engineer .
Maximum limits for Spall and lumps expressed as percentages by mass are listed in Table .
C. Insoluble Residue Test MnDOT Laboratory Procedure Use Statewide except for District If using Class B carbonate materials ensure the portion of the insoluble residue passing the No .
sieve is no greater than percent .
Use for District ONLY .
If crushed carbonate quarry rock limestone or dolostone is used the minus sized portion of the rock insoluble residue shall not exceed by weight .
Blending of sources andor beds with an insoluble residue up to is allowed to meet the insoluble residue requirement .
Individual beds thinner than inches mm or up to of the total face height are exempt from the maximum insoluble residue requirement .
However the aggregate producer shall practice good quality control at all times and exclude poor quality stone to the extent practical regardless of the bed thickness andor pocket size and location .
No carbonate quarry rock from the Platteville Geological Formation is allowed .
D Gradation Ensure the aggregate gradation broad bands meet the following requirements in accordance with AASHTO T passing the No .
wash and AASHTO T. Table Aggregate Gradation Broad Bands percent passing of total washed gradation Sieve size A B C D in ¾ in ½ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
. . . . . . . .
The Contractor may reduce the gradation broadband for the maximum aggregate size to percent passing for mixtures containing RAP if the oversize material originates from the RAP source .
Ensure the virgin material meets the requirement of percent passing the maximum aggregate sieve size. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Mixture Aggregate Requirements Aggregate Blend Property Traffic Level Traffic Level Traffic Level Traffic Level year Design ESALs million million million million Min .
Coarse Aggregate Angularity ASTM D one face two face Wear one face two face NonWear Min .
Fine Aggregate Angularity FAA AASHTO T Method A Wear NonWear Flat and Elongated Particles max by weight ASTM D ratio ratio ratio Min .
Sand Equivalent AASHTO T Max .
Total Spall in fraction retained on the sieve Wear NonWear . . . . . . . .
Maximum Spall Content in Total Sample Wear NonWear . . . . . . . .
Maximum Percent Lumps in fraction retained on the sieve . . . . Class B Carbonate Restrictions Maximum Final LiftAll other Lifts Maximum Final LiftAll other Lifts Max .
allowable scrap shinglesMWSS WearNon Wear Max .
allowable scrap shingles TOSS Final LiftAll other Lifts MWSS is manufactured waste scrap shingle and TOSS is tearoff scrap shingle. . PERMEABLE ASPHALT STABILIZED STRESS RELIEF COURSE PASSRC AND PERMEABLE ASPHALT STABILIZED BASE PASB REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions Do not use recycled materials including glass concrete bituminous shingles ash and steel slag .
B Gradation The Gradation limits are also considered the Job Mix Formula JMF limits. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B. PASB Table PASB Aggregate Gradation Sieve Size Percent Passing ½ inch inch ¾ inch inch No .
No .
No .
No .
B. PASSRC Table PASSRC Aggregate Gradation Sieve Size Percent Passing inch inch inch No .
No .
C Quality Will meet all requirements of .. C. through .. C .. .. C. changes to If using Class B carbonate materials ensure the portion of the insoluble residue passing the No .
sieve is no greater than percent .
D Mixture Quality Requirements Table Mixture Aggregate Requirements for PASSRC PASB Aggregate Blend Property Coarse Aggregate Angularity ASTM D one facetwo face PASSRC PASB Fine Aggregate Angularity FAA AASHTO T Method A NA Flat and Elongated Particles max by weight ASTM D NA Clay Content AASHTO T NA Total Spall in fraction retained on the sieve .
Maximum Spall Content in Total Sample .
Maximum Percent Lumps in fraction retained on the sieve .
Note Carbonate Restrictions If Class B as defined in .. B. crushed carbonate quarry rock limestone or dolostone is used in the mixture or if carbonate particles in the material retained on the No .
sieve exceeds percent by weight the minus sieve size portion of the insoluble residue shall not exceed percent. . ULTRA THIN BONDED WEARING COURSE UTBWC REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions Do not use recycled materials including glass concrete bituminous shingles ash and steel slag .
B Quality Will meet all requirements of .. C. C Coarse Aggregate Provide a Class A aggregate as defined in .. B. in accordance with the following requirements .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table UTBWC Coarse Aggregate Requirements Tests MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method Limit Flat and elongated ratio at Los Angeles Rattler Test LAR Bulk Specific Gravity D Fine Aggregate Provide fine aggregate passing the No .
sieve in accordance with the following requirements Table UTBWC Fine Aggregate Requirements Tests Method Limit Sand equivalent AASHTO T Uncompacted void content MnDOT Laboratory Manual Bulk Specific Gravity MnDOT Laboratory Manual E Aggregate Gradation Broadband Table UTBWC Aggregate Gradation Broadband Aggregate Size Typical application rates inch lbssy Sieve Size Gradation Broadband Limits Passing inch inch inch No .
No No .
No .
No .
No .
No. . . . MICROSURFACING REQUIREMENTS A Restrictions Do not use recycled materials including glass concrete bituminous shingles ash and steel slag .
B Gradation Provide aggregate in accordance with the gradation requirements of Table MicroSurfacing Gradation Limits and QC Tolerances .
If no type is designated by the Contract provide MnDOT Type ISSA Type II .
Table MicroSurfacing Gradation Limits and QC Tolerances Percent Passing AASHTO T AASHTO T Sieve Size MnDOT Type MnDOT Type ISSA Type II MnDOT Type ISSA Type III QC TOLERANCES Percent in JMF for each sieve size ⅜ inch No. . No. . No. . No. . No. . No. . No. . International Slurry Surfacing Association .
Minnesota Standard Specifications C Quality Provide aggregate that meets the durability requirements of Table MicroSurfacing Aggregate Durability Requirements .
Table MicroSurfacing Aggregate Durability Requirements Tests on Aggregate Test Requirement Sand equivalent AASHTO T Abrasion resistance AASHTO T Soundness using MgSO AASHTO T Use Grading C for Type material .
Use Grading D for Type material .
Perform the soundness test on the Class B aggregate of the blend if applicable .
D Class Unless modified by the Contract provide Class A aggregate as defined in .. B Classification or Taconite Tailings .
If modified by the Contract provide Class D aggregate which is defined as percent crushed natural gravel produced from material retained on a square mesh sieve with an opening at least twice as large as the maximum size of aggregate in Table for the type specified in the mix design .
Ensure the amount of carryover material finer than the selected sieve is no greater than percent of the Class D aggregate by weight. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Perform sampling sieve analysis lumps crushing and shale testing meeting the requirements of the MnDOT Laboratory Manual .
MINERAL FILLER .
SCOPE Provide mineral filler as a soil or mixture component . .
REQUIREMENTS A Composition Provide a mineral filler of carbonate dust Portland cement hydrated lime crushed rock screenings fly ash or rotary kiln dust .
Crushed rock needs to have a stability and durability equivalent to those of the comparable mixture containing on of the other acceptable filler materials and be free of clay and shale .
B Gradation The mineral filler will be finer than a . mm sieve and contain less than of the material passing a µm sieve .
The portion passing the µm sieve will meet the following gradation .
Percent finer than .
mm Percent finer than .
mm Percent finer than .
mm .
Does not apply to Portland cement or hydrated lime C Condition Mineral filler which is to be added directly to the dried aggregate for the bituminous mixture will be thoroughly dry and free from lumps consisting of aggregates of fine particles .
Crushed rock screenings used as mineral filler will be processed and handled in such a manner to prevent segregation and dried by passing through a dryer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Sample according to the MnDOT Bituminous Manual B Fineness B .
Fine Aggregate Sieve Analysis according to MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method .
B .
Particle Size Analysis of Soil according to MnDOT Laboratory Manual Method .
Minnesota Standard Specifications BINDER SOIL .
SCOPE This specification lists the requirements for soil material used as a binding agent for aggregate mixtures . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide binder soil with the following characteristics Contains no sod roots plants organics or other deleterious material and Contains no fly ash incinerator ash other manufacturing byproducts or waste material. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Sampling The Engineer will sample binder soil in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
B Sieve Analysis The Engineer will perform the sieve analysis in accordance with test method of the Laboratory Manual .
GRANULAR MATERIAL .
SCOPE This specification lists the requirements for granular materials used for granular subbase structural bedding and backfill . .
REQUIREMENTS Use material sources meeting the requirements of Source of Supply and Quality .
Provide certified granular material meeting the specified gradation .
Report the No .
sieve results to the nearest .
percent and all other sieves to the nearest whole number .
Certify all granular materials on Form GB Certification of Aggregate and Granular Materials .
Provide certified granular material that has similar appearance texture moisture content and performance characteristics .
A Granular Materials A. Virgin Materials Provide virgin aggregate meeting the following requirements Consists of naturally occurring uniformly blended mineral materials Contains no topsoil organics or severely weathered rock and Insoluble residue test results for the portion of quarriedbedrock carbonate aggregates passing the No .
sieve is no greater than percent .
A .
Recycled Materials For products not required to be virgin aggregates the Contractor may substitute recycled aggregates for virgin aggregates if the recycled aggregates meet the following requirements Recycled aggregates uniformly blended consisting only of recycled asphalt pavement RAP recycled concrete materials and recycled aggregate materials The bitumen content of the blended material is no greater than .
percent The recycled concrete material is .
No greater than percent of the material blend .
No greater than percent masonry block .
The maximum amount of brick is .
The maximum amount of other objectionable materials including but not limited to wood plant matter plastic plaster and fabric is .. B Granular and Select Granular Materials Provide granular materials meeting the requirements of Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Granular and Select Granular Material Gradation Ratio Requirements Passing Ratio No .
in Passing Ratio No .
No .
Passing Ratio No .
No .
Granular Material Not Applicable Not Applicable Select Granular Material Not Applicable Not Applicable Select Granular Material Super Sand Not Applicable Select Granular Material Modified Not Applicable Not Applicable C Stabilizing Aggregate Provide stabilizing aggregate meeting the same requirements as required for the base .
If base is not specified in the Contract meet the requirements of class per Aggregate for Surface and Base Courses .
D Structure Backfill Materials Materials in this section are intended to be used as backfill adjacent to structures .
D. Granular Backfill Provide granular backfill meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Granular Backfill Requirements Passing in Sieve Percent Passing Ratio No .
in D. Structural Backfill Provide virgin structural backfill meeting the requirements of Table and the following .
Table Structural Backfill Requirements Passing ¾ in Sieve Percent Passing Ratio No .
No .
Percent Passing Ratio No .
No .
Provide screened material meeting the requirements of .. B .
Classification for Class C. Provide material with a minimum angle of friction Φ of in accordance with AASHTO T . D. Select Granular Backfill Provide select granular backfill meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Select Granular Backfill Requirements Passing in Sieve Percent Passing Ratio No .
in E Aggregate Backfill Provide aggregate backfill meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Aggregate Backfill Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing in No .
No .
No .
No. . F Granular Bedding Provide granular bedding meeting the requirements of Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Granular Bedding Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing in No. . G Aggregate Bedding Provide aggregate bedding meeting the type specified .
G. Fine Aggregate Bedding Provide fine aggregate bedding meeting the requirements in Aggregate for Surface and Base Courses for Class and composed of less than recycled concrete .
G. Coarse Aggregate Bedding Provide virgin coarse aggregate bedding meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Coarse Aggregate Bedding Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing ½ in No .
G. Conduit Aggregate Bedding Provide virgin conduit aggregate bedding meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Conduit Aggregate Bedding Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing No .
No. . H Coarse Filter Aggregate Provide virgin coarse filter aggregate meeting the requirements of Table .
The maximum Los Angeles Rattler LAR loss from carbonate quarry rock is .
Table Coarse Filter Aggregate Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing in ¾ in ⅜ in No .
I Blank J Filter Aggregates Provide filter aggregate meeting the requirements of the type specified J .
Medium Filter Aggregate Provide naturally rounded and virgin medium filter aggregate meeting the requirements of Table and the following .
Table Medium Filter Aggregate Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing ¾ in ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No . .
The maximum shale and soft rock content of the material retained on the No .
sieve is .
percent .
The maximum carbonate content is percent. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The maximum crushing content is percent .
Material crushed from quarries is considered crushed material .
J .
Fine Filter Aggregate Provide percent virgin fine filter aggregate meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Fine Filter Aggregate Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing ⅜ in No .
No .
No .
No. . K Sand Cover Provide percent virgin natural glacial material meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Sand Cover Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing No .
No .
No .
No .
. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test at the rates specified in the Schedule of Materials Control .
A Sampling Sieve Analysis and Crushing Tests Grading and Base Manual B Bitumen Content Laboratory Manual Method C Insoluble Residue Laboratory Manual Method D Light Weight Pieces in Aggregate Laboratory Manual Method E Lithological Count Laboratory Manual Method F Standard Method of Test for Direct Shear Test of Soils under Consolidated Drained Conditions AASHTO T G Los Angeles Rattler Loss Laboratory Manual Method .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Bituminous Material BITUMINOUS MATERIAL .
SCOPE Provide bituminous materials consisting of asphalt binder cutback asphalt and emulsified asphalt . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide bituminous material from a certified source listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List meeting the following requirements for the type and grade required by the contract .
A Asphalt Binder Only use Performance Grade PG Asphalt Binder meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and the Combined State Binder Group Method of Acceptance for Asphalt Binder available on the Asphalt Products page of the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Use asphalt binder supplier recommendations for mixing and compaction temperatures .
B Medium Curing Liquid Asphalt Provide medium curing liquid asphalt meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Only use cutback asphalt as approved by the Engineer .
C Emulsified Asphalt Provide emulsified asphalt meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the type and grade required by the contract .
D Cationic Emulsified Asphalt Provide cationic emulsified asphalt meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . D. Diluted CSSh Provide diluted CSSh meeting the requirements of AASHTO M with the following modifications Dilute the CSSh at a rate of one part emulsion to one part water at the place of manufacture .
Meets a distillation residue of at least percent .
Saybolt viscosity storage stability and particle charge only required on undiluted CSSh .
E Polymer Modified Cationic Emulsified Asphalt E. CRSP Provide polymermodified cationic emulsified asphalt meeting the requirements of AASHTO M CRSP with the following modifications Distilled at F C for min Produced using only polymer modified base asphalt .
Do not use Latex modification .
E. CRSPd diluted CRSP Provide diluted polymermodified cationic emulsified asphalt meeting the requirements of AASHTO M CRSP with the following modifications Distilled at F C for min Diluted at a rate of three parts emulsion to one part water by volume at the place of manufacture Meets a distillation residue of at least percent Produced using polymer modified base asphalt .
Do not use Latex modification .
Saybolt viscosity storage stability and particle charge only required on undiluted CRSP .
F Polymer Modified High Float Medium Set Emulsified Asphalt HFMSP Provide emulsified asphalt meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Table with the following modification Perform the polymer modification step before the emulsification process .
G Ultrathin Bonded Wearing Course UTBWC Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane Provide a polymer modified emulsion membrane meeting the requirements of Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table UTBWC Polymer Modified Emulsion Membrane Requirements Test Method Minimum Maximum Tests on emulsion Viscosity Saybolt Furol at F C AASHTO T s s Storage stability test h AASHTO T . Sieve test AASHTO T . Residue by distillation AASHTO T Oil distillate by distillation AASHTO T . Demulsibility oz mL .
dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate AASHTO T Tests on residue from distillation Penetration at F C AASHTO T dmm dmm Solubility in trichloroethylene AASHTO T . Elastic recovery at F C AASHTO T After standing undisturbed for h ensure the surface has a smooth homogenous color .
AASHTO T except at no greater than F F C C for min .
H Micro Surfacing Emulsified Asphalt Provide a CQShP or CQSP as required by the mix design and meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Table with the following modifications Ensure the emulsion is polymer modified with a minimum of percent natural latex polymers or a Department approved manmade latex polymer or SBS styrenebutadienestyrene polymer .
Distilled at F C for min .
I Mixing Grade Engineered Emulsion for Stabilization Reclamation Provide a cationic emulsion according to the job mix design for cold inplace recycled bituminous cold central plant recycled bituminous stabilized base or stabilized full depth reclamation using the testing methods referenced in AASHTO M to meet the following properties for the types listed I .
Soft Base Engineered Emulsion Residue asphalt content minimum Penetration range of dmm I .
Hard Base Engineered Emulsion Residue asphalt content minimum Penetration range of dmm .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide Bill of Ladings with a certification statement that the bituminous material meets the requirements in .
Requirements .
Sample at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
The Materials Engineer will test samples submitted and certified by the manufacturer as representative of the bituminous material to be provided .
ANTISTRIPPING ADDITIVE .
SCOPE Provide antistripping additives to improve the moisture sensitivity and adhesion properties between the asphalt binder and aggregate . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide antistripping additives meeting the following requirements Composition meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Minnesota Standard Specifications Miscible with all types of bituminous materials without showing separation or settlement Not affecting the long term stability of the asphalt binder and With a concentration meeting the requirements of the Modified Lottman Test Laboratory Manual Method .
Ship and store antistripping additives in containers provided by the manufacturer and labeled with the following information Name of the manufacturer Trade name or trade mark Manufacturers lot number Date of manufacture and Net weight of the contents .
Maintain uniform consistency from drum to drum within shipments. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK ASPHALT PRIMER FOR DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING .
SCOPE Provide asphalt primer for damp proofing and waterproofing concrete and masonry surfaces above or below ground level .
REQUIREMENTS Provide asphalt primer meeting the requirements of ASTM D . . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
ASPHALT FOR DAMPPROOFING AND WATERPROOFING .
SCOPE Provide asphalt for use as a mopping coat for dampproofing or as a plying or mopping cement in the construction of a membrane system of waterproofing . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide Type II asphalt meeting the requirements of ASTM D unless otherwise required by the contract. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract Bituminous Products SATURATED FABRIC FOR WATERPROOFING .
SCOPE Provide asphalt saturated fabric for waterproofing . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide fabric meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and saturated with asphalt .
Use the asphalt saturated fabric in conjunction with asphalt for waterproofing in accordance with Asphalt for Dampproofing and Waterproofing. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK Minnesota Standard Specifications PREMOLDED ASPHALT PLANK .
SCOPE Provide premolded asphalt plank . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide asphalt plank meeting the requirements of ASTM D for the type required by the contract. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK Culvert Pipe and Sewer Pipe CORRUGATED ALUMINIZED STEEL PIPE TYPE .
SCOPE Provide corrugated aluminized steel CAS pipe and pipe arches for use in the construction of culverts underdrains and sewers . .
REQUIREMENTS Use Type aluminumcoated steel sheets meeting the requirements of AASHTO M to fabricate pipe in accordance with AASHTO M and as specified in Corrugated Steel Pipe .
Use pipe sections with identification marks meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . A Aprons Provide aluminized coated steel aprons fabricated in accordance with this specification and as shown on the plans. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK CORRUGATED ALUMINUM PIPE .
SCOPE Provide corrugated aluminum alloy CA pipe for use as culverts and underdrains .
The Department will designate the size of circular pipes by the nominal inside diameter and the size of pipearches by the span width . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and the following A Physical Properties The Contractor may provide pipe in the least thickness of metal listed for a specified diameter unless otherwise shown on the plans or special provisions .
B Coupling Bands Use aluminum alloy coupling bands meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and as shown on the plans to make field joints .
C Aprons Provide aluminum aprons for circular pipes manufactured in accordance with this specification for corrugated aluminum pipe and as shown on the plans .
D Identification Marks Mark each pipe section with identification meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer will inspect corrugated aluminum pipe in accordance with AASHTO M . . Minnesota Standard Specifications CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE .
SCOPE Provide prefabricated corrugated galvanized steel CS pipe to construct culverts and underdrains .
The unmodified term pipe refers to any or all types of pipe .
The Department will designate the size of the circular pipe by the nominal inside diameter .
The Department will designate the size of the pipearches by the span width measured from the inside crest of the corrugations . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the type required by the contract and in accordance with the following A Blank B Dimensions Ensure that pipe dimensions meet the requirements of AASHTO M except as modified by the following Provide each size of pipe with a nominal sheet thickness as shown on the plans and meeting the requirements for specified thickness in Table of AASHTO M Provide pipes with a corrugation size of ½ inch ¼ inch ⅔ inch ½ inch inch inch or inch inch as shown on the plans and meeting the requirements in Table of AASHTO M for the provided pipe sizes and Provide spiral ribbed pipes with a corrugation size of ¾ inch ¾ inch ½ inch and meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Table for the provided pipe sizes .
Provide the pipes with section properties meeting the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Appendix A .
C Blank D Appurtenant Parts and Sections Provide metallic zinc galvanized coated steel aprons fabricated in accordance with this section and Sheet Steel Products .
Provide elbow tee and wye sections as shown on the plans and fabricated from standard pipe sections using mitered and welded joints forming the required intersection angles for each installation .
Provide special adapters as necessary to make connections between different sizes and types of pipe .
Provide an outlet screen at each free end of underdrain systems .
The Contractor may provide metal end caps to close the dead ends of pipe instead of installing concrete or vitrified clay plugs .
E Identification Marks Mark each pipe section with identification meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Provide pipe with a sheet thickness as designated in the markings on sheets and coils meeting the requirements in Table of AASHTO M . . sampling and testing The Engineer will not accept units of pipe if the zinc galvanized coating has been burned by shop welding or otherwise damaged in shop fabrication unless the Contractor regalvanizes the pipe units using the hotdip process or the metalizing process specified in AASHTO M . Do not make shop repairs with zinc paint .
Use the metalizing process to make zinc coating repairs on buttwelded seams of helical corrugated pipe if the adjacent zinc coating is burned to a width greater than three times the metal thickness .
After the Contractor delivers the pipe to the project the Engineer will inspect each unit for compliance with the details of construction workmanship and finish requirements .
In addition to all other defects as listed in AASHTO M constituting cause for rejection the Engineer may reject at the project any units damaged during shipment or fabrication .
The Contractor may use zinc paint to repair pipe coating damage caused by job site field welding or fabrication in lieu of regalvanizing .
Use organic zinc primer paint specified on the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List under Bridge Structural Steel Coating as Three Coat Systems Organic .
Clean the damaged area by sandblasting or as otherwise approved by the Engineer .
Apply the zinc paint in accordance with instructions from the paint manufacturer .
Minnesota Standard Specifications POLYMERIC COATED CORRUGATED STEEL PIPE .
SCOPE Provide polymericcoated galvanized corrugated steel PCCS pipe for use as culverts and underdrains . .
REQUIREMENTS Use precoated galvanized steel sheets meeting the requirements of AASHTO M to fabricate pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and in accordance with Corrugated Steel Pipe .
Provide steel sheets with a polymer coating on both sides that is .
inch .
A Aprons Polymeric coated aprons meeting AASHTO M and M are not available .
Use apron material as shown in the plans. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK GALVANIZED STEEL STRUCTURAL PLATE FOR PIPE PIPEARCHES AND ARCHES .
SCOPE Provide galvanized corrugated steel CS structural plate and fasteners for use in constructing pipe pipearches underpasses and special shapes for field assembly . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide structural plates and fasteners meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and the following A Fabrication Provide the plate thickness specified in Table of AASHTO M unless otherwise specified on the plans .
Provide steel plate with the section modulus shown on the plans .
A different thickness and section modulus is acceptable if the strength is at least equal to the strength of the thickness and section modulus shown on the plans .
Provide plates of a size and shape that yield a finished structure of the dimensions shown on the plans .
Stagger either the longitudinal or the transverse seams .
Punch bolt holes before galvanizing the sheets .
B Workmanship and Finish The Engineer will reject individual plates or shipments of plates with the following defects Plates without careful and finished workmanship Incorrect plate shape Unevenly lined or spaced bolt holes Plates with ragged edges Plates with illegible or improper markings Bruised scaled broken or improperly repaired zinc galvanized coating or Metal plates with dents or bends. . SAMPLING AND TESTING ALUMINUM ALLOY STRUCTURAL PLATE FOR PIPE PIPEARCHES AND ARCHES .
SCOPE Provide corrugated aluminum alloy CA structural plate accessories and fasteners for the construction of pipe pipearches arches and special shapes for field assembly . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide structural plates accessories and fasteners meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and the following A Fabrication Provide the plate thickness pipe shape sheet fabrication details and assembly bolting as shown on the plans .
B Workmanship and Finish The Engineer will reject individual plates or shipments of plates with the following defects Plates without careful and finished workmanship .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Incorrect plate shape Unevenly lined or spaced bolt holes Plates with ragged edges Plates with illegible or improper markings or Metal plates with dents or bends. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE .
SCOPE Provide reinforced concrete pipe of circular arch elliptical or special shape and design with appropriate appurtenances to construct culverts sewers or underpasses . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide reinforced concrete pipe meeting the following requirements and as modified in this section Table Reinforced Concrete Pipe Pipe type AASHTO reference Circular AASHTO M PipeArch AASHTO M Elliptical AASHTO M Provide concrete aprons manufactured as shown on the plans .
Attach aprons compatible with pipe .
Provide concrete cattle pass units manufactured as shown on the plans .
The Department will not require external load bearing tests on cattle passes and aprons .
A Materials A .
Aggregate Quality and A .
Form Release Agents A. Portland Cement The Department will allow admixtures in accordance Precast Concrete .
The Department will allow the following cement substitutions percent Class F or Class C fly ash by weight percent ground granulated blast furnace slag by weight percent substitution with a combination of ground granulated blast furnace slag and Class F or Class C fly ash by weight .
A. Flyash for Use in Portland Cement Concrete A .
Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag Cement A .
Structural Concrete A .
Metal Reinforcement A. Preformed Gasket Seals for Concrete Pipe B Pipe Design Provide pipe designed as shown on the plans or meeting the AASHTO requirements referenced in Table if approved as an alternate by the Engineer for the different classes of pipe meeting the following design requirements .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Pipe shape circular arch elliptical Diameter Wall thickness Compressive strength of concrete and Area and type of circumferential reinforcement .
Provide pipe with reinforcement placed in accordance with applicable AASHTO Specifications referenced in Table except as otherwise shown on the plans or as approved by the Engineer .
Do not use circular pipe with elliptical reinforcement .
Lap wires in the circumferential steel welded wire reinforcement to meet one of the following One full window and at least twenty wire diameters or Forty wire diameters and the first transverse wires from each side pass each other .
Fully welded lap splices will not be allowed without specific approval of the Materials Engineer .
If the plans show pipes with rubber gasket seals ensure the joint surfaces adjacent to the gasket are smooth and free of imperfections to allow the rubber gasket seal to meet the specified performance requirement .
C Manufacture Provide products manufactured in a precast concrete manufacturing plant preapproved by the Materials Engineer and listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Provide certified products as required by the contract from a manufacturer with total production setup on a preapproved basis for that product type pipe end sections or manholes .
The Materials Engineer will limit acceptance of products to each precast concrete manufacturer to each of the plants and to each product type as preapproved by the Materials Engineer .
The Materials Engineer will limit preapproval to the identified sizes of circular pipe arch pipe elliptical pipe and product type .
Sizes and classes without designs shown in the Standard Plates or with a span greater than or equal to inches will not be preapproved .
Notify the Materials Engineer at least business days before the manufacturer begins producing pipe requiring shear steel or Special Designs not listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Pin all shear steel .
Provide concrete units cured by the steam or water curing methods unless using methods otherwise approved by the Materials Engineer .
In all cases use curing chambers with an atmospheric temperature no greater than F C. Protect concrete units from freezing or drying after casting until the completion of curing .
D Permissible Variations Provide pipe meeting the tolerance requirements of applicable AASHTO specifications referenced in Table . . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Materials Engineer will approve each precast concrete manufacturer and its individual plants to provide precast concrete products under the preapproval program .
The Materials Engineer will not authorize precast concrete production if the manufacturer fails to abide by the terms conditions and requirements contained in this program .
If the Materials Engineer finds manufacturer noncompliance with the preapproval program or evidence of nonconformance of certified products the Materials Engineer in conjunction with the Engineer may perform the following Reject the individual product Reject the questioned shipment Reject the identified days production or Revoke preapproval privileges .
A Plant QC Ensure the manufacturer establishes and implements a QC program including the following elements for each pre approved plant A .
Internal QC Program Ensure the manufacturer includes the following in the internal QC program Sampling and testing of component materials or documentation of acceptability if materials were previously inspected and tested or received from a certified source Inspection of product manufacturing including the following .
Reinforcing steel fabrication and placement .
Concrete mix design and proportioning .
Concrete placement and consolidation and .
Concrete curing .
Testing of finished products including the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Strength of concrete cylinders .
Threeedgebearing test round pipe and .
Absorption and steel verification from pipe cores .
For each class size and type of manufacture on the first run of the year and as directed by the Materials Engineer provide core specimens at least in mm in diameter for the absorption test and steel verification .
Final visual inspection and stamping and Maintenance of plant facilities and equipment .
A. OnSite Quality Control Technicians Ensure the manufacturer employs and has onsite during production QC technicians trained and certified meeting the requirements of MnDOT Level I Concrete Field Tester or ACI Grade I Quality Control Technician to perform the following Ensure the conformance of all preapproved products to the requirements Maintain knowledge of the following .
Plans and specification requirements .
Product manufacturing operations and .
Significance of the specification requirements in producing quality products .
Correct stop or both operations causing nonconforming attributes Reject products not meeting the contract requirements Ensure the manufacturer meets requirements related to producing preapproved products and Contact the Departments inspector before making repairs greater than percent of the respective surface inside or outside .
A .
Equipment A .
System of Record Keeping Ensure the manufacturer maintains the following records Component material sources and passing quality test results authorized certification or other evidence of inspection and satisfactory testing Test results covering product manufacture and the finished product as listed in the records section of the ACPA manual Records of manufactured products in accordance with the following .
Date .
Size and .
Class .
Running inventory of preapproved products in stock and Equipment calibration reports .
B Quality Assurance The Materials Engineer will visit each plant to perform tasks in accordance with this specification and including the following Random sampling and testing of the materials used in the manufacture of preapproved products Random sampling and testing of the preapproved pipe produced Observing the manufacturing process Reviewing the manufacturers quality control tests inspection records and stockpiling practices and Reviewing the preapproved product inventory .
The Engineer will perform a final inspection upon delivery .
C Testing Rates C. Concrete Ensure the manufacturer tests the air content of concrete in each mix once a day for each positive slump mix .
Ensure the manufacturer tests the concrete strength of each mix meeting the requirements of Cylinder and Core Guidelines for Precast Pipe and Box Culvert kept on file by the Materials Engineer .
C. Load Bearing Test Ensure the manufacturer conducts ThreeEdge Bearing tests meeting the requirements of AASHTO M on each size and class of pipe and in accordance with the following schedule .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Size Range in Class Range Test Rates per pieces per pieces per pieces per pieces per pieces per pieces NOTE Testing rates for sizes not shown are as required by the project specifications .
Begin a new schedule of testing after changing the mix design after shutting down the system for major repairs and renovations when beginning a new production run and when beginning a new season .
These rates are for testing to the .
in Dload .
Testing to ultimate load is required on each combination of pipe size and class manufactured once per production year .
Notify the Materials Engineer full business days before testing .
The Materials Engineer may select pipes for testing and may direct the manufacturer to perform additional testing at no additional cost to the Department .
Do not ship pipe that have not developed the specified Dload .
Only pipe of equal or older age than a tested pipe section of the same size and class that has passed the threeedge bearing test may be shipped .
Maintain documentation of all load tests performed .
D Pipe Marking Provide pipe marked by the manufacturer in accordance with the following Meeting the marking requirements of AASHTO M Stamped with the word Certified Stamped with the manufacturing plant identification For units at least in in diameter stamped on the inside and For units smaller than in in diameter stamped on the outside .
Before stockpiling mark products manufactured for projects with special requirements not meeting the standards of the preapproved program with an identifying project number or the buyers name .
The Engineer may accept preapproved shipments if the Contractor provides pipe marked with the following by the manufacturer The phrase CERTIFIED PLANT COMPANY in letters at least in high Company identification and Individual production plant .
Provide the Engineer with a certified bill of materials or invoice signed by a designated responsible company representative with each shipment that identifies the following information Project number Contractor Type of material Number of pieces of each size class and length and The following statement The materials itemized in this shipment are certified to be in compliance with the applicable Minnesota Department of Transportation Specifications and the Project Plans including any Buy America provisions .
____________________________ Authorized Signature and Date Ensure the manufacturer does not ship preapproved products until after the completion of QC tests and inspections and as approved by the Materials Engineer .
E Stockpiling Ensure the manufacturer stockpiles products meeting the above requirements to allow the Materials Engineer to inspect the products for QA and that the manufacturer stockpiles special nonpreapproved product in areas separate from preapproved stock. . Minnesota Standard Specifications PRECAST CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS .
SCOPE Provide precast concrete items manufactured in a facility meeting the requirements of Precast Concrete Manufacturing .
Provide precast concrete single and multicell box culverts sections headwalls and aprons including box culvert sections used in the ascast position as manholes or manholetype structures .
The Materials Engineer is the Engineer with authority regarding this Specification . .
REQUIREMENTS A Fabrication Drawings Falsework and Forms If full construction details are not included in the plans provide shop drawings according to before fabricating the units .
Provide shop drawings and design calculations for mitered culvert bends and other specialty culvert shapes .
Provide precast concrete box culverts with individual sections at least ft long capable of being tied to the adjacent section with concrete pipe ties as specified by MnDOT Standard Plate and as shown on the plans .
Unless specifically called for in the plans openings in the flow line or sidewalls are not allowed .
B Materials B .
Concrete Provide concrete with mix designations as shown on the plans for the specific items of work .
B. Reinforcement Bars B .
Steel Fabric C Forms Provide forms capable of withstanding pressure from concrete vibration and impact without distorting .
Set and maintain forms in a mortar tight condition free of warp and on a rigid foundation .
Provide joints in the sectional forms without offset .
Set forms to create dimensions of the precast unit as shown on the plans .
Repair or replace forms not meeting the dimensions shown on the plans before casting additional sections .
When recesses around lifting devices are required use forming devices provided by the lifting device manufacturer .
Clean forms before use .
Treat the face of the forms in contact with the concrete with form coating material in accordance with Form Coating Material before setting the forms .
D Lifting Devices and Other Steel Inserts When lifting devices or other steel inserts will have less than .
inches of concrete cover in the finished structure or if the recess is to be grouted in the field provide items that are galvanized according to .
E Reinforcement Steel Place reinforcement steel as shown on the plans .
Support reinforcement steel with chairs .
Splice secure and tie reinforcement steel in accordance with Metal Reinforcement .
Provide concrete cover of at least .
in or as shown on the plans .
Provide stainless steel plastic plastic tipped hot dipped galvanized or mechanically galvanized reinforcement supports in contact with the forms .
Extend coatings on the supports at least in from the form surface .
Do not tackweld reinforcement .
Lap wire mesh as detailed in the plans .
Cut wire mesh so that the sum of the two end overhangs equals no more than one transverse wire spacing .
When measuring the length of wire mesh for compliance with plans splice lengths etc .
the end overhang shall not exceed onehalf of the transverse wire spacing .
When a secondary pour will be used for adding a weir wall an integral base for a manhole or similar structures use epoxycoated steel reinforcement across the joint with the bars being cast in the first pour or set in epoxyfilled drilled holes .
F Placement of Concrete Do not place concrete for precast units until the Materials Engineer inspects and approves the forms and steel placement .
Place the concrete in each precast unit without interruption .
Vibrate the concrete internally externally or both to produce uniformly dense concrete and to avoid displacement of enclosures or steel units .
Internally vibrate in accordance with .. D. Compaction of Concrete except provide internal vibrators with a vibrating head no greater than ¼ in in diameter and capable of operating at a frequency of at least Hz impulses per min .
G Concrete Curing Cure until the concrete reaches a compressive strength of at least psi based on compressive strength test results from control cylinders cured according to Precast Concrete Manufacturing. . Minnesota Standard Specifications H Concrete Finishing and Repair Provide formed surfaces of the precast units with a uniform dense surface finish in accordance with .. F .. a Ordinary Surface Finish .
After removing the forms examine the concrete surfaces for areas of unsound concrete and defective surfaces caused by faulty forms or form assembly improper concrete placement improper form removal and other causes .
Remove and replace concrete with porosity honeycomb delamination hollow sound or segregated materials as approved by the Materials Engineer .
The Materials Engineer will not allow the following repairs in the finished product Individual repairs greater than sq .
ft on an inside or outside surface and Repairs to the tongue or groove down to the steel and greater than ft long .
With the approval of the Materials Engineer and in compliance with the plant quality control program the Contractor may repair minor surface cavities or irregularities before the unit completes curing .
I Certified Plant Requirement Provide precast concrete box culverts end sections and appurtenances constructed in a precast concrete fabrication plant certified by the American Concrete Pipe Association the National Precast Concrete Association or another organization approved by the Materials Engineer .
If requested provide quality control and plant certification records to the Materials Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Materials Engineer will inspect the units at the plant and will stamp approved units with the official mark of the Department .
Store individual units in an upright position to facilitate inspection unless otherwise approved by the Materials Engineer .
Do not ship units without the official mark of the Department .
Notify the Materials Engineer at least one full business day before intent to ship .
Complete finishing and repair work on units before submitting notice of intent to ship .
The units are subject to final inspection of the units after delivery .
Unless otherwise directed by the Materials Engineer mark the inside of each box section with the following information Project number Overfill height Size Segment number as shown on the plans Date and which pour if more than one pour per day of manufacture Manufacturers name and plant PRECAST CONCRETE MANUFACTURING .
SCOPE Provide precast concrete items manufactured offsite at a permanent manufacturing facility listed on the Departments website and manufacturing products such as box culverts reinforced concrete pipe and manholes bridge beams abutments pier caps and other structures .
After seasonal or other delays in production provide a minimum of two full weeks of notice that production will begin .
When a manufacturing facility has not produced items covered by this Specification in the current or previous calendar year provide a minimum of sixty days notice of intent to manufacture .
If a manufacturing facility is located outside of MnDOTspecified coverage areas and has been given specific approval to manufacture products according to this specification all costs of providing that inspection will be deducted from monies paid under the contract .
A list of plants locations and products with regular MnDOT inspection is on the Materials Office website . .
REQUIREMENTS A Fabrication Drawings If full construction details are not included in the plans or if modifications of the plan drawings are necessary provide shop drawings meeting the following requirements to the Engineer of Record for review and approval by the Office of Bridges and Structures or other project representative as designated by the Materials Engineer before fabricating the units Complete and comprehensive Include the details of reinforcing steel and Show mat makeup and configuration .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Do not begin construction of the items until full approval of the shop drawings is attained .
When shop drawings are transmitted electronically the final approved shop drawings should be sent from the approved project representative directly to the Precast Inspection Engineer andor the States inspectors for the manufacturing facility .
B Materials B .
Concrete Provide concrete with mix designations as shown on the plans for the specific items of work .
B. Reinforcement Bars B .
Steel Fabric C Forms Provide forms capable of withstanding pressure from concrete vibration and impact without distorting .
Set and maintain forms in a mortar tight condition free of warp and on a rigid foundation .
If evidence of mortar leakage is apparent after a pour take corrective action to prevent the leakage from recurring .
Provide joints in the sectional forms without offset .
Set forms to create dimensions of the precast unit as shown on the plans .
Repair or replace forms not meeting the dimensions shown on the plans before casting additional sections .
When recesses around lifting devices are required use forming devices provided by the lifting device manufacturer .
Clean forms before use .
Treat the face of the forms in contact with the concrete with form coating material in accordance with Form Coating Material before setting the forms .
D Concrete Curing D. General Begin curing operations immediately after concrete placement .
Continue curing until reaching at least of design strength or as required by the plan or special provisions .
D. Curing Methods Use any of the following to cure the precast items Covering of burlap or canvas kept continuously wet Continuous water spray or mist Complete airtight seal using plastic curing blankets or The moist air or steam method of curing in accordance with .D .
Steam Curing which will be considered to include any methods using an external heat source .
D. Steam Curing For box culvert and reinforced concrete pipe production delay the introduction of steam into the curing enclosure for curing purposes until the concrete has taken its initial set and at least h after placing the concrete .
During the delay period maintain a temperature within the curing chamber of at least F C. During the delay period the temperature inside the curing chamber may be increased from the concrete temperature at the time of placement up to F per hour to no higher than F. Only use steam to maintain the curing enclosure temperature within these limits .
For bridge girder production delay the introduction of steam into the curing enclosure for curing purposes until the concrete has taken its initial set and at least h after placing the concrete .
During the delay period maintain a temperature within the curing chamber of at least F and no greater than F higher than the temperature of the concrete at the time of placement .
Use steam only to maintain the curing enclosure temperature within the limits .
For all products do not allow steam jets to impinge directly on the concrete or on the forms .
Do not allow the rate of rise in temperature adjacent to the concrete to rise at rates greater than F per hour F for concrete pipe and other products not specifically mentioned here .
Provide free circulation around the top sides and ends of the concrete units .
Do not allow the temperatures adjacent to the concrete greater than F. Use saturated steam within the curing enclosure .
Maintain a temperature in the concrete unit of at least F during the curing period .
For bridge items do not allow a difference in temperature adjacent to the concrete within the enclosure to be greater than F. After the expiration of the steam curing period reduce the temperature inside the chamber at a rate no greater than F per hour until the temperature inside and outside of the chamber equalize .
After removing items from the chamber protect the items to avoid cooling at a rate greater than F per hour until reaching the air temperature at the storage site .
If removing forms before the completion of the steam curing cycle including temperature taper off process only remove and leave uncovered the minimum area of the curing enclosure at any one time needed to remove each individual form section .
Close the open area in the enclosure immediately upon removing each form section or within min of first uncovering the area. . Minnesota Standard Specifications When removing the precast items from the casting bed during the coolingoff process take appropriate measures to keep the items warm during the moving operations and immediately resume the coolingoff process at the storage area .
When control cylinders are cured in a chamber separate from the pieces represented maintain the cylinder chamber at the same temperature as or no more than F higher than the curing chamber for the precast items represented at all times during the curing period .
Provide a continuous recording thermometer for each curing enclosure that has an individual temperature control at least of the curing chambers for box culvert production and at least one per ft for bridge girders .
Variances from these requirements may be allowed with approval of the Materials Engineer .
Locate thermometers in each curing enclosure as approved by the Materials Engineer .
Submit complete temperature recording charts for all recording devices to the Materials Engineer upon request .
Discontinue steam curing and use one of the other approved curing methods if the records indicate noncompliance with temperature and time element specifications for steam curing. . PLANT QUALITY CONTROL The Materials Engineer will approve each precast concrete manufacturer and its individual plants to provide precast concrete products .
The Materials Engineer will withdraw authorization or will not authorize precast concrete production if the manufacturer fails to abide by the terms conditions and requirements contained in this specification .
If the Materials Engineer finds manufacturer noncompliance with the specification or evidence of nonconformance of precast products the Engineer may perform the following Reject the individual product Reject the questioned shipment Reject the identified days production or Revoke preapproval privileges for the product or product class if applicable .
A Plant QC Ensure the manufacturer establishes and implements a QC program including the following elements for each plant A .
Internal QC Program Ensure the manufacturer includes the following in the internal QC program Sampling and testing of component materials according to the Schedule of Materials Control or documentation of acceptability if materials were previously inspected and tested or received from a certified source Inspection of product manufacturing including the following .
Reinforcing steel fabrication and placement .
Concrete mix design and proportioning .
Concrete placement and consolidation and .
Concrete curing .
Testing of finished products including strength of concrete cylinders .
Maintenance and calibration of plant facilities and equipment .
A. OnSite Quality Control Technicians Ensure the manufacturer employs and has onsite during production a QC technician trained and certified meeting the requirements of MnDOT Concrete Plant and either MnDOT Concrete Field or ACI Concrete Field to perform the following Ensure the conformance of all products to the requirements Maintain knowledge of the following .
Plans and specification requirements .
Product manufacturing operations and .
Significance of the specification requirements in producing quality products .
Correct stop or both operations causing nonconforming attributes Reject products not meeting the contract requirements Ensure the manufacturer meets requirements related to producing preapproved products and Contact the Departments inspector before making repairs .
A .
System of Record Keeping Ensure the manufacturer maintains the following records Component material sources and passing quality test results authorized certification or other evidence of inspection and satisfactory testing Test results covering product manufacture and the finished product Records of manufactured products in accordance with the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Date .
Size .
Class .
Equipment calibration reports and Concrete batch records .
B Quality Assurance The Materials Engineer may visit each plant to perform tasks in accordance with this specification and including the following Random sampling and testing of the materials used in the manufacture of precast products Random sampling and testing of the items produced Observing the manufacturing process Reviewing the manufacturers quality control tests inspection records and stockpiling practices and Reviewing the completed product inventory .
The Engineer will perform a final inspection upon delivery to the project site .
C Testing Rates C. Concrete Ensure the manufacturer tests the slumpspread of concrete in each mix at least once per cubic yards for each positive slump mix .
Ensure the manufacturer tests the concrete strength of each mix meeting the requirements of Cylinder and Core Guidelines for Precast Pipe and Box Culvert kept on file by the Materials Engineer .
C. Notify the Materials Engineer full business days before threeedge bearing testing shipping strength testing or other acceptance testing or full business day if inspectors are present on a daily basis .
The Materials Engineer may select items or cylinders for testing and may direct the manufacturer to perform additional testing at no additional cost to the Department .
Maintain documentation of all strength tests performed including a signed printed report from the cylinder testing machine that includes the following information Unique identification of the original pour such as pour number or date time of the pour Unique cylinder ID Date and time of the test and Breaking strength .
D Shipping Do not ship items that have not developed the specified compressive strength .
THERMOPLASTIC PIPE .
SCOPE Provide thermoplastic TP pipe and fittings for use as pipe sewers or subsurface drains . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide thermoplastic pipe and fittings meeting the requirements of one of the following AASHTO M Class PS Polyvinyl Chloride PVC Pipe perforated and unperforated ASTM D Type PSM PVC Sewer Pipe SDR unperforated only ASTM F SmoothWall PVC Type PS perforated and unperforated or ASTM F PVC Corrugated Sewer Pipe perforated and unperforated .
If perforated pipe is specified provide pipe with perforations in accordance with the applicable specification .
Unless otherwise specified in the applicable specifications plans or special provisions the Contractor may choose the joint type. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each pipe shipment .
CORRUGATED POLYETHYLENE PIPE .
SCOPE Provide corrugated polyethylene CP dualwall pipe for use as culverts or pipe sewers . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide corrugated polyethylene CP dualwall pipe with couplings and fittings meeting the requirements of the following AASHTO M Type S pipe and Section of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
Provide corrugated polyethylene CP pipe with watertight joints that meet a . psi laboratory test per ASTM D and utilize a bell and spigot design with a gasket meeting ASTM F. Provide corrugated polyethylene CP pipe and fittings manufactured from highdensity polyethylene HDPE virgin compounds .
May use clean reworked polyethylene materials from the manufacturers own production if the pipe and fittings produced meet the requirements of this section .
Submit a laboratory certification that the pipe connection for each size pipe meets or exceeds the requirements in this section .
Submit the shop drawings of each pipe coupler provided by the pipe manufacturer and any additional mechanical connections required by the plans .
Store and handle corrugated polyethylene CP pipe as recommended by the manufacturer .
Provide pipe manufactured no more than six months prior to installation .
Do not use damaged pipe. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Approved manufacturers of corrugated polyethylene CP are listed on the Approved Products List .
Corrugated High Density Polyethylene HDPE pipe manufacturing facilities are required to participate and be in compliance with AASHTOs National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP for producers of AASHTO M HDPE plastic pipe .
If a plant has a compliant NTPEP audit for AASHTO M pipe at the time the pipe is manufactured then the plant has met requirements .
Compliant plants are listed on the NTPEP website and can also be accessed through the Approved Products List .
Submit a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each pipe shipment including date manufactured .
POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PIPE .
SCOPE Provide polyvinyl chloride PVC pipe for use as culverts or pipe sewers . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide PVC pipe with couplings and fittings meeting the requirements of the following AASHTO M and ASTM F and Section of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
Provide polyvinyl chloride PVC pipe with a watertight seal that shows no sign of leakage when tested in accordance with ASTM D . Elastomeric seals gaskets used for joining pipes must meet ASTM F . Submit a laboratory certification that the pipe connection for each size pipe meets or exceeds the requirements in this section .
Submit the shop drawings of each pipe coupler provided by the pipe manufacturer and any additional mechanical connections as required by the plans .
Provide polyvinyl chloride PVC pipe and fittings manufactured from virgin PVC compounds .
May use clean reworked PVC materials from the manufacturers own production if the pipe and fittings meet the requirements of this section. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Store and handle corrugated polyvinyl chloride PVC pipe as recommended by the manufacturer .
Provide polyvinyl chloride PVC pipe manufactured no more than six months prior to installation .
Do not use damaged pipe. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Approved manufacturers of polyvinyl chloride PVC are listed on the Approved Products List .
Polyvinyl chloride PVC pipe manufacturing facilities are required to participate and be in compliance with AASHTOs National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP for producers of AASHTO M PVC pipe .
If a plant has a compliant NTPEP audit for AASHTO M PVC pipe at the time the pipe is manufactured then the plant has met requirements .
Compliant plants are listed on the NTPEP website and can also be accessed through the Approved Products List .
Submit a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each pipe shipment including date manufactured .
POLYETHYLENE LINER .
SCOPE Provide polyethylene liner for use in lining pipes . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide polyethylene liner meeting one of the following requirements Polyethylene PE pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM F DR . or Closedprofile PE pipe with an ASTM D cell classification of C or Polyethylene PE pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM F with a minimum ring stiffness of or at deflection when tested in accordance with ASTM D. Store and handle liner as recommended by the manufacturer .
Do not expose liner to direct UV radiation or sunlight for a total time greater than six months after fabrication .
Do not use damaged liner. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each liner shipment .
CAST IRON SOIL PIPE .
SCOPE Provide cast iron soil pipe and fittings for use in gravity flow plumbing drain waste and vent sanitary and storm water applications . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide cast iron soil pipe and fittings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for the class shown on the plans or special provisions. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK Subsurface Drainage Units CORRUGATED POLYETHYLENE DRAINAGE TUBING .
SCOPE Provide corrugated polyethylene PE tubing and fittings . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide corrugated polyethylene PE tubing and fittings meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each tubing shipment .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Metals and Metal Products REINFORCEMENT BARS .
SCOPE Provide deformed and plain reinforcing steel for use as reinforcement in concrete construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide reinforcement bars other than wire meeting the requirements of the following AASHTO specifications for the size type and grade as shown on the plans or as required by the contract Table AASHTO Specifications Per Bar Type Reinforcement Bars AASHTO Specification Requirement Billet steel bars AASHTO M Rail steel bars AASHTO M MAASHTO M Axle steel bars AASHTO M MAASHTO M If the plans or specifications do not specify the type or grade of reinforcement bars provide Grade Grade of any type except as modified by the following Provide deformed billet steel reinforcement bars for use in a concrete bridges including precast units box culverts and retaining walls .
Provide deformed reinforcement bars of any type or grade for use in all other concrete structures and If required or allowed by the contract weld bars meeting the requirements of ASTM A and having a yield point of at least psi MPa .
If required in the plans provide epoxy coated reinforcement bars meeting the requirements of ASTM A .
Apply the coating in a fusion bonded epoxy coating plant certified by the CRSI .
Ensure the plants quality control office maintains documentation required by CRSI certification including test data and measurements taken at times and locations as directed by the Materials Engineer .
Fabricate store and place reinforcement in accordance Metal Reinforcement. . SAMPLING and TESTING Sample and test reinforcement bars in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
If the Materials Engineer determines that the fusion bonded epoxy coating plant is not following approved coating procedures correct the process and repair or replace the unacceptable material as directed by the Materials Engineer .
DOWEL BARS .
SCOPE Provide dowel bars for use in portland cement concrete pavements and other concrete applications as shown on the plans . .
REQUIREMENTS A Epoxy Coated Steel Dowel Bars Provide Grade or Grade steel dowel bars meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Epoxy coat the steel dowel bars in accordance with AASHTO M and as modified Apply mils epoxy coating thickness .
Epoxy coat the ends of the dowel bars as required by the manufacturer .
Apply epoxy coating in a fusion bonded epoxy coating plant certified by the CRSI or another organization approved by the Materials Engineer .
If cutting dowel bars to length by shearing immediately repair all damaged coating and verify dowel bars have not exceeded the maximum deformation limits .
Ensure that sheared dowel bars are not more than .
in out of round and that such damage does not extend more than .
in from the end of the bar .
B Alternate Dowel Bars Use alternate dowel bar materials as allowed or required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Certification of Dowel Bars Ensure the manufacturers plant quality control office maintains documentation containing the data required by certification including test data and measurements taken at times and locations as required by the CRSI the Materials Engineer or both .
D Storage and Protection of Dowel Bars Do not store dowel bars in a manner that will cause induce or accelerate corrosion or contamination of the metal at any time .
Locate timbers dunnage on the ground to support the bundles and keep them free of contamination .
Protect coated dowel bars before handling or shipping to prevent damage to the coating .
Pad bundling bands and lift bundles using an OSHAapproved spreader bar multiple supports or platform bridge to prevent bar to bar abrasion from sags in the bar bundle .
Do not drag or drop bars or bundles .
Support bars or bundles in transit to prevent damage to the coating .
Store materials at the project site to allow the Engineer to visually inspect and check the various types of reinforcement for conformance to the dimensions as shown on the plans .
Store bars of the same type together .
Identify dowel bars with tags bearing the identification symbols as shown on the plans .
If the epoxycoated steel is incorporated into the Project and is exposed to the weather or stored exposed to the weather for more than calendar days cover the steel to protect the material from sunlight saltspray and weather exposure .
Provide for air circulation around the covered steel to minimize condensation under the protective covering. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test dowel bars in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
STEEL FABRIC .
SCOPE Provide steel fabric for use as concrete reinforcement . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide steel fabric for concrete reinforcement meeting the requirements of ASTM A for plain or deformed wire except the Contractor may use oversized wire .
If the Contractor uses oversize wire the maximum and minimum diameter requirements will not apply .
Provide flat sheets or rolls of fabric .
Unless otherwise allowed by the specification allowable steel areas will be based on Grade for smooth wire and Grade for deformed wire. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test the steel fabric in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
SPIRAL REINFORCEMENT .
SCOPE Provide steel wire for use as spiral cage reinforcement for round columns . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide cold drawn steel wire to fabricate spiral cage reinforcement for round columns meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the size shown on the plans .
Alternatively the Contractor may use plain or deformed Grade billet steel bars in accordance with Reinforcement Bars .
When required to splice spiral reinforcement by welding perform welding in accordance with the requirements of ANSIAWS D. Structural Welding Code Reinforcing Steel. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test in accordance with the requirements of Reinforcement Bars .
LOWCARBON STRUCTURAL STEEL .
SCOPE Provide carbon steel shapes plates bars sheets and strips . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide lowcarbon structural steel meeting the requirements of ASTM the tensile requirements in and General Requirements for Structural Steel .
Provide steel shapes plates and bars meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide steel sheets and strips meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade Type . . SAMPLING AND TESTING Perform tensile tests for all sizes of shapes and bars in accordance with the Schedule for Materials Control .
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STRUCTURAL STEEL .
SCOPE Provide steel for structural applications referenced in Structural Metals . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide steel for structural applications meeting the requirements of ASTM A and the following B Quality Submit a Nonconformance Report NCR to the Engineer for review and approval before performing any weld repairs of the base metal .
Correct injurious defects e.g .
pipes seams unapproved repairs laminations cracks segregations and perform necessary testing to determine the extent of the defects or confirm the adequacy of repairs as required by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will reject plates or rolled beams with defects that reduce the thickness of the material in any given section by greater than percent. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Tensile Test Take tensile specimens for rolled beams from the midthickness of the flange and oriented longitudinally to the rolling direction .
Note the location and orientation of tensile specimens on the mill test report .
B Impact Tests Perform impact tests for structural steel provided for use in major structural components as defined in .. A .. b Major Structural Components or the contract .
The Department will not require impact testing for minor structural components unless otherwise required by the contract Ensure that impact tested structural steel meets the requirements of ASTM A for zone welded material .
HIGHSTRENGTH LOWALLOY STRUCTURAL STEEL .
SCOPE Provide highstrength lowalloy structural steel shapes plates bars sheets and strips . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide highstrength lowalloy shapes plates and bars meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade W and General Requirements for Structural Steel .
Provide highstrength lowalloy sheet and strip meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Type hot rolled material and General Requirements for Structural Steel except ensure the yield strength is at least psi .
If the contract does not specify the type of steel provide any material type listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
For unpainted structures provide all steel material of the same type. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK HIGHSTRENGTH LOWALLOY COLUMBIUMVANADIUM STEEL .
SCOPE Provide highstrength low alloy columbiumvanadium steel shapes plates bars sheets and strips. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Provide shapes plates and bars for highstrength lowalloy columbiumvanadium steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade and General Requirements for Structural Steel .
Provide sheet and strip for highstrength lowalloy columbiumvanadium steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade Class and General Requirements for Structural Steel. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK STAINLESS STEEL .
SCOPE Provide stainless steel plates sheet and strip . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide stainless steel plates sheet and strip meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Type or Type .
For the finish use a No .
polish except on sheet and strip used in bearing and modular expansion joint assemblies use a No .
polish .
Provide stainless steel bars meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Type or Type Condition A annealed .
Provide pin stock in accordance with the requirements for Type IV in ColdFinished Bar Steel .
For free machining applications such as bolt stock provide stainless steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A Type Condition A cold finished unless otherwise required by the contract .
Provide bolt stock in accordance with .. E Stainless Steel Bolts .
Descale and clean stainless steel surfaces in accordance with ASTM A .
If welding use stainless steel with a carbon content no greater than .
percent. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK HOT ROLLED BAR STEEL .
SCOPE Provide rounds squares hexagons or flats for hot rolled bar steel of the following types as required by the contract .
REQUIREMENTS A Type I Carbon Bar Steel Provide carbon bar steel with the following characteristics A minimum yield strength of psi A minimum ultimate strength of psi and A minimum elongation of percent in inches .
Use ASTM A Practice for Steel Bars Selection Guide Composition and Mechanical Properties to select the material specifications and grade in accordance with the section and mechanical properties .
Procure steel in accordance with the relevant procurement specifications .
B Type II Alloy Bar Steel Provide alloy bar steel with the following characteristics A minimum yield strength of psi A minimum ultimate strength of psi and A minimum elongation of percent in inches .
Use ASTM A Practice for Steel Bars Selection Guide Composition and Mechanical Properties to select the material specifications and grade in accordance with the section and mechanical properties .
Procure steel in accordance with the relevant procurement specifications .
C Type III HeatTreated Alloy Bar Steel Round Provide heattreated alloy bar round steel in accordance with ASTM A with mechanical properties meeting the requirements for Class BC. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Type IV Corrosion Resisting Cold Finished Rounds Provide coldfinished hotrolled stainless steel bars for bridge pins finished to size in a fabrication shop .
Manufacture bars for bridge pins from a base material that is annealed and hotfinished free machining Type as specified in ASTM A .
After turning ensure the size does not exceed a pin diameter of ½ inches. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK COLDFINISHED BAR STEEL .
SCOPE Provide rounds squares hexagons or flats as required by the contract . .
REQUIREMENTS A Type I Carbon Bar Steel Provide coldfinished carbon bar steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade C and the following strength requirements unless the contract requires otherwise For rounds with a diameter no greater than ⅞ inches and hexagons and squares with a maximum dimension across flats no greater than inches .
A minimum yield strength of psi .
A minimum ultimate strength of psi and .
A minimum elongation of percent in inches .
For rounds with a diameter greater than ⅞ inches and flats hexagons and squares with a maximum dimension across flats greater than inches .
A minimum yield strength of psi .
A minimum ultimate strength of psi and .
A minimum elongation of percent in inches .
B Type II Alloy Bar Steel Provide coldfinished alloy bar steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A for the corresponding annealed and coldfinished Grade AISI or Grade AISI and the following strength requirements unless the contract requires otherwise For rounds with a diameter no greater than inches and hexagons and squares with a maximum dimension across the flats no greater than inches .
A minimum yield strength of psi .
A minimum ultimate strength of psi and .
A minimum elongation of percent in inches .
For rounds with a diameter greater than inches and hexagons squares and flats with a maximum dimension across the flats greater than inches .
A minimum yield strength of psi .
A minimum ultimate strength of psi and .
A minimum elongation of percent in inches .
C Type III PreHeat Treated Alloy Bar Steel Rounds Provide coldfinished preheat treated alloy bar steel with the following characteristics Base material meeting the requirements of ASTM A for corresponding Grade AISI or Grade AISI .
Stock that is preheat treated by quenching and tempering to meet the physical properties specified in Table and is in a machinable condition .
D Type IV Corrosion Resisting Cold Finished Rounds Provide coldfinished stainless steel rounds for use as bridge pins meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Type annealed and centerless ground .
Ensure the pin diameter does not exceed ½ inches. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK STEEL FORGINGS .
SCOPE Provide material for steel forgings. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS A Material Requirements Provide material for steel forgings meeting the requirements for one of the three types of steel specified in this section as required by the contract .
If the contract does not specify a steel type provide Type I .
A .
Type I Carbon Steel Forgings Provide carbon steel forgings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Class D forged from blooms billets bars or slabs meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade C or Grade C . A .
Type II Alloy Steel Forgings Provide alloy steel forgings for sizes no greater than inches thick or in diameter meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Class G. Provide alloy steel forgings for sizes greater than inches thick or in diameter meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Class H. Provide alloy steel forgings made from alloy steel blooms billets bars or slabs meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade Grade or Grade .
A .
Type III Corrosion Resisting Steel Forgings Provide corrosion resisting steel forgings made from billets or bars primarily produced for reforging in accordance with ASTM A for Type .
Provide steel forgings meeting the physical and chemical requirements for hotrolled materials as specified in ASTM A .
Provide Type material that is fully annealed to develop maximum corrosion resisting properties .
Workmanship appearance and finish must conform to ASTM A .
B Machine Finishing Machine steel forgings after the annealing process is complete .
Finish forgings in accordance with Structural Metals .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans or required by the contract bore a inch round hole longitudinally through the center of each type of forged steel pin roller measuring over inch in diameter. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Ensure the supplier performs the following physical and chemical tests required by the ASTM Specifications for Type I Type II and Type III material Perform magnetic particle tests on Type I forgings in accordance with ASTM E. Perform magnetic particle tests on Type II forgings in accordance with ASTM A .
Perform ultrasonic tests on Type III forgings in accordance with ASTM A .
Ensure the supplier performs magnetic particle testing after machining operations are complete .
The Engineer will reject material with serious defects such as bursts cracks pipes internal cracks and flakes or laminations .
Submit to the Engineer certified test reports for physical chemical magnetic particle and ultrasonic tests from the supplier .
HIGH PERFORMANCE STEEL Y.S .
KSI .
SCOPE Provide highstrength lowalloy structural steel shapes plates and bars to enhance atmospheric corrosion resistance weldability and mechanical properties . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide material for highperformance steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade HPS W and General Requirements for Structural Steel .
Provide Grade HPS W highperformance steel with a minimum specified yield strength of ksi. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK Minnesota Standard Specifications HIGH PERFORMANCE STEEL Y.S .
KSI .
SCOPE Provide highstrength lowalloy structural steel shapes plates and bars to enhance atmospheric corrosion resistance weldability and mechanical properties . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide materials for highperformance steel meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade HPS W and General Requirements for Structural Steel .
Provide highperformance steel Grade HPS W with a minimum specified yield strength of ksi. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK GRAY IRON CASTINGS .
SCOPE Provide gray iron castings for drainage or structural use .
The castings are classified according to tensile strength but the Department will make provisions for acceptance of drainage castings and other ornamental or nonstress bearing castings on the basis of flexural tests . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide gray iron castings meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the class required by the contract .
Obtain the castings from foundries approved by the Materials Engineer in accordance with these specifications .
A Class Designation If the contract does not specify a strength class provide castings in accordance with the following Provide Class C or better for stress bearing castings such as bridge rockers bolsters and sliding shoes or Provide Class B or better for bridge rail posts light standard bases drainage and manhole castings and other castings subject to vehicle impact or vehicle loading .
B Special Requirements Provide drainage castings of metal with a Brinell hardness number from to .
Provide round casting assemblies with lidtoframe surfaces machinemilled to provide true bearing around the entire circumference .
C Foundry Control Before beginning casting the manufacturer and the Engineer will establish in conference a control procedure for correlating casting operations arranging for foundry inspection and establishing an approved identification system .
Unless the Engineer otherwise agrees the manufacturer will identify castings as follows With a mark correlating the casting with test bars using a system of heat numbers or a calendar date and tap number using numerals no greater than ½ inch With a mark indicating the source of manufacture using a symbol no greater than ½ inches in the largest dimension or a letter no greater than ¾ inch high and inches long With the Departments type or style number shown on the plans in the size and location indicated .
Form these identification marks on castings of sufficient size during manufacture .
If the casting size is insufficient for the marks use stamped metal tags wired to the castings for markings not formed in the castings .
Place identification marks subject to approval by the Engineer where they will not interfere with assembly of parts and will not be removed during machine finishing operations .
Ensure the manufacturer does not place its name on castings except as specified above .
D Casting Details Provide castings meeting the dimensions shown on the plans .
Provide draft by increasing the net dimensions .
Provide castings within a tolerance of ⅛ inch for the overall general dimensions .
Limit the tolerance in dimensions of grates and covers for drainage casting assemblies and the openings into which they fit to inch .
In no case is the metal thickness to be less than inch less than the thickness shown on the plans .
Provide castings with a density of at least percent of the theoretical density of that type based on lbcu .
ft cast to the exact dimensions shown on the plans .
Pour castings in closed molds with gating feeders risers and sprues .
Ensure castings completely fill the molds .
Do not remove castings from the molds until properly cooled .
Do not chill the castings. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Boldly fillet castings on the inside and reentrant corners .
Round the outside corners and edges to a radius of at least ⅛ inch .
For bridge bearings use a ½ inch fillet except where the fillet may interfere with assembly .
E Workmanship and Finish Remove attachments of gates risers and sprues from the castings and grind remaining extensions flush to the casting surface .
The Engineer will reject castings damaged through careless removal of attachments .
Do not repair by welding .
Fabricate castings free of sponginess cracks blow holes warping sand inclusions cold shuts chilled iron shrinks and other defects that affect the strength and value of the casting for the purpose intended .
Ensure the contact surfaces between different castings in an assembly provide a firm even bearing without rattling or rocking .
Clean castings of foundry sand rust scale and other deleterious material. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Ensure the manufacturer casts the required number of test bars as stated below and machine finishes tension test specimens to the dimensions required in the Schedule for Materials Control .
Unless otherwise approved by the Engineer the manufacturer will deliver test specimens to the Materials Laboratory for testing .
Cast three test bars for each heat or tap .
If adding alloys in the ladle cast three test bars for each ladle .
For continuous furnace pouring cast two test bars at the beginning and two test bars at the end of cast .
For bridge bearing castings cast at least one test bar for each casting .
Pour castings and test bars in the presence of the Engineer unless the test bars are cast as an integral part of the bearing castings .
Identify each test bar separately and to the corresponding castings using symbols letters or numbers cast on the test bar and casting .
If properly identifying castings and corresponding test bars is not possible the Engineer may require test specimens to be cut from selected castings that are representative of a lot and perform tests on those samples .
CARBON STEEL CASTINGS .
SCOPE Provide mild to medium strength carbon steel castings for general applications requiring a tensile strength of no more than psi . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide carbon steel castings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for the grade required by the contract and this section .
A Grade Designations If the contract does not specify a strength grade provide castings in accordance with the requirements for ASTM A Grade .
Supply castings in a normalized or normalized and tempered condition .
B Casting Details Provide casting patterns that will produce a finished casting with the dimensions and details shown on the plans .
Provide draft by increasing the net dimensions without reducing the metal thickness as required by the contract .
Boldly fillet sharp angles .
Provide fillets of a size that does not reduce the clearance required by the contract .
Round external corners on castings except ornamental types to a radius of inch .
Make allowance for shrinkage and provide enough material on surfaces requiring a finish to produce castings of the specified size and shape after the completion of finishing operations as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will not allow split cores between unfinished surfaces of restricted clearance .
Provide face cores of one piece unless castings require machine finishing .
Provide chaplets spaced and in numbers to prevent the chaplets from impairing the strength of the casting .
Provide chaplets that are completely fused .
Fabricate castings using methods that will ensure corners arises and edges are completely filled .
For castings with one machine surface cast with the machine surface down .
Do not use metal from different melts in the same casting .
Do not withdraw castings from the mold until properly cooled .
Do not quench castings to speed up cooling. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Workmanship and Finish The Engineer will reject castings with structural defects in a casting including blow hole shrink pipes sand hole cracks checks slag inclusions cold shuts unfilled arises warped surfaces or deformation from core or flask movement .
Do not repair castings with minor defects until the Engineer provides permission and approves the repair method .
Grind extensions high spots and rough edges resulting from pouring connections smooth and flush with the casting surface .
Clean castings of foundry sand rust scale and other deleterious material before painting galvanizing or metalizing as required by the contract .
Clean paint galvanize and metalize castings in accordance with Structural Metals. . SAMPLING AND TESTING If the Engineer suspects the soundness of a casting the Engineer has the right to subject castings to radiographic or magnetic particle inspection at no additional cost to the Department .
A Test Specimens Attach test coupons using the preferred method of a keel block but do not make attachments that may structurally weaken the casting .
Cast two test coupons integrally for each casting greater than lb .
Provide two test coupons for each casting heat less than lb and cast the test coupons as ribs integrally and below a special block no less than inches inches inches .
B Foundry Control Identify castings with embossed markings indicating the heat from which the casting was poured together with the bridge and piece numbers .
Die mark the same information on the representative test coupons .
Mark test coupons and castings for each heat .
Do not remove coupons until after the castings are heattreated .
The Engineer will reject castings without proper identification unless the inspector can identify corresponding test coupons by matching fractures .
ALLOY STEEL CASTINGS .
SCOPE Provide alloy steel castings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade CA and this section . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide alloy steel castings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade CA and this section .
Provide castings in a normalized or normalized and tempered condition .
Ensure that the reduction of area is at least percent. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide test specimens foundry control casting details workmanship and finish and inspection and testing in accordance with .. B Casting Details .. C Workmanship and Finish .. A Test Specimens and .. B Foundry Control except cast two test coupons integrally with each casting regardless of mass .
MALLEABLE IRON CASTINGS .
SCOPE Provide malleable iron castings . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide malleable iron castings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for the grade required by the contract and this section .
For galvanized castings heat treat to meet the requirements for the specified grade .
Galvanize in accordance with ASTM A. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK WROUGHT BRONZE PLATES .
SCOPE Provide wrought bronze plates. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Provide wrought bronze plates that are coldfinished and meet the requirements of ASTM B for Alloy C or Alloy C or ASTM B for Alloy C. For plates fabricated in accordance with ASTM B meet the following hardness requirements Table Wrought Bronze Plates Plate Thickness inch Hardness Brinell Rockwell by Conversion ½ B ½ B .
SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK BRONZE CASTINGS TYPE .
SCOPE Provide Type bronze castings for nameplates and other castings . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide Type bronze castings meeting the requirements of ASTM B Alloy C. Use this lowstrength copper alloy for nameplates and other castings with light detail allowing lightly filleted corners and a natural patina. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK BRONZE CASTINGS TYPE .
SCOPE Provide Type bronze castings for bridge bearing plates medium pressure bearing sleeves and bright ornamental castings and other items having light details . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide Type bronze castings meeting the requirements of ASTM B Alloy C or ASTM B Alloy C subject to the following Modify the chemical composition of Alloy C to allow a maximum manganese content of .
percent and Unless the plans specify one alloy the Contractor may use either of the two alloys designated in this section .
Use Type bronze castings for bridge bearing plates medium pressure bearing sleeves bright ornamental castings and other items with light detail allowing medium filleted corners and slightly rounded arises and a medium bright finish. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK LUBRICATED BRONZE BEARING PLATES AND BUSHINGS .
SCOPE Provide aluminum bronze bearing plates and manganese bronze bushings . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide aluminum bronze bearing plates meeting the requirements of ASTM B Alloy C or Alloy C or ASTM B Alloy C Temper M. Provide manganese bronze bushings meeting the requirements of ASTM B Alloy C or Alloy C. Provide bearing plates and bushings from standard production .
Provide bronze bearing plates and bushings with recesses completely filled with lubricating compound .
Form recesses by trepanning drilling or the shell molding process as shown on the plans but at least inch deep .
Ensure recesses have straight sides without grooves and do not intersect the edges of the parent plate or bushing .
Provide plates with recesses that are uniformly spaced in a geometric pattern over the area of the bearing with adjacent rows overlapping in the direction of motion. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide lubricating compound consisting of graphite metallic substances and a lubricant binder to form a dense non plastic lubricating insert capable of withstanding spalling and atmospheric elements .
Do not use shellac or other gummy materials as the lubricant binder .
Ensure the top surface of the bearing insert is flush with or slightly above the surface of the bearing plate or bushing .
For both bearing plates and bushings provide a lubricated area that comprises percent to percent of the total area .
If the plate or bushing manufacturer uses a bearing insert in the shape of a hollow cylinder ensure the net lubricated area is at least percent of the total area of the plate or bushing .
If the plans do not indicate which surfaces to lubricate provide inserts for surfaces that have provisions for movement other than flexural .
Provide bearing plates and bushings with contact surfaces with at least a µin finish .
Provide bearing plates that are true to detail flat surfaces truly flat and curved surfaces curved true to the radius with an allowable working tolerance of .
inches between male and female fittings .
Provide a minimum net section of ½ inch for the bronze .
Provide bushings with a wall thickness of at least ⅜ inch .
Provide the machine allowances for the I.D .
and O.D .
operating fit of bushings recommended by the manufacturer unless otherwise shown on the plans .
Ensure the bronze and steel portions of bearing plates and bushings are assembled in the fabricating shop and match marked or bonded together and shipped as a unit. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK SHEET BRASS .
SCOPE Provide sheet brass . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide sheet brass meeting the requirements of ASTM B Alloy C or Alloy C in H H or H temper. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK SHEET COPPER .
SCOPE Provide sheet copper . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide sheet copper meeting the requirements of ASTM B for any type of copper with a total copper and silver content at least .
percent and the following Provide a light coldrolled temper The Engineer will waive the requirements for resistivity and embrittlement tests and Ensure the copper sheet withstands the bend test by coldbending the sheet through an angle of flat upon itself without fractures on the outside of the bend portion. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK SHEET LEAD .
SCOPE Provide sheet lead prepared from pig lead . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide sheet lead prepared from pig lead meeting the requirements of ASTM B .
Provide sheets with a thickness within a tolerance of percent of the thickness required by the contract. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK .
Minnesota Standard Specifications WROUGHT AND EXTRUDED ALUMINUM .
SCOPE Provide aluminum alloy for specified applications . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide aluminum alloy products meeting relevant requirements of the ASTM specifications listed in this section .
Provide the alloy and temper for a specified application as required by the contract .
Provide sheet and plate products meeting the requirements of ASTM B for Alloy Alclad Alclad or Alclad .
Provide standard structural shapes rolled or extruded meeting the requirements of ASTM B B M for Alloy T. Provide pipe and tube products meeting the following requirements Drawn seamless tube in accordance with ASTM B for Alloy or Alloy Seamless pipe and seamless extruded tube in accordance with ASTM B for Alloy or Alloy and Extruded structural pipe in accordance with ASTM B for Alloy or Alloy .
Provide sand castings meeting the requirements of ASTM B for Alloy SGA or Alloy SB .
Provide permanent mold castings meeting the requirements of ASTM B for Alloy SGA Alloy SGB Alloy SB or Alloy SA .
Provide other miscellaneous aluminum products as shown on the plans or the special provisions. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK STAINLESS STEEL CLAD PLATE .
SCOPE Provide stainless steel clad plate . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide stainless steel clad plate meeting the requirements of ASTM A and this section .
Provide Type L stainless steel cladding .
Unless the contract requires otherwise provide a plate clad on one side with a nominal thickness of percent at least percent of the total plate thickness or no greater than ½ inch of cladding .
Provide cladding and base metal with a shear strength of at least psi when tested in accordance with ASTM A .
Provide the clad surface of the plate with a sand blasted and pickled finish or a blast cleaned and pickled finish .
Provide the plate in a heattreated condition .
Perform heat treatment so cladding develops maximum corrosionresistant properties. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK SEVENWIRE STRAND FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide one of two grades of sevenwire uncoated lowrelaxation steel strand for pretensioned and posttensioned prestressed concrete construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide steel strands meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade with an ultimate tensile strength of psi and ASTM A Grade with an ultimate tensile strength of psi based on the nominal area of the strand. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit two copies of the mill certificate two copies of the stressstrain curve representing the lot and steel strand samples to the Engineer .
Provide mill certifications with bond strength test results representative of the current years production showing that the manufacturing process produces strand with a bond strength of at least psi at a measured freeend slip no greater than inch .
Ensure an accredited independent testing laboratory performs or certifies bond strength tests .
Perform bond strength tests on an embedment length of inches in accordance with standard test procedures on file in the Departments Office of Materials .
Minnesota Standard Specifications SHEET STEEL PRODUCTS .
SCOPE Fabricate galvanized sheet steel products for erosion control or other uses including open metal flumes or gutters culvert headwalls or aprons antiseepage diaphragms erosion dams and cribbing . .
REQUIREMENTS The term metal unit refers to the products specified in this section .
A Materials Provide galvanized steel in the fabrication of metal units meeting the requirements of ASTM A except as modified for different coating classes .
If the plans or specifications specify a galvanized coating requirement other than oz per sq .
ft of sheet provide galvanized coating in accordance with ASTM A instead of ASTM A .
Provide the steel thickness shown on the plans .
Galvanize or sherardize rivets consisting of the same base metal as used for the sheets .
Unless the contract requires otherwise provide bolts nuts and washers of commercial grade and galvanized in accordance with ASTM A .
Provide other unspecified steel shapes plates bars and rods made of steel meeting the requirements of LowCarbon Structural Steel and galvanized in accordance with ASTM A .
B Fabrication Provide units fabricated to the shape and dimensions shown on the plans .
Avoid cracking or breaking the spelter coating on galvanized sheets .
Ensure fabricated units of the same nominal size and type are interchangeable .
Do not drill punch or drift to correct defects in manufacture .
Ensure the centers of rivets or bolt holes are at least twice the diameter of the holes from the edge of the metal .
Locate slots holes and lugs for accurate field assembly as shown on the plans .
Drive rivets cold and ensure the plates are drawn tightly together throughout the entire lap .
Provide rivets with full hemispherical heads or heads of a form acceptable to the Engineer .
Drive rivets without bending and completely fill the hole with driven rivets. . SAMPLING AND TESTING SIGNS DELINEATORS AND MARKERS .
SCOPE Provide fabricated traffic signs delineators and markers consisting of sign panels complete with border legend route markers and legend components as individual items .
The Department defines the term Legend as all letters numerals arrows and symbols that convey the message on signs . .
REQUIREMENTS Use traffic signs delineators and markers as specified in the MnDOT Standard Signs Manual and the MN MUTCD and in accordance with this section .
A Materials Fabricate signs delineators and markers in the colors meeting the FHWA Color Tolerance Charts unless otherwise specified in this section .
If using color tolerance charts determine color compliance by visual comparison with the appropriate chart .
A .
Base Material for Sign Panels Delineators and Markers Use sign base material with no warps or twists and flat so the finished sign delineator or marker will lay flat against the post or mounting structure .
A .. a Sheet Aluminum Provide sheet aluminum for sign panels delineators and markers meeting the requirements of ASTM BM for Alloy H or Alloy T. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide sheet aluminum thickness for single section sign panels delineators markers panel sections of multiple section signs and sign panels type overlay in accordance with the following Table Sheet Aluminum Thickness Length of Longest Side Thickness . . . . . .
Type Overlays . . Overlay Type _ . . A .. b Extruded Aluminum Bolted Type Provide extruded aluminum panels meeting the requirements of ASTM BM for Alloy T and in accordance with the following sizes and weights in wide and at least .
lb per ft of length and in wide and at least .
lb per ft of length .
Use aluminum alloy hardware as recommended by the manufacturer or stainless steel hardware to assemble the panel sections and to attach to the supports except use nylon insert stainless steel locknuts meeting the requirements of ASTM F Type for the nuts for post clip bolts .
A. Retroreflective Sheeting Provide retroreflective sheeting on the ApprovedQualified Products List for signs barricades reboundable drums cones and other traffic control devices as specified in this section .
Materials on this list meet the requirements of ASTM D and CFR Appendix to Subpart F. Some standard sheeting types have been modified to reflect MnDOT requirements .
A .. a Sign Sheeting Type III Provide Sign Sheeting Type III MC for traffic cones and Sign Sheeting Type III MT for tubular markers and yellow cylinder style delineators .
Additionally test to ensure the impact resistance of the material at F. A .. b Sign Sheeting Type IV Provide white and fluorescent orange Sign Sheeting Type IV for reboundable plastic drums and weighted channelizers .
Additionally test to ensure the impact resistance of the material at F. A .. c Sign Sheeting Type V Provide Sign Sheeting Type V for cylinder style delineators and tubular markers .
Additionally test to ensure the impact resistance of the material at F. A .. d Sign Sheeting Type VI Provide Sign Sheeting Type VI for temporary rollup signs .
A .. e Sign Sheeting Type VIII Provide white and fluorescent orange Sign Sheeting Type VIII for reboundable plastic drums weighted channelizers and white cylinder style delineators .
Additionally test to ensure the impact resistance of the material at F. A .. f Sign Sheeting Type IX Provide fluorescent orange Sign Sheeting Type IX for rigid substrate construction signs .
A .. g Sign Sheeting Type XI Provide Sign Sheeting Type XI for highway signing markers and delineators .
Provide fluorescent orange Sign Sheeting Type XI for rigid substrate construction signs .
Provide Sign Sheeting Type XI for work zone barricade sheeting .
A .
Warranty Requirements Ensure the sign sheeting materials are included on the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List at the time of letting .
Ensure the warranty provided by the sign sheeting materials manufacturer meets or exceeds the requirements in Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Reflective Sheeting Manufacturer Warranties Material Warranty Prismatic sign sheeting for permanent signs and white cylinder style delineators non fluorescent years total .
The first years covers percent full replacement of all material and labor costs associated with fabricating and installing the sign or device .
The final years covers percent of sheeting replacement .
Table Reflective Sheeting Manufacturer Warranties Material Warranty Fluorescent prismatic sign sheeting for permanent signs years total .
The first years covers percent full replacement of all material and labor costs associated with fabricating and installing the sign or device .
The final years covers percent of sheeting replacement .
Encapsulated lens sign sheeting for permanent signs and yellow cylinder style delineators years total .
The first years covers percent full replacement of all material and labor costs associated with fabricating and installing the sign or device .
The final years covers percent of sheeting replacement .
Encapsulated lens or prismatic sign sheeting for traffic cones Replacement of defective products .
Encapsulated lens or prismatic sign sheeting for tubular markers Replacement of defective products .
Prismatic sign sheeting for rigid Signs work zone use years covers percent sheeting replacement .
Prismatic sign sheeting for reboundable plastic drums and weighted channelizers Replacement of defective products .
Prismatic sign sheeting for work zone barricades Prorated warranty for years covers sheeting replacement .
Rollup Sign Sheeting work zone use Prorated warranty for years covers sheeting replacement .
Use inks and overlays that are part of the sign sheeting materials manufacturers integrated components system .
Ensure that the sign sheeting ink and overlay film manufacturers and finished sign provide warranties covering the loss of retroreflectivity loss of color cracking and other conditions that cause ineffectiveness in meeting the intended use .
Ensure the sheeting color meets the color specifications of ASTM D Table along with requirements of CFR Appendix to Subpart F during the warranty period .
Maintain retroreflectivity values during the warranty in accordance with the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Minimum Retroreflectivity Values Sign Sheeting Type Warranty Period years Minimum Allowable Retroreflection Total Daytime Luminance Factor Minimum Type III Type III Type III MC None Type III MT None Type IV Drums and Channelizers None Type VI Type VIII Cylinder Style Delineators Type VIII Cylinder Style Delineators Type VIII Fluorescent Orange None Type IX Type IX Type IX Fluorescent YellowGreen Type IX Fluorescent Yellow Type IX FO Fluorescent Orange Type XI Type XI Type XI Fluorescent Yellow Green Type XI FO Fluorescent Yellow Type XI FO Fluorescent Orange Type XI B Note Percentages are based on minimum original values meeting the requirements of ASTM D A. Transparent Overlay Film Ensure the transparent overlay film sign sheeting materials are included on the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List at the time of letting and ensure the warranty provided by the sign sheeting manufacturer meets the requirements of respective retroreflective sign sheeting material used in Table .
Use sign faces made of pigmented flexible weatherresistant plastic film free from streaks blisters wrinkles and other surface imperfections .
Use plastic film with a high gloss surface that if applied over a contrasting black and white surface can completely hide the colors and can be applied over embossed surfaces .
Apply the film to aluminum panels in .
Minnesota Standard Specifications accordance with the sign sheeting materials manufacturers recommendations .
Cure the film for h from F to F and ensure the film meets the following characteristics Film does not shrink more than in from the edge of a panel at F for h Film and adhesive do not separate at F for h Adhesion color and general appearance show no visible effects from immersion in distilled water for h and Film and adhesive do not delaminate at F after h. A. Legend Apply sign sheeting material to demountable shapes before they are applied to sign panel .
A .. a Direct Applied Legend Sign Sheeting Type XI .. A .. g A .. b Screen Processed Painted Legend Use a direct or reverse screening process to apply the painted legend to the face .
Use screen process paints approved by the sign sheeting materials manufacturer that will adhere to the retroreflective sheeting surface in accordance with sign sheeting materials manufacturers recommendations .
Digitally printed legend and border will not be accepted .
A .. c Transparent Overlay Film Legend Provide a legend consisting of shapes cut from transparent overlay film as specified in .. A. Transparent Overlay Film Sign Face .
Apply the transparent overlay film directly to the sign face .
A .
Fasteners A .. a Fasteners for Flat Sheet Sign Panel Sections Use solid grooved pin rivet fasteners consisting of a pin meeting the requirements of ASTM BM Alloy T and a collar meeting the requirements of ASTM BM Alloy TA to assemble sign panel sections .
The grooved pin shall provide a secure grip for the swaged collar .
Use brazier head pins except use counter sunk head pins or aluminum stainless steel nylon or vinyl plastic shim collars to eliminate interference with legend components or overlays .
A .. b Fasteners for Type Overlays Use aluminum alloy pullthrough rivet fasteners to attach Type Overlays .
Place nylon washers under fastener heads to protect the surface of the retroreflective sheeting .
B Fabrication B .
General Fabricate signs delineators and markers as shown on the plans and with details and alphabets contained in the MnDOT Standard Signs Manual and Federal Standard Highway Signs and Markings book .
Fabricate signs delineators and markers as recommended by the sign sheeting materials manufacturer and free of cracks wrinkles blisters and other blemishes .
Ensure that each sign is marked with a permanent fabrication sticker as specified in .. B ..
Ensure that sign materials are handled and signs are fabricated in accordance with directions and recommendations of the sign sheeting materials manufacturers and ensure that sign fabricators are certified by sign sheeting materials manufacturers .
B. BLANK B .
Design and Dimensions Fabricated finished signs delineators and markers must be in accordance with the designs dimensions and punching as shown on the plans or in the special provisions .
B .
Surface Treatment of Metal B .. a Aluminum Signs Clean and treat the metal in accordance with sign sheeting materials manufacturers recommendations before applying the sign face material .
Do not use chromate type chemical conversion treatment .
Apply cleaning or treatment chemicals or detergents as directed by the sign sheeting materials manufacturer .
Maintain laboratory facilities to test and control the concentration of the solutions used at the treatment plant .
Maintain a log of the concentration of treating solutions. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .. b Cleaning and Handling Before painting or applying reflectorizing material clean surfaces with detergents or cleaners that will not harm any surface treatment on the metal .
After treatment and cleaning use a device or clean canvas gloves to handle sign base material until after the application of sign face material .
B .
Applying Sign Face and Legend Sheeting Apply retroreflective sheeting transparent overlay film sign face and legend material as recommended by the sign sheeting materials manufacturer .
Do not splice retroreflective sign sheeting on panels with dimensions smaller than in in height and in in width .
If the retroreflective sign sheeting material is not available in this width use the widest width material available for that type .
Splice the retroreflective sign sheeting so that all sheeting joints are vertical .
Use the least number of seams possible .
Buttjoint gaps so that gap does not exceed in .
Match colors of adjacent sheets of retroreflective sign sheeting on sign panels so that there is no noticeable difference in color .
Do not splice transparent overlay film sign materials except on sign panels where the background changes color .
B .
Fabrication Stickers Provide and affix fabrication stickers to the backside of all Sign Panels Type A C and D sign panels and Sign Panel Overlay Type A sign panels .
Screen a fabrication sticker with the following information Sign fabricator company name and address The twelve months of the year in numeric order The last two digits of the current year and the following four years .
Indicate the month and year of fabrication of the sign panel on the sticker using one of the following methods Punchout the fabrication month and year of the sign panel on the completed sticker or Block out the month and year of fabrication on the screen before applying the black ink so that the month and year of fabrication will not be displayed .
Provide a fullsize mockup of the fabrication sticker measuring in ½ in with a black legend on a white reflectorized background to the Engineer for approval .
Affix the fabrication sticker to the backside of each new Type C singlepost installation and Type D sign panels in the lower right corner of the sign panel when facing the back of the sign panel .
For installations of two posts for Type C sign panels install the sticker at the bottom center of the sign panel .
Affix fabrication sticker to the backside of Type A sign panels in the lower right corner when facing the back of the sign panel .
Warning stickers as specified in .H .
are placed directly above the fabrication sticker .
C Packaging Before packaging allow signs to stand for at least h. Pack single panel signs in corrugated paper cartons or other containers to prevent the package from breaking and to protect the signs from damage during shipment .
Separate signs with coated paper that will not stick to the sign face material .
Package singlepanel signs in packages weighing no greater than lb and no thicker than ½ in .
The Department will not require packaging of multiplepanel signs unless shipped by public carrier .
Deliver multiplepanel signs without damage. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer may inspect sign fabrication and materials at the fabrication site at the sign sheeting materials manufacturers plant or at the project .
Notify the Engineer at least days before fabricating the signs .
The Engineer may send an inspector to the plant to inspect the raw materials or the fabrication .
If the inspector inspects the signs during fabrication the inspector will stamp each package of signs with the Department inspection mark or with the mark of its delegated representative .
Minnesota Standard Specifications PREFORMED PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE FOR PERMANENT TRAFFIC LANE DELINEATION AND LEGENDS .
SCOPE Provide white and yellow retroreflective pavement marking tape prefabricated for recessed traffic marking on bituminous and concrete pavements . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide pavement marking tape meeting the following requirements and characteristics Made of prefabricated retroreflective pliant polymer material Provides a cushioned resilient substrate that reduces bead crushing and loss Weather resistant Under traffic wear shows no appreciable fading in accordance with the color requirements in .. C Color lifting or shrinkage throughout the life of the marking Shows no significant tearing roll back or other signs of poor adhesion Underside of the pavement marking tape precoated with pressure sensitive adhesive and Protected during shipment and in storage .
Apply the preformed pavement marking tape as recommended by the manufacturer to provide a neat durable marking that will not flow or distort due to temperature if the pavement surface remains stable .
Use equipment and application methods specified by the manufacturer .
Uniformly distribute beads throughout the polymer with strongly bonded protruding surface beads .
B Retroreflectivity Provide preformed pavement marking material meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values using m geometry and meeting the testing procedures of ASTM E Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow Tape mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux C Color Provide preformed pavement marking tape meeting the following requirements White color no darker or yellower than of Federal Standard Number C Daytime color of yellow meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . Luminance Factor Cap Y meeting the requirements of ASTM D Table and Nighttime color of yellow meeting the following chromaticity limits as specified in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . D Tensile Stress Provide preformed pavement marking tape with a tensile stress of at least psi kPa at maximum load when tested in accordance with ASTM D . Test a sample in in .
in mm mm .
mm at a temperature from F to F C to C using a jaw speed of in mm per min .
E Elongation Provide preformed pavement marking tape with an elongation of at least percent at maximum load when tested in accordance with ASTM D . . Minnesota Standard Specifications F Skid Resistance Ensure the surface of the retroreflective pliant polymer provides a skid resistance value of at least British Pendulum Number BPN when tested in accordance with ASTM E . G Thickness G. Unpatterned Provide unpatterned retroreflective pavement marking tape at least .
in .
mm thick .
G. Patterned Provide patterned retroreflective pavement marking tape at least .
in .
mm thick at the thickest portion of the patterned crosssection and at least .
in .
mm thick at the thinnest portion of the crosssection. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit samples at least ft long of each color required to the Materials Laboratory .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance .
Mark the samples with the following information Name of manufacturer Place of manufacture Batch or lot number and Month and year of manufacture .
REMOVABLE PREFORMED PAVEMENT MARKING TAPE FOR TRAFFIC LANE DELINEATION AND LEGENDS .
SCOPE Provide white and yellow removable retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape for use as temporary traffic markings . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide removable retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List and meeting the following requirements and characteristics Precoated with a pressure sensitive adhesive Capable of adhering to asphalt concrete and portland cement concrete surfaces as recommended by the manufacturer without the use of heat solvents or other additional adhesive means and immediately ready for traffic after application Capable of performing for the duration of six nonwinter months Capable of being removed intact or in large pieces without the use of heat solvents grinding or blasting Reinforced by a nonmetallic medium to facilitate removal Provided in the widths and shapes required by the contract Available in preformed words and symbols meeting the requirements for the applicable shapes and sizes in accordance with the MN MUTCD Packaged in a way that the chemical composition is not altered or compromised and Meets all requirements in this specification for at least year after the date of purchase when stored in a cool dry indoor area .
B Color Provide white retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape no darker or yellower than of Federal Standard Number C. Provide yellow retroreflective preformed pavement marking tape meeting the following requirements Daytime color meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Luminance Factor Cap Y meeting the requirements of ASTM D Table and Nighttime color meeting the following chromaticity limits as specified in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . C Retroreflectivity Provide retroreflective preformed pavement marking material meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values using m geometry and meeting the testing procedures of ASTM E Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow Tape mcdm²lux mcdm²lux D Frictional Resistance Ensure the surface of the retroreflective pavement marking film provides a frictional resistance value of at least British Pendulum Number BPN when tested in accordance with ASTM E . E Thickness Provide retroreflective pavement marking film including beads at least mils thick. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit samples at least ft long of each color to be used .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance .
Clean the surface of the tape sample of dirt adhesive and asphalt .
Provide tape samples capable of being unrolled for the entire length on a surface for testing .
Mark the rolls of material with the following information Name of manufacturer Place of manufacture Batch or lot number and Month and year of manufacture .
PREFORMED THERMOPLASTIC PAVEMENT MARKING .
SCOPE Provide retroreflective thermoplastic pavement marking product prefabricated for recessed traffic marking on bituminous and concrete pavements . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide thermoplastic pavement marking product meeting the following requirements and characteristics Made of prefabricated retroreflective resilient thermoplastic material Contains glass beads uniformly distributed through the entire cross sectional area Does not require preheating unless used for the removal of moisture Capable of being affixed to bituminous or concrete pavement by heating Resistant to deterioration due to exposure to sunlight water salt and adverse weather conditions Under traffic wear shows no appreciable fading in accordance with the color requirements in .. C lifting or shrinkage throughout the life of the marking Capable of conforming to pavement contours breaks and faults through the action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures Possesses resealing characteristics such that it is capable of fusing with itself and previous thermoplastic markings when heated and Protected during shipment and in storage. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Retroreflectivity Provide preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material meeting the minimum initial pavement marking retroreflectivity values using m geometry and meeting the testing procedures of ASTM E Table Minimum Initial Pavement Marking Retroreflectivity White Yellow Thermoplastic mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux Thermoplastic enhanced skid resistance ESR mcdsq .
mlux mcdsq .
mlux C Color Provide preformed thermoplastic pavement marking material meeting the following requirements White color no darker or yellower than of Federal Standard Number C Daytime color of yellow meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . Luminance Factor Cap Y meeting the requirements of ASTM D Table of min for white and min for yellow and Nighttime color of yellow meeting the following chromaticity limits as specified in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . D Glass Beads Ensure intermixed glass beads provided in the preformed thermoplastic material meet the requirements of AASHTO M Type andor Type to meet the retroreflectivity requirements of section .B above and have a minimum of rounds .
E Skid Resistance Ensure the surface of the retroreflective preformed thermoplastic material provides a skid resistance value of at least British Pendulum Number BPN when tested in accordance with ASTM E . Ensure that the surface of preformed thermoplastic material with enhanced skid resistance ESR provides a skid resistance value of at least BPN .
F Thickness Provide retroreflective thermoplastic pavement marking material at least mils thick. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit a sample measuring at least x of precut legends or sheet of precut line material of each color used to the Materials Laboratory .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance .
Mark the samples with the following information Name of manufacturer Place of manufacture Batch or lot number and Month and year of manufacture .
STRUCTURAL STEEL TUBING .
SCOPE Provide steel tubing for structural use in trusses or bridge rails. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Provide steel tubing that conforms to the following requirements The ASTM requirements below and General Requirements for Structural Steel The requirements for Type A or the plans Either welded or seamless tubing for all applications and Easily weldable using conventional shop practices .
A Type A Cold formed Carbon Steel Tubing Provide Type A square or rectangular structural tubing meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade B .
B Type B Hot formed Carbon Steel Tubing Provide Type B square or rectangular structural tubing meeting the requirements of ASTM A .
C Type C High Strength Low Alloy Weathering Steel Tubing Provide Type C square or rectangular structural tubing meeting the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM A for Grade Ia Grade Ib or Grade II. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK STRUCTURAL STEEL PIPE .
SCOPE Provide steel pipe for structural use in railing . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide steel pipe for structural use meeting the requirements of ASTM A ASTM A seamless pipe ASTM A welded pipe or provide structural steel tubing meeting the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM A with the following modifications Unless the contract requires a different mass or wall thickness provide pipe with a mass of at least the standard mass for Schedule in accordance with ASTM A Provide pipe with a minimum yield strength of psi Unless required by the contract the Engineer will not require hydrostatic testing Provide pipe free of dirt grease loose scale and rust Provide pipe with plain ends unless the contract requires threaded ends Provide pipe free of mill stamps and large or heavy knurl marks Provide screw fittings in or less in diameter made from either steel or malleable iron .
Provide cast steel for screw fittings over in in diameter Provide highstrength lowalloy structural tubing meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Grade and Provide welding fittings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for factorymade wrought carbon steel and ferritic alloy steel welding fittings .
Use a grade equivalent to the tensile properties specified for the steel pipe. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK ALUMINUM TUBE FOR PIPE RAILING .
SCOPE Provide aluminum alloy extruded tubes for bridge railing . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide aluminum alloy extruded tubes for bridge railing meeting the requirements of ASTM B Alloy T. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK WROUGHT STEEL PIPE .
SCOPE Provide wrought steel pipe for bridges and structures . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide wrought steel pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM A with a mass or wall thickness that at least meets the requirements of ASTM A Schedule unless the contract requires otherwise. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Galvanize the pipe and fittings unless the contract requires otherwise .
The Contractor may provide cast steel or malleable iron screw fittings for fittings no greater than inches in diameter .
Provide cast steel screw fittings for fittings greater than inches in diameter .
Provide welding fittings meeting the requirements of ASTM A for butt welding fittings. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK DUCTILE IRON PRESSURE PIPE .
SCOPE Provide ductile iron pressure pipe . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide ductile iron pressure pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM A for the diameter and relevant American Standard required by the contract .
Provide ductile iron pressure pipe coated with bituminous enamel lining and exterior coating. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK COPPER WATER TUBE AND FITTINGS .
SCOPE Provide copper water tube and fittings . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide copper water tube meeting the requirements of ASTM B for Type A pipe annealed .
Provide red brass flared fittings for copper water tube. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK STEEL SHELLS FOR CONCRETE PILING .
SCOPE Provide steel shells for castinplace concrete piling . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide cylindrical steel shells for castinplace concrete piles meeting the physical strength and chemical requirements of ASTM A Grade .
If specified in the plans as an alternative the Contractor may provide coldrolled fluted steel shells meeting the requirements of SAE or SAE with tensile yield strength of at least psi in accordance with ASTM A .
Provide tapered piles with a tip diameter of at least inches and a butt diameter of at least the nominal diameter required by the contract .
Provide steel shells with a thickness and strength capable of withstanding the driving forces to substantial refusal in accordance with .. E Penetration and Bearing and with a nominal wall thickness as specified in Table Steel Shell Requirements .
For piling with a painted finish in accordance with .. J .
Painted Piles or with a galvanized finish in accordance with .J .
Galvanized Piles provide piling free of irregularities or deleterious matter adversely affecting the finished coating .
The Contractor may request the Engineers approval of the use of small quantities of piling representing less than percent of the entire structure from the Contractors surplus of cutoffs and overruns .
Submit mill test reports and a certification stating that the Department previously approved the piling for use on another Department project. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Steel Shell Requirements Steel Shell Options Nominal Pile Size inches Nominal Outside Diameter inches Minimum Wall Thickness inches .
¾ . . ¾ . fluted . . fluted . . fluted .
. .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans or special provisions .
Do not use fluted or tapered shells for exposed pilebent piles unless otherwise shown on the plans or special provisions for a particular structure. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide one certified copy of mill test reports with heat numbers identified including physical test reports and chemical analyses and mill shipping papers to the Engineer before delivering the material to the project .
Include the actual carbon manganese and phosphorus contents in the chemical analysis report .
STEEL PILING .
SCOPE Provide steel Hpiles for structure construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide steel Hpiles for bearing sections in the size and weight per unit of length as shown on the plans and meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade for structural quality carbon steel shapes .
Provide a steel Hpile tip listed on the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products website under HPile Tip Protection. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide one certified copy of mill test reports with heat numbers identified including physical test reports and chemical analyses and mill shipping papers to the Engineer before delivering the material to the project .
Include the actual carbon manganese and phosphorus contents in the chemical analysis report .
STEEL SHEET PILING .
SCOPE Provide steel sheet piling for construction of bridges and piers . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide a steel sheet piling of the style dimensions and mass required by the contract and meeting the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM A for Grade Grade or Grade . . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK FENCE WIRE .
SCOPE Provide barbed woven and chain link fencing wire wire fasteners tie wires hardware and tension wire . .
REQUIREMENTS A Barbed Wire Provide point full round barbs at least .
in long .
The Contractor may provide one of the following types of barbed wire meeting the requirements of AASHTO M unless the contract requires otherwise .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Zinccoated barbed wire meeting the requirements of Class Standard security grade aluminumcoated barbed wire or High security grade aluminumcoated barbed wire .
B Woven Wire Provide metalliccoated Type A or Type Z Class steel woven wire fence fabric meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the size and construction required by the contract .
Provide No .
Grade design woven wire fabric meeting the requirements of AASHTO M if the contract does not specify the size and construction .
Use the hinge joint method with at least ½ tightly wrapped twists to join the vertical stay wires to each horizontal line wire .
C Chain Link Provide chain link fabric meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the type required by the contract .
Use chain link fence with the finished wire size mesh size selvage type and fabric height as shown on the plans .
Use Class A extruded and bonded or Class B bonded Type IV fabric PVC coated steel .
D Miscellaneous Items Provide hardware items meeting the requirements of AASHTO M unless otherwise specified in this section or required by the contract .
Use Lshaped staples with barbed serrated or ring shanks or Ushaped staples made of gauge diameter wire galvanized after fabrication meeting the requirements of ASTM A to attach wire to wood posts with shank length as specified in .. C. Barbed Wire and Woven Wire .
Use flat metal bands instead of wire fasteners if approved by the Engineer .
Provide hog rings meeting the requirements of ASTM F . When polymer coating is required provide hog rings with a Class A or Class B polymer coating thickness meeting the requirements of ASTM F . Provide wire ties meeting one of the following requirements gauge steel meeting the requirements of AASHTO M or At least .
in .
aluminum alloy meeting the requirements of ASTM B Alloy H. Provide polymercoated wire ties meeting the same coating thickness requirements as polymercoated fabric .
Provide tension wire meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Provide tension bars truss rods truss rod tighteners barbed wire arms tension bands brace bands rail and brace ends rail sleeves post and line caps and cups meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Provide polymercoated tension bars truss rods truss rod tighteners tension bands brace bands post and line caps and cups with a bonded polymer coating thickness of at least .
in .
Provide zinc coated nuts and bolts meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Shoppaint or fieldpaint nuts and bolts when polymercoated fence is required. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance for each fence component in this section including Buy America compliance if required .
Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
FENCE GATES .
SCOPE Provide vehicular gates and pedestrian gates with pipe frames . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Use the same pipe hardware fittings fence wire and appurtenance materials to assemble all gates provided to the project. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Materials Use a frame made of galvanized steel pipe or aluminum alloy pipe .
B Galvanized Steel Pipe Provide galvanized steel pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM A for galvanized Standard Schedule pipe with plain ends .
Hydrostatic testing of the pipe is not required .
B Aluminum Alloy Pipe Provide aluminum alloy pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . B Fittings and Hardware As shown on the plans use corner fittings tops stretcher bars truss rods and other required fittings hardware and appurtenances made of steel malleable iron wrought iron or aluminum alloy .
If using steel or iron galvanize fittings or hardware in accordance with AASHTO M after fabrication .
B Wire Provide barbed wire gate fabric for woven wire fence and gate fabric for chain link fence as specified in Fence Wire .
C Physical Properties Use gate and members with physical properties as shown on the plans .
Use fittings hardware and other required appurtenances capable of being securely fastened and fitted to meet the requirements of the approved design .
Provide hinges and catch and locking devices meeting the requirements of an approved design. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance for each component in this section including Buy America compliance if required .
Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
A Metal Pipe and Fittings B Fence Wire and Fasteners WIRE ROPE AND FITTINGS FOR CABLE GUARDRAIL .
SCOPE Provide wire rope and accessory fittings for use in cable guardrail construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide wire rope and fittings for proprietary hightension cable guardrail systems meeting the manufacturers specifications .
Provide wire rope and fittings for lowtension cable guardrail meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and the following A Wire Rope Requirements Provide wire rope meeting the requirements of Type with Class A coating unless otherwise specified .
B Fitting Requirements Unless the manufacturer specifies otherwise provide bolts and nuts used to assemble the guardrail elements meeting the requirements of ASTM A .
Provide bolt heads and nuts with dimensions meeting the requirements of ANSI No .
B . for the type shown on the plans .
Use externally threaded fittings including end tie rods anchor rods post loops and splicing studs that transmit direct tensile stress having a tensile strength of at least psi .
Use internally threaded fittings such as turnbuckles cable sockets and nuts capable of withstanding a proof load equal to percent of the proof load requirements for nuts as specified in ASTM A Table III .
Use expansion assemblies cable splices and connections capable of withstanding a proof load equal to the tensile strength required of the attached wire rope cable or as specified by the manufacturer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide steel rectangular plate washers and cable clamps with a tensile strength of at least psi .
Provide ferrous metal plain circular washers meeting the requirements of ANSIASME B ..
Type A. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing as directed by the Engineer .
The Engineer will test wire rope and fittings for cable guardrail meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . STEEL PLATE BEAMS AND FITTINGS FOR TRAFFIC BARRIERS GUARDRAIL .
SCOPE Provide steel plate beams and fittings for use in guardrail construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide steel plate beams and fittings for guardrail construction meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the type and class required by the contract .
Unless the plans show otherwise provide beams meeting the requirements for Class A Type II galvanized .
Provide wbeam and thriebeam rail elements posts blocks soil plates reducer sections and end treatments that meet the requirements of A Guide to Standardized Highway Barrier Hardware published by AASHTO ARTBA and AGC. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Triplespot test galvanized beams and fittings .
ANCHOR RODS .
SCOPE Provide anchor rod material in four general strength levels .
The plans may show or the special provisions may specify other types of anchor rod material . .
REQUIREMENTS Use the ASTM or product reference for each type of anchor rod material .
Unless the contract requires otherwise provide anchor rods meeting the requirements for Type A and fabricated from single rounds .
Galvanize Type A Type B and Type C anchor rods in accordance with Galvanized Hardware unless otherwise shown on the plans .
A Type A Carbon Steel Anchor Rods Provide Type A anchor rods meeting the requirement of ASTM F for Grade Class A with supplementary requirement S for permanent grade identification .
Provide nuts and washers as recommended in ASTM F for Grade anchor rods .
B Type B Intermediate Strength Anchor Rods Provide Type B anchor rods meeting the requirements of ASTM F for Grade Class A with supplementary requirement S for weldability and supplementary requirement S for permanent grade identification .
Provide nuts and washers as recommended in ASTM F for Grade anchor rods .
C Type C High Strength Anchor Rods Provide Type C anchor rods meeting the requirements of ASTM F for Grade Class A with supplementary requirement S for permanent grade identification and supplementary requirement S for Charpy impact testing .
Provide nuts and washers as recommended in ASTM F for Grade anchor rods .
Do not make an anchorage cage by tackwelding Type C anchor rods or welding anchor rods to other material .
Hold Type C anchor rods in place mechanically using methods approved by the Engineer .
D Type D Stainless Steel Anchor Rods Provide Type D anchor rods nuts and washers meeting the requirements of ASTM A for Type or Type stainless steel and .
Fasteners Requirements for stainless steel fasteners .
Do not make an anchorage cage by tack welding Type D anchor rods or welding anchor rods to other material .
Hold Type D anchor rods in place mechanically using methods approved by the Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Departments Schedule of Materials Control .
FASTENERS .
SCOPE Provide various types and grades of fasteners for use in general and structural applications. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Provide fasteners of the type shown on the plans .
Provide bolts nuts and washers meeting the requirements of ANSI for the type required by the contract .
Unless otherwise required by the contract provide threads that are ANSI Coarse Thread Series with a Class A tolerance for bolts and Class B tolerance for nuts .
A Common Structural Steel Bolts Provide bolts and nuts meeting the requirements of ASTM A .
For bolts at least ½ inch in diameter use Grade B bolts with heavy hexagon nuts .
B High Strength Structural Steel Bolts Provide field and shop bolts for steel bridges meeting the requirements of ASTM F Grade A Type bolts .
Provide bolts that project through the nut from ⅛ inch to ⅜ inch .
Provide field and shop nuts for steel bridges that meet ASTM A Grade C or DH nuts and shop washers for steel bridges that meet ASTM F Type washers .
Provide bolts nuts and washers installed before the application of the prime coat in the uncoated Black condition .
Apply the same paint coatings to the bolts as applied to the structural steel .
Provide mechanically galvanized fasteners that are to be field installed after the application of the prime coat meeting the requirements of ASTM B Class Type .
For all other bridges and structures provide bolts meeting the requirements of ASTM F Grade A Type for painted or galvanized applications or Type for unpainted weathering steel applications .
Provide bolts that project through the nut from ⅛ inch to ⅜ inch .
Provide nuts meeting the requirements of ASTM A and washers meeting the requirements of ASTM F. Only retighten bolts meeting the requirements of ASTM F A once .
Regardless of specified finish provide nuts lubricated with a lubricant of contrasting color meeting the requirements of ASTM A Supplementary requirements S S and S at the time of the installation of the fasteners .
C Bolts for Wood Construction Unless otherwise shown on the plans provide bolts for wood construction in accordance with .. A Common Structural Steel Bolts and galvanized by a mechanical or hotdip process .
Provide the mass of coating meeting the requirements of ASTM A .
D Stud Welded Fasteners Provide studs in the size and configuration required by the contract .
Provide defectfree weldable carbon steel studs meeting the requirements of ASTM A for cold drawn bars Grade Grade or Grade .
For the purpose of welding provide studs with fluxed tips or fluxed ferrules and equipped with a ceramic ring or ferrule arc shield .
Provide material for the studs meeting the following characteristics An ultimate strength of at least psi A yield strength of at least psi A elongation of at least percent in inches and A reduction of area of at least percent .
Provide threaded studs with nuts capable of developing the minimum ultimate strength requirement of the net cross section area of the threaded portion of the stud .
Provide shear connector studs with a head height and head diameter within a dimensional tolerance of inch .
Identify stud containers by the heat number of the steel from which the studs were produced .
E Stainless Steel Bolts Provide stainless steel bolts made of material meeting the requirements of ASTM F for Condition CW Type Type or Type L. Provide finished bolts with the following characteristics A yield strength of at least psi An ultimate tensile strength of psi and A minimum elongation of percent in inches .
Provide stainless steel nuts made of material meeting the requirements of ASTM F Condition CW Type or L. After fabrication if required fully anneal bolts nuts and washers to promote maximum corrosion resistance of the stainless steel .
After heat treatment give parts a pacifying treatment in a nitric acid solution .
Perform the pacifying treatment in accordance with standard commercial practice .
Provide bolts of dimensions meeting the requirements of ANSI B . for Regular .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Hexagonhead Cap Screws .
Finish surfaces in accordance with the American bolt nut and rivet manufacturers .
Provide nuts meeting the requirements for ANSI B . for Regular Finished Hexagon .
Provide washers as shown on the plans .
F Tension Indicators Provide and test compressiblewashertype direct tension indicators DTI in accordance with ASTM F. Submit three samples of each lot of tension indicators with the test reports to the Materials Laboratory for testing .
The Engineer will reject lots if the representative washer samples fail the tests performed. . SAMPLING AND TESTING If the minimum bolt strength requirements are specified in the contract perform testing in accordance with ASTM A except only use a wedge for testing highstrength structural steel bolts .
Do not use reduceddimension specimens for test purposes .
Determine the yield strength using relevant methods specified in ASTM E. For bolts with nuts provide nuts capable of withstanding a proof load equal to the required tensile strength of the bolt .
Provide test bolts and nuts of each type in each size and length .
Provide two test bolts and nuts for each increment of or fraction of bolts supplied .
GALVANIZED HARDWARE .
SCOPE Provide galvanized hardware as specified in the contract . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide galvanized hardware and miscellaneous items as shown on the plans .
Galvanize hardware items using the hotdip process meeting the requirements of with ASTM A or mechanically galvanize the hardware meeting the requirements of ASTM B Class Type I. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test in accordance with the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
GALVANIZED STRUCTURAL SHAPES .
SCOPE Provide galvanized structural shapes plates bars and castings for pipes and structures . .
REQUIREMENTS Blast clean all items in accordance with SSPCSPNACE No .
Commercial Blast Cleaning before galvanizing .
Exceptions to this blast cleaning requirement are listed in .. L. Galvanizing .
Provide structural shapes plates bars and castings galvanized meeting the requirements of ASTM A .
Provide castings that have been pickled before galvanizing .
For galvanized surfaces that have handling marks or minor chips that no greater than ½ inch at the narrowest dimension repair in accordance with ASTM A Annex or Annex brush applied paint only .
Ensure the dry film thickness DFT of the coating repair is in accordance with ASTM A .
Perform repairs in accordance with the suppliers quality procedures .
Obtain an approved nonconformance report NCR for each repair .
Calibrate dry film thickness gauges in accordance with SSPCPA Measurement of Dry Coating Thickness with Magnetic Gauges .
The Galvanizer shall provide the Engineer with all galvanizing processrelated Quality Control documents which demonstrate compliance to this specification and referenced specifications prior to shipment of the galvanized product .
Identify in a Purchase Orders which specific items are to be duplex coated and which materials to be galvanized are reactive e.g .
HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel etc ..
Submit an NCR to the Engineer before performing any repairs .
A Additional Galvanizing Requirements for Duplex Coated Material All products supplied using this specification have higher aesthetic expectations than standard galvanized products .
Produce the final product to comply with its intended use as architectural with heightened aesthetics andor visual qualities. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Process all metal components to be galvanized utilizing a dry kettle .
Preflux the material prior to the galvanizing bath using an aqueous tank of zinc chlorideammonium chloride .
Do not use a top flux blanket on the molten zinc bath Air cool the materials to ambient temperature before handling for shipment andor storage .
Do not quench the material or apply any postgalvanizing treatments Lumps projections globules high spots drip lines heavy deposits blisters black and bare areas flux deposits thin spots dross inclusions etc .
are considered unacceptable .
Repair unacceptable zinc coatings in accordance with the Galvanizers approved Quality Manuel and the coating applicators approved method .
Zinc which will interfere with the intended use of the product will not be permitted and Store galvanized metal components in a manner that will prevent the formation of whiterust or wet storage staining .
White rust or staining of the galvanize coating is not acceptable. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK FLAP GATES .
SCOPE Provide flaptype drainage control gates for direct attachment to the outlet ends of culvert and sewer pipe as shown on the plans or required by the special provisions .
If shown on the plans or required by the special provisions provide gates with attachment to the outlet structure . .
REQUIREMENTS A Base Metal Provide frame flap flange hinge bars and other basic components of the gate assembly made of cast iron cast steel structural steel or other metals approved by the Engineer .
Provide hinge bushings and pins made of noncorrosive metal approved by the Engineer .
Do not use bronze or brass fittings on gates attached to aluminum alloy drainage structures .
Provide iron castings meeting the requirements of ASTM A Class B or better ASTM A Grade .
Provide steel castings meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade or better .
Provide steel components in accordance with Low Carbon Structural Steel or HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel .
B Dimensions and Design Provide flap gates designed to permit direct attachment to pipe of the type and size required by the contract or to the outlet structure as shown on the plans or required by the special provisions .
Ensure the gates provide practical water tightness against a face pressure and open automatically under a back head allowing free outflow .
Provide a double pivoted flap hinge or a flap hinge otherwise designed to provide accurate seating of the flap and frame and ensure complete closure of the flap using its own mass .
Use a design that limits the hinge movement to prevent the flap from becoming lodged in the frame opening .
Provide gates designed to adequately withstand the seating head as shown on the plans .
If the plans do not show seating head requirements provide gates designed to withstand a ft seating head .
Provide gates designed or installed to hang closed at all times .
Provide suitable flange or hinge fastening adjustments that provide a vertical frame seat when installed .
Include provisions for attaching the gate assembly to the pipe or structure as shown in the plans or required by the special provisions using bolts flanges and compression bands or other devices .
For metal pipe installations the Contractor may shop assemble the gates on a inch section of pipe with rivets or bolts .
Install the stub section of pipe with gate attached on a zero or flat grade when feasible .
The Engineer will approve all critical dimensions and design details of the gate assembly .
Provide shop drawings to the Engineer upon request .
C Fabrication and Assembly Provide castings and fabricated steel components that are free of defects that affect its ability to function for its intended purpose .
Machine mill or grind the contact surfaces between frame and flap to provide true bearing around the entire circumference .
Galvanize cast steel and fabricated steel components of the gate assembly including steel bolts nuts and washers in accordance with ASTM A for the appropriate class of material .
In lieu of galvanizing the Contractor may paint steel specified in .
Minnesota Standard Specifications HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel in accordance with Organic ZincRich Paint System with an aluminum finish coat .
Paint iron castings with an asphalt or coaltar pitch varnish or galvanize as required for steel castings .
Paint and galvanize after fabrication and before assembly. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Ensure the manufacturer prepared and tested physical test specimens for the tests required in accordance with this section at no additional cost to the Department .
Submit to the Engineer the certified test reports provided by the manufacturer showing the results of each test before delivering the material to the project .
The Engineer may require the manufacturer make check tests if results of previous tests are not conclusive .
Posts FLANGED CHANNEL SIGN POSTS .
SCOPE Provide rerolled rail steel and comparable new billet steel posts for signs delineators and guide posts . .
REQUIREMENTS A Material Use posts made of rerolled rail steel or a new billet steel meeting the mechanical requirements of ASTM A Grade .
For rails weighing at least lb per yd of length use steel meeting the chemical requirements of ASTM A .
B Length Use posts with lengths within ½ inch as shown on the plans or in the special provisions .
C Weight Use posts with the following nominal weights per length as shown on the plans or in the special provisions lb per ft ½ lb per ft ¾ lb per ft lb per ft lb per ft Verify the nominal weights of the posts before punching and without galvanizing or the addition of anchor plates or other attachments .
Use posts weighing up to percent under the weight shown on the plans or the special provisions .
D Shape and Dimensions Use channel section design posts with flanges for the placement of the signs .
Use flanges with a flat front face and positioned in the same plane to provide a smooth uniform bearing for the sign .
The back of the flanges and the posts shall be flat and parallel to the front .
Connect the backs of the flanges and the posts flat and parallel to the front .
Make the cross section of the posts symmetrical about the central axis perpendicular to the front and back .
Use straight posts free of bow twist burrs and other unsightly defects .
E Punching If the plans specify posts weighing lb per ft of length punch in diameter holes along the centerline of the back on in centers beginning at ½ in from the top and extending the full length of the post .
Space the holes so that the variation in distance between the centers of any two holes is in for each in between the holes .
If using posts weighing at least ½ lb per ft of length punch ⅜ in diameter holes along the centerline of the back on either in or in centers beginning in or ½ in from the top and extending the full length of the post .
Space the holes so that the variation in distance between the centers of any two holes is in for each in between the holes .
Punch holes so that cracks do not radiate from the holes. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Nominal Dimensions Requirement Mass per Unit of Length .
lb ½ lb ¾ lb .
lb .
lb Width overall across front in in in ¼ in ½ in Width back surface in in in ¼ in ¼ in Width flanges bearing surface ½ in ½ in ½ in ⅝ in ¾ in Depth overall front to back ⅜ in ⅜ in ½ in ½ in .
in Thickness of metal flanges and back ⅛ in ⅛ in in .
in .
in Side in ⅛ in ⅛ in .
in .
in Note Dimension requirements are for flat flange sections .
F Galvanizing Provide posts galvanized in accordance with ASTM A . . SAMPLING AND TESTING Obtain a certified mill analysis from the supplier that states the chemical composition of each lot or heat of posts delivered .
The Engineer may take samples for testing from any of the provided posts .
During the inspection of any lot of posts if the Engineer rejects more than percent of the posts in the lot the Engineer may reject the entire lot .
SQUARE TUBULAR SIGN POSTS .
SCOPE Provide square steel tubular posts for signs . .
REQUIREMENTS A Material Use steel posts meeting standard specification for hot rolled carbon sheet steel structural quality ASTM A Grade .
The average minimum yield strength after cold forming shall be a minimum of psi .
B Length Use posts with lengths within ¼ inch of the length shown on the plans or in the special provisions .
C Weight Use posts in accordance with the following as shown on the plans or in the special provisions Size U.S.S .
Gauge Weight ½ x ½ . lbsft ¾ x ¾ . lbsft x . lbsft ¼ x ¼ . lbsft ½ x ½ . lbsft x . lbsft ½ x ½ . lbsft Use posts weighing anywhere in a range starting from the weight shown for the specified post size and gauge down to percent under that weight. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Cross Section Use square tube formed of gauge or gauge steel as shown in plans or special provisions carefully rolled to size and welded directly in the corner by high frequency resistance welding and externally scarfed to agree with corner radii .
E Hole Punching Use posts with punched holes inch in diameter on inch centers on all fours sides down the entire length of the post .
Holes shall be on centerline of each side and in true alignment and opposite of each other directly and diagonally .
F Coating Use posts hot dip galvanized steel in accordance with ASTM A G. The corner weld shall be zinc coated after scarfing operation .
The steel shall also be coated with a chromate conversion coating and a clear organic polymer topcoat .
Both the interior and the exterior of the post shall be galvanized .
Modifications made to the post after the initial fabrication such as additional welding or other alterations shall be galvanized .
G Telescoping Properties Use straight posts with a smooth uniform finish free of bow twist and other unsightly defects .
All holes and ends shall be free from burrs and ends shall be cut square .
Telescoping systems shall meet dimensional requirements and shall permit consecutive sizes of square tubes to telescope freely without necessity of matching any particular face to any other face .
H Anchors Use galvanized square tube anchors as shown in plans or in the special provisions. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Obtain a certified mill analysis from the supplier that states the chemical composition of each lot or heat of posts delivered .
The Engineer may take samples for testing from any of the provided posts .
During the inspection of any lot of posts if the Engineer rejects more than percent of the posts in the lot the Engineer may reject the entire lot .
HOTROLLED STEEL FENCE POSTS .
SCOPE Provide hotrolled steel posts and angles for fencing . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide hotrolled steel line posts and angle section post assemblies for end gate corner or intermediate brace assemblies meeting the requirements of ASTM A and as shown on the plans. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance and a certified mill analysis showing the chemical composition of each delivered lot or heat of posts and compliance with Buy America if required .
Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
The Engineer may take samples for testing from any of the provided posts .
STRUCTURAL METAL FENCE POSTS .
SCOPE Provide tubular metal posts and rails metal rolledformed C posts and fittings for fencing . .
REQUIREMENTS A Materials Provide posts and rails meeting the requirements of the plans and AASHTO M except as noted .
Use Grade round posts .
For Alternate Roll Formed posts provide posts meeting the weight and property requirements of ASTM F for Heavy Industrial Fence Framework Grade with Type A coating .
Use line posts weighing .
lb .
per ft. nominal .
Use brace bars weighing .
lb .
per ft. nominal. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Apply coatings on posts rails and fittings after welding and fabrication .
Provide tie wires clips and bands for fastening chain link fabric to posts rails and braces as specified in Fence Wire .
Use Type IV PVC posts rails and frames first coated with zinc and then coated with PVC Class B bonded to a thickness of at least .
in .
B Dimensions Provide posts rails and stretcher bars required by the contract meeting the requirements of AASHTO M except the Engineer will not accept posts greater than in .
shorter than the specified length .
WOOD GUARDRAIL POSTS .
SCOPE Provide preservative treated wood posts for use in guardrail construction including round posts and sawed timber posts with rectangular cross sections and offset blocks . .
REQUIREMENTS A Round Posts A .
Species of Wood Provide treated round posts made from the following species of wood Northern White Cedar Western Red Cedar Jack Pine Norway Red Pine Lodgepole Pine Ponderosa Pine or Southern Yellow Pine .
A. Seasoning Airseason wood for treated posts .
The wood may be conditioned as part of the treating process for penetration of preservative without damage to the posts .
A. Dimensions and Finish Provide naturally round posts .
Shave off inner bark and closely trim knots .
Saw the bottom end of the posts square .
Provide posts in the length nominal diameter and with a top finish as shown on the plans .
Complete debarking trimming and sizing of posts before applying the preservative treatment .
A .
Quality Do not use wood with the following defects Unsound and unsmooth knots that impair the post strength Short kinks defined by a line drawn between centers of the butt and tip falling outside the center of the post by more than percent of the post length Checks wider than ¼ in mm Unsightly and exaggerated winding twists Decay except Northern White Cedar may contain one pipe rot no greater than ⅜ in mm in diameter in the top of the post Butt rot and ring rot totaling greater than percent of the butt area in Northern White Cedar Defects that affect the appearance or impair the strength or durability of the post as determined by the Engineer and Oneway sweep greater than in mm .
B Sawed Timber Posts B .
Species and Grade Provide sawed timber posts made from the following species of wood Douglas Fir Southern Yellow Pine Jack Pine Norway Red Pine or Ponderosa Pine. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide sawed timber posts in the grade meeting the following requirements and characteristics Stained sapwood Splits ¾ of the thickness Seasoning checks single or opposite each other with a sum total depth equal to half of the post thickness Heavy torn grain Close grain Slope of grain over the full length of post no greater than in Pitch streaks with medium pitch pockets Wane ⅛ of any face Shakes ⅓ of the thickness and Wellspaced sound and tight knots no wider than the following .
in mm in in mm posts .
½ in mm in in mm posts and .
in mm in in mm posts .
For rectangular post sizes use the wider face to determine the maximum size of the knots permitted .
B. Dimensions Saw the posts and offset blocks to the nominal dimensions as shown on the plans .
The Engineer will not require surfacing .
Do not allow the sawing dimensions for dry material to vary from the nominal dimensions by greater than ¼ in mm or ½ in mm .
C Preservative Treatment Treat posts and offset blocks in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Timber Products .
Provide treated posts and offset blocks with a dry surface and free of excess preservative. . SAMPLING AND TESTING WOOD FENCE POSTS TREATED .
SCOPE Provide preservative treated wood posts for fence construction . .
REQUIREMENTS A Species of Wood Provide posts cut from live growing trees and made from Northern White Cedar or any species of Pine except Lodgepole Pine .
B Seasoning Airseason or otherwise condition wood posts to allow penetration of the preservative .
C Manufacture C. Peeling Shave off inner bark and closely trim knots before treating .
C. End Finish Cut the ends of posts square .
If setting the post by driving the Contractor may cut the larger end to a blunt point with a length no greater than ½ times the diameter of the pointed end .
C. Dimensions Provide naturally round posts in the length and minimum diameter as required by the contract .
The Contractor may provide posts with a diameter at the small end no greater than in greater than the minimum diameter required by the contract .
C. Quality Do not use wood with the following defects Knots that impair the post strength Short kinks defined by a line drawn between centers of the butt and tip falling outside the center of the post by more than percent of the post length Checks wider than ¼ in Unsightly and exaggerated winding twists Decay except Northern White Cedar may contain one pipe rot no greater than ¼ in in diameter Butt rot and ring rot totaling greater than percent of the butt area in Northern White Cedar and .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Defects that affect the appearance or impair the strength or durability of the post as determined by the Engineer .
D Preservative Treatment Treat posts in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Timber Products .
Cut trim and point ends before treatment .
Provide treated posts with a dry surface and free from dripping or excess preservative. . SAMPLING AND TESTING STRUCTURAL WOOD .
SCOPE Provide structural wood for dimensional lumber joists and planks beams and stringers and posts and timbers .
A Definitions of Terms ASTM D B Nomenclature ASTM D . REQUIREMENTS A Species of Wood Use West Coast Douglas Fir or Southern Yellow Pine unless otherwise shown on the plans specified in the special provisions or specified in the purchase order .
B Standard Sizes Provide structural wood meeting the dimensions specified for either rough or surfaced stock .
C Preservative Treatment Provide wood treated in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products if specified .
D Grading Provide commercial stress grades of lumber and timber with grade descriptions meeting the stress requirements .
The numerical stress values for structural wood required by the contract are the minimum requirements .
The Contractor may provide stress graded material meeting grading rules developed from ASTM D Methods for Establishing Structural Grades of Lumber as tabulated by the National Design Specification for Wood Construction NDS .
The Standard Grading and Dressing Rules of the West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau the Standard Grading Rules for Western Lumber of the Western Wood Products Association and the Standard Grading Rules for Southern Pine of the Southern Pine Inspection Bureau each meet the requirements of ASTM D. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test for preservative treatment in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products .
The Department will make final inspection and acceptance in accordance with the following For direct purchases by the Department at the point of delivery .
For materials provided and installed by a Contractor at the site of the work. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Lumber Timber Piling and Wood Treatment LUMBER .
SCOPE Provide lumber for general building purposes .
Refer to ASTM D for definition of terms . .
REQUIREMENTS Use Douglas Fir Norway Red Pine Ponderosa Pine White Pine or Southern Yellow Pine .
Provide grade marked lumber graded in accordance with grading rules adopted by regional associations of lumber manufacturers in accordance with the requirements of the American Lumber Standards .
Provide No .
Grade lumber unless otherwise specified. . SAMPLING AND TESTING PLANK FOR WEARING COURSE .
SCOPE Provide lumber for use as plank for wearing course on bridges . .
REQUIREMENTS Refer to ASTM D for the definition of terms and provide plank made from the following species Douglas Fir Norway Red Pine Ponderosa Pine White Pine Southern Yellow Pine or Northern White Poplar .
Provide plank meeting the following characteristics and requirements Sound livecut timber Well seasoned Free from pocket rot dry rot red heart cavities bad checks loose slivers loose heart shakes splits any incipient decay unsound loose or decayed knots and ant or worm holes Contains no checks in the ends of planks extending greater than inches into the piece Free from crook Contains no corner wane greater than ½ inch Surfaced on one side and one edge SSE or surfaced on two edges Lengths from ft to ft Uniform width and thickness through the entire length Straight with squaresawed ends and Skip on the planed surfaces permitted not exceeding percent of the surfaced area of any individual plank .
Surface planks with heart center appearing on one side on the heart side .
For any one bridge provide planks of the same thickness of at least ½ inch after surfacing .
For any one bridge the Contractor may provide planks with nominal widths of inches inches or both .
Ensure the widths after surfacing are at least ½ inches for planks with a nominal width of inches and ¼ inches for planks with a nominal width of inches .
Provide planks of each nominal width for any one bridge with the same actual width .
If the contract requires treated plank provide planks treated with preservative in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Minnesota Standard Specifications TIMBER PILING .
SCOPE Provide timber piling for treated and untreated foundation piles below water level . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide piling meeting the following requirements Capable of withstanding driving without breaking or suffering excessive brooming or splitting Cut from sound live trees except the Contractor may use firekilled blightkilled or windfelled trees if no evidence of charred sapwood wood decay or insect attachment and Free from defects impairing strength or durability .
A Permitted Species A. Untreated Piles Provide the following types of timber for untreated piles Pine Tamarack Douglas Fir Coast Region Oak Elm or Hard Maple .
A .
Treated Piles Provide the following types of timber for treated piles Norway Red Pine Jack Pine Ponderosa Pine Southern Yellow Pine or Douglas Fir Coast Region .
A .
Temporary Structures If the contract allows untreated timber piling for temporary structures the Contractor may use any species that will withstand driving to the bearing and penetration required by the contract without damage to the piling .
B Quality of Timber Provide Douglas Fir Norway Red Pine and Jack Pine with a sapwood thickness at the butt end of at least ¾ in .
Provide Southern Yellow Pine and Ponderosa Pine with a sapwood thickness at the butt end of at least inches .
Provide untreated trestle piles with a heartwood diameter of at least percent of the diameter of the pile at the butt end .
Do not use timber with checks wider than ¼ inch .
C Peeling Peel piles by removing the rough bark and at least percent of the inner bark .
Do not leave strips of inner bark greater than ¾ inch wide and inches long on the pile .
Provide at least inch of cleaned wood surface between any two strips of inner bark .
Provide piles with clean wood on at least percent of the surface circumference at any location on the pile .
D Straightness Cut piles above the ground swell and provide piles with a gradual taper from the point of butt measurement to the tip .
Ensure that a line drawn from the center of the butt to the center of the tip lies wholly within the body of the pile and the distance from this line to the center of the pile at any point along the pile is no greater than percent of the length of the pile .
The Contractor may use piles with bends within the upper percent of the pile length measured from the butt end toward the tip end if the deviation of the centerline of the pile from a line drawn from the center of the pile above the bend to the center of the pile below the bend is no greater than percent of the length of the bend and is no greater than ½ inches .
Do not use piles with bend deviations greater than inch if located within the lower percent of the pile length or if located within ft from the tip end .
Use piles free of twists greater than half the circumference in any ft of length .
Saw off the ends of piles square .
Trim knots close to the body of the pile. . Minnesota Standard Specifications E Knots Do not use piles with unsound knots .
The Contractor may use piles with sound knots having diameters no greater than inches or percent of the minimum diameter of the pile measured at the knot location .
Do not use piles if the sum of the diameters of all knots occurring in a ft length of pile is greater than twice the diameter of the maximum allowable knot size measured at the knot location .
Do not use timber with knot clusters .
The Department defines a knot cluster as groups of at least two knots deflecting the fibers of the wood around the entire unit .
The Department does not consider a group of single knots with fibers deflected around each knot separately as a cluster regardless of their close proximity .
F Density Ensure the number of annual rings in any pile measured at the butt end averages at least rings per inch over the outer inches of a representative radial line from the pith .
Ensure the outer inch within the measured section contains at least rings .
G Dimensions Provide sound piles with a minimum diameter at the tip end measured under the bark in accordance with the following Table Minimum Diameter at Tip End Length of Pile ft Tip Diameter in Provide sound piles with a minimum diameter measured under the bark at ft from the butt end in accordance with the following Table Minimum Diameter ft from Butt End Length of Pile ft Diameter inches Determine the average diameter of a pile by measuring and dividing the circumference by pi .
or by averaging the maximum and minimum diameters at the locations specified in Table and Table for butt and tip diameters .
Ensure the diameter of the pile measured at the butt end is no greater than inches .
H Preservative Treatment Treat piling in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Wood Products unless otherwise required by the contract. . SAMPLING AND TESTING PRESERVATIVES AND PRESERVATIVE TREATMENT OF WOOD PRODUCTS .
SCOPE Apply wood preservatives and preservative treatment using the pressure process for lumber timber piling posts poles plywood and structural glued laminated members . .
REQUIREMENTS A Materials A .
Wood Products Provide timber lumber piling plywood and posts as required by the contract .
The Department considers Southern Pine the same as Southern Yellow Pine and Red Pine the same as Norway Pine .
A. Preservatives Provide preservatives listed on the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List and then only for the specific application for which they are approved .
Provide preservative meeting the requirements of AASHTO M as modified herein. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Preservative Treatment Provide preservative treatment meeting the requirements of AWPA Standard Tand the current applicable AWPA Use Category Standards U .
B .
Preparation for Treatment B .. a General Requirements Because difficulty may be encountered in obtaining the specified retention and penetration ensure the supplier uses wood materials having sufficient sapwood thickness to permit the specified penetration and retention .
Ensure suitable conditioning and for some species incising prior to the treatment and the use of treating conditions that do not damage the wood in accordance with AWPA Standards T U and the applicable AWPA Use Category Standards shown in Table .
B .. b Incising Incise the wood to allow penetration of the preservative .
Incise lumber and timbers of species difficult to penetrate including Douglas Fir Western Larch Spruce Hemlock Redwood and Jack Pine before treatment such that the incising will not make the material unfit for use .
Incise pines if predominantly heartwood .
The Engineer may waive the incising requirement if the Contractor can meet penetration and retention requirements without incising .
B .. c Seasoning For sawn material treated with an oiltype preservative and used in buildings or other construction where high moisture content or shrinkage would be objectionable dry to a moisture content no greater than percent before treatment .
Measure the moisture content at a depth equivalent to the required preservative penetration .
Unless the contract requires otherwise dry lumber no greater than inches in nominal thickness and plywood treated with a waterborne preservative to a moisture content no greater than percent before and after treatment .
C Method of Treatment Unless the contract requires otherwise use the preservative materials listed in Table and the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List .
Use the same preservative on the entire product provided for each contract item unless the contract requires otherwise .
Use the fullcell process to treat timber products if using with waterborne preservatives .
Field treat cuts bored holes and damaged treated areas per the requirements of AWPA M except do not use coal tar products including roofing cement .
D Results of Treatment Unless the contract requires otherwise provide preservative retention in accordance with Table .
Determine the preservative retention meeting the requirements of the AWPA method referenced in Table of the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List for the treatment of timber products .
Provide preservative penetration and other timber product treatments meeting the requirements of AWPA Standard T and in accordance with Table . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Product and AWPA Use Categories Product Usage AWPA Use Category AWPA Commodity Specification U Section Special Requirements A Piles A Round UCC E B Posts Fence guide and sight B Round UCA B B Sawn four sides UCA A Subsection .
C Posts guardrail and spacer blocks noise walls C Round UCB B C Sawn four sides UCC A Subsection .
D Poles lighting D Round UCB D E Lumber and timber E Bridges prefab nail laminated panels other structural members culverts and other issues UCC A Subsection .
E Noise wall facing at or below ground level UCB A E Building constructionrepair at or below ground level UCA A E Decks porches handicap ramps boardwalks or pedestrian bridge decking UCA A Subsection .
F Lumber and timber not in contact with ground or water F Handrails sidewalk plank UCB A Subsection .
F Noise wall facing above ground level UCB A Subsection .
F Building constructionrepair above ground level UCB A Subsection .
F Bridges Prefab nail laminated panels Structural Members and other uses UCC A Subsection .
G Gluedlaminated structural members Treated after gluing UCB F H Plywood H In contact with ground or water UCA F H For use above ground UCB F Refer to the MnDOT ApprovedQualified Products List for information regarding which products may be used on which applications such as near water residential or recreational areas .
For products listed by the AWPA or approved by the International Code CouncilEvaluation Service ICCES .
Include passing results from the test method AWPA E. Do not substitute test method AWPA E. E Handling Treated Products Care for and handle preservative treated wood products in accordance with the requirements of AWPA Standard M. F Product Marking Hammer heat brand dye stamp or metal tag the treated material marking the species commercial grade and type of treatment meeting the requirements of AWPA M and AWPA M except brand piles on the butt end .
Include the charge number in the markings on treated piles .
The Contractor may bundle sawn materials no greater than inches in nominal thickness and plywood treated with oiltype preservatives with the tags attached to the bundles .
For sawn materials treated with waterborne preservatives the Contractor may dye stamp the information on the outer pieces of the bundle instead of using bundle tags .
G. Framing Provide framing with bored holes in accordance with Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Bored Hole Diameter Requirements Hardware Types Diameter Round drift bolts and dowels Equal to diameter of bolt or dowel Square drift bolts and dowels in greater than least dimension of bolt or dowel Machine bolts in greater than diameter of bolt Rods in greater than diameter of rod Lag screws No greater than in of the body diameter of the screw at the root of the thread .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide for the inspection of materials and treatments meeting the requirements of AWPA M by an independent commercial inspection agency .
Only use agencies approved by the Materials Engineer for materials provided to Department projects .
Engage the inspection agency directly or through the supplier of the treated wood products .
The Department will include the cost of inspection with the relevant contract pay items for treated wood products .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each shipment of treated materials .
Submit the Certificate of Compliance the inspection report from the commercial inspection agency and the treating companys report of treatment to the Engineer .
The Department may inspect treated products upon delivery .
Consider the Departments inspection results conclusive and binding. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Paints and Enamels BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR PAINTS .
SCOPE Provide paints for construction and maintenance . .
REQUIREMENTS A Package Stability Ensure the paint does not cake liver thicken curdle gel or show other objectionable properties that can not be corrected by stirring during months after delivery .
B Colors Provide paint matching the Federal Standard colors or the Departments standard colors required by the Contract .
The Departments standard colors are located at the Materials Laboratory .
A paint color is considered to match the specified Standard if E . when measured according to ASTM D . C Toxic Metals and Volatile Organic Compounds VOC Provide paints free of toxic metals and meeting the requirements of Federal and MPCA VOC regulations .
D Manufacturing and Packaging Screen paint while filling containers to remove coarse particles and skins .
Package the paint in new containers marked with the following information Name of the manufacturer Name of contents Specification number Date and Manufacturers batch number .
Provide paint in quantities based on the volume or unit mass at F C. E Drying Time Ensure drying time for paint meets the requirements of the contract .
F Approval Process Obtain approval of the paint from the Engineer before use unless the contract requires the paint selection or it appears on the on the Approved Products List. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
Provide a color Draw Down sample on a Leneta chart per ASTM D to the Materials Laboratory for verification of the finish coat color .
ZINCRICH PAINT SYSTEMS .
SCOPE Provide zincrich paint systems . .
REQUIREMENTS A ZincRich Primer Provide multicomponent zincrich primer capable of being sprayapplied in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and applications guide .
After mixing according to the manufacturers recommendation strain the primer through a mesh screen or a double layer of cheesecloth to remove undispersed zinc agglomerates .
Formulate the primer to produce a distinct contrast with blast cleaned steel and with the subsequent intermediate coat .
A .. Pigment Provide a metallic zinc pigment meeting the requirements of ASTM D . Only add inert materials to the pigment for tinting .
Ensure the inert materials do not reduce the effectiveness of the galvanic protection .
A ..
Finished Primer Provide finished primer meeting the requirements in Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Finished Primer Requirements Characteristic Requirement Zinc portion total solids by weight .
Pot life at F C h Density of VOC .
lbgal gL Slip coefficient of cured primer .
Cure time for recoating per Manufacturers Product Data Sheet When applied at mil µm dryfilm thickness at F C and percent R.H. B Approved Epoxy ZincRich Systems Provide a zincrich paint system listed on the Approved Products List for Bridge Structural Steel Coatings .
B. Epoxy ZincRich System Provide an epoxy zincrich system consisting of an epoxy zincrich primer an epoxy intermediate coat and an aliphatic urethane finish coat .
B. Inorganic ZincRich System Provide an inorganic zincrich system consisting of solventbased inorganic zincrich primer an epoxy intermediate coat and an aliphatic urethane finish coat .
B. MoistureCure ZincRich System Provide a moisturecure zincrich system consisting of moisturecure zincrich primer a urethane intermediate coat and an aliphatic urethane finish coat .
B .
Two Coat ZincRich System Provide a moisture cure zincrich system consisting of moisturecure zincrich primer and a fastdry polyaspartic urethane finish coat .
C Color Provide a semigloss finish coat as required by the contract .
D Packaging and Labeling Provide multicomponent paints packaged in separate containers or kits that ensure paint manufacturers mixing proportions are achieved when using the entire container. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each batch lot or both for each component of the zincrich paint system .
Provide a color Draw Down sample on a Leneta chart per ASTM D to the Materials Laboratory for verification of the finish coat color .
EXTERIOR POLYURETHANE PAINT .
SCOPE Provide exterior polyurethane finish paint for use on steel lighting cabinets signs handrails traffic signal poles and transformer bases . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide paint free of toxic metals and meeting the requirements of Federal and MPCA VOC regulations .
Provide an aliphatic polyurethane finish coat listed on the Approved Products List for Traffic Signal Paint Systems .
Use the finish coat with an intermediate coat or primer and intermediate coat from the same manufacturer .
A Color Provide the following semigloss finish coat in colors chosen from the Federal Standard C colors unless otherwise required by the contract .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Dark green Federal Standard Number C Color Number and Yellow Federal Standard Number C Color Number . . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
Provide a color Draw Down sample on a Leneta chart per ASTM D to the Materials Laboratory for verification of the finish coat color .
ALUMINUM POLYURETHANE PAINT .
SCOPE Provide aluminumfilled polyurethane paint for use as a finish coat on bridges sign posts traffic signal poles and luminaire extensions . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide paints free of toxic metals and meeting the requirements of Federal and MPCA VOC regulations .
Provide an aluminum polyurethane paint listed on the Approved Products List for Traffic Signal Paint Systems .
Use the finish coat with an intermediate coat or primer and intermediate coat from the same manufacturer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample at the rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
Provide a color Draw Down sample on a Leneta chart per ASTM D to the Materials Laboratory for verification of the finish coat color .
EXTERIOR MASONRY ACRYLIC EMULSION PAINT .
SCOPE Provide acrylic latex paint for coating exterior masonry . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide paints free of toxic metals and meeting the requirements of Federal and MPCA VOC regulations .
Provide acrylic latex paint listed on the Approved Products List meeting the requirements of Federal Specification TTP and having a vehicle consisting of percent straight acrylic polymer .
Provide paint in the color required by the contract .
Only use light fast colorants. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample at the rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
Provide a color Draw Down sample on a Leneta chart per ASTM D to the Materials Laboratory for verification of the finish coat color .
MULTICOMPONENT LIQUID PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
SCOPE Provide reflectorized white and yellow multicomponent percent solids MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings that are free of toxic heavy metals for installation on bituminous and concrete pavement surfaces . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Apply MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings including lines legends symbols crosswalks and stop lines in accordance with Pavement Markings .
Use materials capable of producing pavement markings of specified thickness in accordance with .. B. Thickness Requirements and retroreflectivity in accordance with .. C. Retroreflectivity unless otherwise required by the contract .
Provide yellow markings distinguishable from white markings in the dark. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide Slow Dry material from the MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings ApprovedQualified Products List unless otherwise required by the contract .
The Department will not require the mixing of individual components before use if stored for no greater than months .
B MultiComponent Liquid Material Provide multicomponent liquid material meeting the following requirements and characteristics Composed only of multicomponent liquids and pigments Does not emit or leach solvents into the environment upon application to a pavement surface The infrared spectrum for all components shall match the reference sample provided by the manufacturer for the product tested and approved by the Department Free of lead cadmium mercury hexavalent chromium and other toxic heavy metals as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency White material no darker than or no yellower than of Federal Standard Number C Colors Daytime color of the yellow epoxy meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points Yellow x . . . . y . . . . White daylight directional reflectance Y of least percent Yellow daylight directional reflectance Y of at least percent Nighttime color of yellow meeting the following chromaticity limits in ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points Yellow x . . . . y . . . .
Contrast Ratio of .
or greater when measured on a blackwhite drawdown card at mils WFT application rate .
B. Adhesion Capabilities Provide material meeting the adhesion requirements of the American Concrete Institute Committee when tested on portland cement concrete .
Apply MultiComponent Liquid pavement markings during the test to concrete pavements with a tensile strength of at least psi kPa and ensure the failure of the system occurs in the concrete during testing .
B. Abrasion Resistance Provide material with an abrasion resistance wear index no greater than when tested in accordance with ASTM C with a CS wheel under a load of g for cycles .
The Department defines the wear index as the weight in milligrams of material abraded from the sample under the test conditions .
B. Hardness Provide material with a Type D durometer hardness from to when tested in accordance with ASTM D after curing for h at F F C C. B. Tensile Strength For epoxyamine based multicomponent systems including variations of this base chemistry provide material with a tensile strength of at least psi kPa when tested in accordance with ASTM D after curing for h at F F C C. For polyurea based multicomponent systems provide material with a tensile strength of at least psi kPa when tested in accordance with ASTM D after curing for h at F F C C. B. Compressive Strength For epoxyamine based multicomponent systems including variations of this base chemistry provide material with a compressive strength of at least psi kPa when tested in accordance with ASTM D after curing for h at F F C C. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Test the daylight directional reflectance and the color meeting the requirements of ASTM E . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide pt .
L samples of each manufacturers lot or batch of material when manufactured to the Department .
Provide pt .
L samples of Part A yellowwhite multicomponent liquid and Part B catalyst to the Materials Laboratory .
Mark the samples with the following information Manufacturer product number Lot or batch number Name of manufacturer Date of manufacture Color and State project numbers for intended material use .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance for all components of the MultiComponent Liquid pavement marking system .
Mark containers for epoxy components with the following information Name of manufacturer Product identification number Lot or batch number Date of manufacture Color and Net weight of contents .
WATERBASED TRAFFIC PAINT .
SCOPE Provide fastdry white and yellow acrylic latex traffic marking paints for use with dropon glass beads for application on concrete and bituminous pavements . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Requirements Use paint listed on the ApprovedQualified Products Lists for Latex Paint and High Build Latex Paint .
A .
Quality Provide paint meeting the following requirements and characteristics Formulated from firstgrade materials Capable of being applied by conventional traffic striping equipment at elevated spray temperatures with dropon glass beads Smooth Homogeneous and Free of coarse particles skins or other foreign materials detrimental to the application or appearance of the paint .
A .
Package Stability Within months from the time of delivery if the paint cakes settles livers thickens skins curdles gels or shows other objectionable properties not correctable with stirring return the paint to the manufacturer for credit .
Ensure the manufacturer adds antisettling agents stabilizers and other additives to ensure proper storage stability .
A .
Manufacturing and Packaging Provide paint from a manufacturer capable of producing paint in batches of at least gal L. Provide paint screened with a mesh or finer screen to remove coarse particles skins or foreign material .
Provide paint packaged in lined new totes of gal L or gal L containers meeting the following requirements and characteristics Full removablehead universal drums meeting the requirements of DOTH Drum covers containing one in mm fitting and one ¾ in mm fitting Marked with the following information .
Manufacturers name .
Type of paint .
Batch number .
Date of manufacture .
Gross weight and .
Container weight. . Minnesota Standard Specifications To prevent formation of skins ensure the manufacturer uses one of the following A float of ammonia water on the paint surface or A floating type plastic liner on the top of the filled container .
B Properties of Finished Paint Provide finished paint with properties in accordance with either Table or Table Table High Solids Paint Properties Parameter Test Method Range Weight per gallon at F C ASTM D . lb per gal Viscosity Krebs Stormer at F C ASTM D KU KU Grind Hegman ASTM D Total solids ASTM D by weight Nonvolatile vehicle by weight Pigment ASTM D by weight Dry time mil µm WFT at RH ASTM D modified MnDOT Lab Manual min Dry through at RH MnDOT Lab Manual min Daylight directional reflectance white ASTM E Daylight directional reflectance yellow ASTM E Contrast ratio mil µm wet ASTM D . Flexibility and adhesion MnDOT Lab Manual No cracking or flaking Water resistance MnDOT Lab Manual No blistering or loss of adhesion Settling MnDOT Lab Manual rating Skinning at h MnDOT Lab Manual none Track free time MnDOT Lab Manual min pH ASTM E . Lab Retroreflectivity white min .
mcdmlux MnDOT Lab Manual Lab Retroreflectivity yellow min .
mcdmlux MnDOT Lab Manual Table High Build Paint Properties Parameter Range Weight per gallon at F C ASTM D . lb per gal Viscosity Krebs Stormer at F C ASTM D KU KU Grind Hegman ASTM D Total solids ASTM D by weight Nonvolatile vehicle by weight Pigment ASTM D by weight Dry time mil µm WFT at RH ASTM D modified MnDOT Lab Manual min Dry time mil µm WFT at RH ASTM D modified MnDOT Lab Manual min Dry through at RH MnDOT Lab Manual min Daylight directional reflectance white ASTM E Daylight directional reflectance yellow ASTM E Contrast ratio mil µm wet ASTM D . Flexibility and adhesion MnDOT Lab Manual No cracking or flaking Water resistance MnDOT Lab Manual No blistering or loss of adhesion Settling MnDOT Lab Manual rating Skinning at h MnDOT Lab Manual none Track free time MnDOT Lab Manual min pH ASTM E . Lab Retroreflectivity white min .
mcdmlux MnDOT Lab Manual Lab Retroreflectivity yellow min .
mcdmlux MnDOT Lab Manual .
Minnesota Standard Specifications C Specific Requirements For High Solids paints meeting the requirements of Table use a vehicle composed of a percent acrylic polymer .
For High Build paints meeting the requirements of Table use Rohm Hass HD Dow DT or approved equal acrylic emulsion polymer .
Use white material no darker than or no yellower than of Federal Standard Number C Colors .
Use yellow paint with a daytime color meeting the following CIE Chromaticity limits using illuminant D Table Daytime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . Use yellow paint with a nighttime color meeting the following chromaticity limits as specified by ASTM D Table Table Nighttime Chromaticity Coordinates Corner Points x . . . . y . . . . Use white and organic yellow paints free of the following heavy metals Lead Mercury Cadmium Hexavalent chromium and Other toxic heavy metals as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide pt .
L manufacturerprovided paint samples of each batch and a certification stating that the sample represents the full manufactured batch .
The Department may base acceptance on pt .
L samples taken at the point of delivery or from the Contractors supply .
Submit to the Materials Laboratory the manufacturers certified test results with each batch of paint including tests for weight per gallon viscosity and drying time .
Provide the manufacturers certified test results for tests performed annually at the start of paint production meeting the following requirements Table Paint Property Standard Parameter Standard Weight per gallon ASTM D Viscosity ASTM D Grind fineness ASTM D Total solids ASTM D Total pigment ASTM D Dry time ASTM D modified Daylight directional reflectance ASTM E Contrast ratio mil µm wet ASTM D Color ASTM E pH ASTM E Minnesota Standard Specifications DROPON GLASS BEADS .
SCOPE Provide treated glass beads for retroreflectorizing liquid pavement markings . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide treated glass beads meeting AASTHO M with the following characteristics and requirements A General Requirements Listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List Made from clean colorless transparent glass Smooth Spherically shaped Free from milkiness pits excessive air bubbles chips and foreign material Capable of being applied by conventional striping equipment and Produce a retroreflectorized line when viewed at night with automobile headlights B Gradation and Roundness Requirements B .
Standard Gradation Meet the requirements of AASHTO M Type except with at least percent true spheres .
B. Utah Blend Gradation Meet the graduation requirements of Table and at least percent true spheres for beads passing the sieve .
Table Utah Blend Gradation Requirements Sieve Size Passing No .
No .
No .
C Coating Requirements C. Dual Coated Beads Provide beads with dual surface treatment meeting the following requirements and characteristics for use with waterbased paints Moisture resistant silicone surface treatment meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and T as recommended by the paint manufacturer Silane adherence surface treatment as recommended by the paint manufacturer and Meet the adherence treatment Dansyl Chloride Test of AASHTO M and T . C. Moisture Resistant Coated Beads Provide beads for use with multicomponent liquid with a moisture resistant silicone surface treatment meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and T as recommended by the multicomponent liquid manufacturer .
D Packaging Requirements Unless otherwise specified provide beads packaged in moistureproof multiwall shipping bags and in containers marked with the following information Manufacturer name Manufacturer address Types of coating treatments Batch number and Date of manufacture .
Deliver the containers and contents in a dry condition .
The Engineer will reject beads not meeting the requirements of this specification. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples in the rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule for Materials Control and as required by the contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will test in accordance with AASHTO M except the Engineer will determine roundness meeting the requirements detailed in the Laboratory Manual .
Stone and Brick RIPRAP MATERIAL .
SCOPE Provide stone and filter layer material for use in random or handplaced riprap gabion and revet mattress construction . .
REQUIREMENTS A Stones A .
Quality Provide stone of the quality approved by the Department and meeting the following requirements Each individual stone has at least one fractured face .
Is free of soil or other debris before placement .
Contains less than percent of the following by weight .
Stones with defects that could cause rapid or excessive deterioration or degradation during service such as cracks or seams .
Stones with a width or thickness less than percent of the length .
For carbonate quarrybedrock material used in total or in part for riprap the portion of the insoluble residue passing the sieve is no greater than percent .
Use virgin materials for riprap and granular filter To determine suitable quality of stone the Department may consider the results of laboratory tests the performance of the stone under natural exposure conditions the performance of the riprap from the same or similar geological formations or deposits or other tests or criteria .
A .
Type A .. a Random Riprap Table A .. b HandPlaced Riprap Provide individual stones with a weight of at least lb .
The Department will not require a minimum weight for smaller stones required for filling in the narrow openings between individual stones chinking .
A .. c Blank A .. d Gabions and Revet Mattresses Provide well graded stones for filling the baskets ranging in size from inches to inches for gabions and inches to inches for revet mattresses. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Random Riprap Gradation Requirements Weight lb Size inch Approximate Percent of Total Weight Smaller than Given Weight Class of Riprap I II III IV V Weight to size conversion based on a specific gravity of .
and a volume average between a sphere and cube B Filter Material B. Granular Filter Provide granular filter material in accordance with Granular Material and the following gradations B .. a Under Class I Random Riprap .. G. Use Class gradation requirements listed in Table B .. b Under Other Riprap Gabion and Revet Mattress Table Table Granular Filter Material Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight inch inch inch No .
No .
No .
No .
B. Geotextile Filter .
SAMPLING AND TESTING The Department will inspect the material for compliance to the requirements of this section .
Obtain the Engineers approval of the quality of the stone before delivering the stone to the project .
The Engineer will inspect the stone for compliance to the gradation requirements after delivery of the stone to the project .
The Engineer will visually check riprap gradations .
If the Contractor disagrees with the results of the Engineers visual check the Contractor will test the gradation based on weight under supervision of the Engineer .
If the quantity of riprap for any class is greater than yd the Engineer may require construction of a control unit consisting of yd of riprap as a reference for size and quality compliance .
Construct the control unit at the source or on the project .
When the Engineer requires and approves a control unit for reference maintain the control unit during riprap construction and incorporate the stones from the control unit as the last stones placed in the riprap construction .
Use production stone equivalent to the stone placed in the approved control unit .
If using carbonate quarrybedrock materials in total or in part for riprap materials sample and test at the rates specified in the Schedule of Materials Control for the following tests Insoluble Residue Laboratory Manual Method .
Minnesota Standard Specifications GABIONS AND REVET MATTRESSES MATERIALS .
SCOPE Provide material and construct baskets for gabions and revet mattresses meeting the following characteristics Rectangular Variable in size and Manufactured from doubletwisted metalliccoated wire mesh or metalliccoated welded wire fabric .
A Gabion Rectangular Basket B Revet Mattress Thin Flat Rectangular Basket .
REQUIREMENTS Provide gabions and revet mattresses meeting the requirements of ASTM A for welded wire fabric or ASTM A for doubletwisted wire .
Unless otherwise specified provide welded wire fabric gabions and revet mattresses with a Style coating and provide doubletwisted wire gabions and revet mattresses with a Style coating as listed in the ASTM A and ASTM A specifications respectively. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance for the wire and basket materials and the construction of gabions and revet mattresses .
PRECAST ARTICULATED CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide manufactured articulated concrete block and mat revetment systems to protect embankment slopes river channels spillways and vehicle accesses where the soil may erode . .
REQUIREMENTS A Revetment Systems A. Articulated Block Mat Provide closed cell or open cell articulated block mat consisting of blocks cabled together into a prefabricated mat placed on a geotextile fabric meeting ASTM D . Place the mats sidebyside and clamp and anchor to provide one homogeneous erosion protection system .
Provide blocks for the mats ranging in thickness and weight meeting the bed shear requirements in accordance with Table Bed Shear Requirements .
Determine the type in accordance with Table Bed Shear Requirements for Type A Type B Type C Type D and Type E. Table Bed Shear Requirements Type Minimum Bed Shear lbsq .
ft A B C D E A. Articulated Interlocking Block Mat Provide closed cell or open cell articulated interlocking block consisting of hand placed concrete blocks placed on a geotextile fabric and locked together to form a soil protecting paver system .
Provide blocks ranging in thickness and weight meeting the bed shear requirements in accordance with Table Bed Shear Requirements .
Determine the type in accordance with Table Bed Shear Requirements for Type A Type B and Type C. Provide open cell units with an open area of at least percent when measured at the bottom of the block in the system .
Provide closed cell systems with an open area no greater than percent when measured at the bottom of the block in the system .
B Concrete Provide blocks meeting Specification Structural Concrete and the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Manufactured in a plant with a Department approved quality control plan Design air content of .
percent for wet cast blocks Less than .
percent loss in freezethaw cycles when tested in accordance with ASTM C using a distilled water solution or less than .
percent loss in freezethaw cycles when tested in accordance with ASTM C Absorption no greater than .
percent when tested in accordance with ASTM C and Minimum Design Strength at days when tested in accordance with ASTM C a. psi for wet cast b. psi for dry cast C Cable For systems using cables provide stainless steel or coated highstrength polyester cables compatible with the system and designed to meet a factor of safety in accordance with ASTM D . Use stainless steel cable at least in .
thick and use highstrength polyester cable at least ¼ in .
thick .
D Geotextile Filter Provide geotextile appropriate for the soil conditions in accordance with the manufactures recommendations and Geotextiles .
The Engineer will make the final approval of the geotextile type .
E Clamps Use stainlesssteel wire rope clamps and sleeves to secure loops of adjoining mats .
F Anchors Use helical or duckbill anchors with a pull resistance of lbs .
to secure the top and exposed sides of the articulating block system. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufactures Certificate of Compliance for the revetment system and components that meets the requirements of ASTM D and ASTM D . CONCRETE ARMOR UNITS .
SCOPE Provide manufactured concrete armor units for use in stream bank riverbank and lakeshore stabilization and for soil bioengineering construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Use interlocking concrete cross shaped units each with two individual and symmetrical interlocking halves to provide concrete armor units .
Assemble the units with the two individual halves forming a three dimensional cross with six symmetrical legs .
Assemble multiple identical units into a continuous and flexible interlocking matrix with a percent void space for soil filling and planting .
Use concrete meeting the following requirements to form the armor units Type concrete per Structural Concrete Compressive strength of at least psi and Water absorption no greater than lb .
per cu .
ft .
Ensure each concrete armor unit meets the physical requirements in accordance with the following Table Concrete Armor Units Size Designation A A Overall dimension outside of leg to outside of leg in in Thickness of each side of leg .
in .
in Kerf corner reinforcement .
in .
in Overall weight of assembled unit lb lb NOTE Dimensions are nominal dimensions with a percent tolerance. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK .
Minnesota Standard Specifications SEWER BRICK CLAY .
SCOPE Provide brick made from burned clay or shale for the following Drainage structures that are part of a sewage industrial waste or storm water system and Related structures such as manholes and catch basins . .
REQUIREMENTS Use sewer bricks meeting the requirements of ASTM C for the grade shown on the plans .
If the plans do not specify a grade provide Grade MS for manholes or catch basin construction and Grade SS for other sewer construction. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Compressive Strength and Absorption ASTM C B Freezing and Thawing ASTM C C Sample Bricks The Engineer will select bricks for testing .
Provide test specimens from the manufacturer or seller at no additional cost to the Department .
BUILDING BRICK CLAY OR SHALE .
SCOPE Provide clay or shale building brick for use in the construction of transportation facilities .
REQUIREMENTS Provide clay or shale building brick meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . Provide grade SW unless otherwise required by the contract. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
BUILDING BRICK SANDLIME .
SCOPE Provide sandlime building brick for use in the construction of transportation facilities . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide sandlime building brick meeting the requirements of ASTM C . If the contract does not require a specific brick grade provide grade SW building brick. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
BUILDING BRICK CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide concrete building brick for construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide concrete building brick meeting the requirements of ASTM C . For architectural veneer and facing uses provide concrete building brick meeting the requirements of ASTM C . In either case provide normal weight brick unless otherwise required by the contract. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
SEWER BRICK CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide concrete brick to construct catch basins and manholes. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Provide concrete brick meeting the requirements of ASTM C as modified by the following Provide concrete brick with a compressive strength of at least psi for any individual unit and an average compressive strength of psi for three units when delivered to the project and Use steam or water curing methods to cure the concrete unless the Materials Engineer approves the use of a sealing membrane or other curing methods .
If steam curing maintain an atmospheric temperature in the curing chamber no greater than F. Protect the concrete from freezing until the completion of curing .
Continue curing until the concrete develops the compressive strength shown above in item within days .
Use any standard size brick capable of producing the dimensions in the completed structure as shown on the plans. . SAMPLING AND TESTING ASTM C Precast Concrete Units CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS .
SCOPE Provide solid precast segmental concrete masonry units to construct catch basins and manholes . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide concrete masonry units in accordance with .
Sewer Brick Concrete Requirements modified to provide units with dimensions as shown on the plans and with wall thicknesses of in ⅜ inch. . SAMPLING AND TESTING SECTIONAL CONCRETE MANHOLE AND CATCH BASIN UNITS .
SCOPE Provide precast reinforced concrete manholecatch basin units consisting of riser sections and appurtenances such as grade rings base slabs tops and special sections to construct sewer or water works . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide reinforced concrete manholecatch basin units meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Reinforced Concrete Pipe and the following .
Notify the Materials Engineer according to the requirements of before the manufacturer starts production to arrange for inspection .
A Physical Properties Provide sectional concrete manholecatch basin units in the dimensions shape wall thickness type and quantity of reinforcement as shown on the plans .
The Contractor may use alternative spigotup joint or alternative offset joint .
Use the profile or prelubricated pipe seal system with the alternative offset joint .
Ensure test results show a compressive strength of at least psi at calendar days and before shipping the product to the project site .
B Manufacture Provide units true to shape and with smooth dense surfaces uniform in appearance .
As soon as the forms are removed use mortar to fill minor surface cavities or irregularities not impairing the service value of the unit and capable of being corrected without marring the appearance .
Remove forms without damaging the unit. . Minnesota Standard Specifications When the manufacturer provides manholes with block outs or holes provide additional steel in the remaining unit to prevent cracking .
If the unit is cracked remove the cracked portion and repair with mortar in accordance with the approved repair procedure in the QM Manual and notify the MnDOT inspector for acceptance .
When manufacturing special design rectangular manholes provide sections meeting the manufacturing requirements of . . SAMPLING AND TESTING PRECAST CONCRETE MEDIAN BARRIERS .
SCOPE Provide precast concrete median barriers for use in construction work zones . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide precast concrete median barriers manufactured at a precasting plant approved by the Materials Engineer .
A Materials A .
Concrete A .
Mix Designation A. Reinforcement Bars B Concrete Finish If shown on the Plans or required by the Special Provisions sandblast the precast barrier units and fill the surface imperfections with a groutcontaining bonding agent in accordance with .. F .. a Ordinary Surface Finish .
Begin sandblasting and grouting operations after stripping the forms and while the concrete barriers are still warm. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Minnesota Standard Specifications Joint Fillers and Sealers PREFORMED JOINT FILLERS .
SCOPE Provide preformed filler material for joints in concrete construction . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide preform joint filler material listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Provide the following types of preformed joint filler material meeting the requirements of AASHTO M or AASHTO M . Type A Cork .
Type B Selfexpanding Cork .
Type C Sponge Rubber .
Type E Bituminous Type Provide the following types of preformed joint filler material in accordance with the following .
Type D Closedcell Polyethylene Foam meeting the requirements of ASTM D . Type D Closedcell Polypropylene Foam Provide the filler for each joint in a single piece for the full depth and width required for the joint unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
For pavement construction provide filler in lengths equal to the width of the pavement lanes .
Where dowel bars are necessary provide joint filler with properly sized cleancut punched holes correctly spaced to fit flush with the dowel bars .
Provide preformed filler material meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Preformed Joint Filler Requirements Properties Type A B C D D E Compression psi psi psi psi ǁ psi psi Recovery Extrusion .
in .
in .
in .
in .
in .
in Density lbft .
lbft lbft Water Absorption Asphalt Content Expansion To of the original thickness ǁ Compression requirements per ASTM D Airdried .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
HOTPOURED CRUMBRUBBER TYPE CRACK SEALER .
SCOPE Provide hotpoured crumbrubber type crack sealer for sealing cracks in concrete and bituminous pavements and miscellaneous structures . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide crack sealer material meeting the following requirements .
Minnesota Standard Specifications On the Approved Products List Consists of asphalt and crumb rubber blended together by the manufacturer to produce a homogeneous mixture When melted the sealer does not separate or settle and Uniform consistency suitable for filling joints and cracks without inclusion of large air holes or discontinuities .
A Physical Requirements Provide crack sealer meeting the requirements of ASTM D Type I with the following modifications in Table after one cycle of heating to the manufacturers maximum heating temperature cooling and reheating to the manufacturers maximum heating temperature .
Table ASTM D Type I Modifications Test Specification Recycled rubber mass of asphaltic components Bond Test extension at F C No adhesion or cohesion bond failure after cycles Resilience at F C Softening point F C Use sawed cement mortar blocks or asphalt HMA blocks prepared using the method found in the MnDOT Laboratory Manual .
B Packaging and Marking Package and ship the sealer material in boxes weighing no greater than lb kg .
Mark the boxes with the following information Material name Manufacturer name Brand name Weight Batch number and Maximum heating temperature recommended by the manufacturer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Sampling Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
The Materials Engineer will perform tests on samples taken from the product proposed for use .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance for each sealer batch .
B Methods of Test Perform tests meeting the requirements of ASTM D except perform the bond test using sawed cement mortar blocks or asphalt HMA blocks consistent with the pavement type prepared in accordance with the methods in the Laboratory Manual .
PREFORMED ELASTOMERIC COMPRESSION JOINT SEALS FOR CONCRETE .
SCOPE Provide preformed polychloroprene elastomeric joint seals for use in sealing joints in concrete pavements bridges and other structures . .
REQUIREMENTS A Composition and Manufacture Provide joint seals meeting the requirements of ASTM D and as specified in this section .
Provide seals that are preformed and manufactured from a vulcanized elastomeric compound using polymerized chloroprene as the only polymer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Size and Shape Provide preformed elastomeric compression joint seals in the size shape and dimensional tolerances of the seals as shown on the plans or required by the contract .
The Contractor may use alternate shapes if approved by the Engineer .
C Physical Properties Unless the contract requires otherwise provide a in mm joint seal meeting the physical properties in accordance with ASTM D and the following table Table in mm Joint Seal CompressionDeflection Requirements Property Requirement Force at .
in .
mm lblinear inch .
Nmm Force at .
in .
mm lblinear inch .
Nmm Meeting the requirements of ASTM D and the CompressionDeflection Test Method located in the Laboratory Manual .
D Identification and Marking Provide joint seals marked with the following at intervals no greater than ft . m Manufacturers name or the manufacturers trademark Lot number and Date of production .
For multiple die extrusion machines identify the seal produced from each extrusion die as an individual sublot in addition to the list above .
Limit individual lot numbers or sublot numbers to one every h shift or every ft m whichever results in the smallest lot size .
Place a mark on the top surface of the seal at ft mm intervals to allow length measurements on each seal after installation .
Provide containers to package joint seals for shipment marked with the following information Name of the manufacturer Lot number or sublot number and Date of manufacture .
E LubricantAdhesive Provide lubricantadhesive meeting the requirements of ASTM D to install the seals. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer in conjunction with the Materials Engineer may sample and test joint seals and lubricant adhesive materials before or after delivery .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Materials Engineer may reject an entire lot or sublot if a test result for that lot or sublot fails .
A Sampling Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule for Materials Control or as required by the contract .
B Sample Preparation The Materials Engineer will prepare test specimens meeting the requirements of ASTM D and in accordance with the Laboratory Manual .
C Compression Deflection Test Perform compression deflection testing on two specimens in accordance with the Laboratory Manual .
SILICONE JOINT SEALANT .
SCOPE Provide a silicone joint sealant for use in concrete pavement joints and cracks to protect the pavement from intrusion of water and incompressible material . .
REQUIREMENTS .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide silicone joint sealant meeting the requirements of ASTM D and the following Primerless Low modulus Does not contain solvents or diluents that can cause shrinkage or expansion during curing Smooth and uniform in appearance with a consistency that allows application with air pressure guns or hand caulking applicators Capable of withstanding repeated joint movement from percent to percent without losing adhesion to the concrete and without cohesion failure and Listed on the Approved Products List. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
HOTPOURED ELASTIC TYPE JOINT AND CRACK SEALER .
SCOPE Provide hotpoured elastic type joint and crack sealer to seal joints and cracks in concrete and bituminous pavements bridges and other structures . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide a sealant material meeting the following requirements Listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List Composed of a combination of polymeric materials fully reacted chemically to form a homogeneous compound When melted ensure the sealant does not separate or settle and ensure the sealant does not contain a dispersed or settling component and Maintains a uniform consistency to seal joints and cracks without large air holes or discontinuities .
A Physical Requirements Provide sealant meeting the requirements of ASTM D Type II and the following modifications Table ASTM D Type II Modifications Test Requirement Cone penetration at F C g s dmm Bond at F C cycles extension No adhesion or cohesion bond failure after cycles Mandrel bend test at F C in mm mandrel No cracking Resilience at F C B Packaging and Marking Package and ship the sealant material in boxes no greater than lb kg .
Mark the containers with the following information Material name Manufacturer name Brand name Weight Batch number and Maximum heating temperature as recommended by the manufacturer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Sampling Provide samples in rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
The Materials Engineer will perform tests on samples taken from the product proposed for use .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each sealant batch. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Methods of Test B .
Bond Test Perform tests meeting the requirements of ASTM D except perform the bond test using sawed cement mortar blocks or asphalt HMA blocks consistent with the pavement type prepared using the methods found in the Laboratory Manual .
B. Mandrel Bend Test ASTM D Method B The Materials Engineer will perform the Mandrel Bend Test at F C using a in mm mandrel bending the specimen over s. The Materials Engineer will prepare test specimens meeting the requirements of ASTM D Type II Flow Test and condition the specimens at F C for at least h. HOTPOURED EXTRA LOW MODULUS ELASTIC TYPE JOINT AND CRACK SEALER .
SCOPE Provide hotpoured extra low modulus elastic type joint and crack sealer to seal joints in concrete pavement bridges other structures and rout and seal applications on bituminous pavements . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide a sealant material meeting the following requirements Listed on the MnDOT Approved Products List Composed of a combination of polymeric materials fully reacted chemically to form a homogeneous compound When melted ensure the sealant does not separate or settle and Maintains a uniform consistency to seal joints and cracks without inclusion of large air holes or discontinuities .
A Physical Requirements Provide sealant meeting the requirements of ASTM D Type IV with the following modifications in Table .
Table ASTM D Type IV Modifications Test Requirement Cone Penetration at F C ASTM D dmm Cone Penetration at F C ASTM D modified dmm Resilience ASTM D NOTE Ensure the material meets the requirements of Table after heating for h with constant mixing in a laboratory melter at the manufacturers maximum heating temperature .
B Packaging and Marking Package and ship the sealant material in boxes weighing no greater than lb kg .
Mark the boxes with the following information Material name Manufacturer name Brand name Weight Batch number and Maximum heating temperature recommended by the manufacturer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
The Materials Engineer will perform tests on samples taken from the product proposed for use .
Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance with each sealant batch .
Perform tests meeting the requirements of ASTM D except perform the bond test using sawed cement mortar blocks or asphalt HMA blocks consistent with the pavement type prepared using the methods found in the Lab Manual .
PREFORMED GASKET SEALS FOR CONCRETE PIPE .
SCOPE Provide preformed gasket seals to construct watertight joints for concrete pipe. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Provide preformed gasket type seals to construct flexible watertight joints in concrete pipe meeting the requirements of AASHTO M and as shown in the plans for the specific joint design of the pipe. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
BITUMINOUS MASTIC JOINT SEALER FOR PIPE .
SCOPE Provide cold applied mineral filled joint sealing compound for joints of bell and spigot or tongue and groove concrete or clay culvert sewer or drain pipe . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide a bituminous mastic joint sealer consisting of refined petroleum asphalt meeting the requirements of ASTM D except for the following modifications Table ASTM D Modifications Test Requirement Grease cone penetration unworked g F C s ASTM D dmm dmm Density .
lb per gal .
kg per L Nonvolatile content Ash content by ignition Cure Evaluation at F C Tough plastic coating free of blisters Do not use coal tar products .
Provide material exhibiting percent adhesion and cohesion when applied to metal concrete or vitrified clay surfaces. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance .
Apply the bituminous mastic joint sealer in a layer in to in mm to mm thick on a tinned metal panel .
Cure the joint sealer at F C for h. An acceptable bituminous mastic joint sealer will set to a tough plastic coating free of blisters .
CAULKING COMPOUND .
SCOPE Provide caulking compound meeting the requirements of Federal Specification AA in the type required by the contract .
If the type is not specified use Type IIIButyl Rubber or Type IV Silicone . .
REQUIREMENTS Apply the caulking compound in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Unless the contract requires otherwise use near white light gray or buff colored caulking compound. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Sample and test in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
GEOTEXTILES .
SCOPE Provide geotextiles permeable fabrics for the typical uses classified as follows Type for wrapping subsurface drain pipe joints of concrete pipe culvert or other drainage applications Type .
The Department no longer uses this classification .
If the contract specifies Type use Type property requirements Type for use under Class I and Class II random riprap gabions and revetment mattresses Type for use under Class III and Class IV random riprap and handplaced riprap on slopes no steeper than horizontal to vertical .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Type for separating materials for stabilization Type for earth reinforcement Type for use under Class III and Class IV random riprap on slopes steeper than horizontal to vertical and under Class V random riprap .
Type for use as a bond breaker interlayer for concrete overlays over existing concrete pavement . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide geotextiles consisting of woven nonwoven or knit fabric of polymeric filaments or yarns such as polypropylene polyethylene polyester or polyamide that form a stable network .
Knit fabric shall only be used as perforated pipe wrap .
Provide geotextile resistant to biological and chemical environments normally found in soils and that is free of chemical treatment or coating that may significantly reduce porosity or permeability .
Provide geotextile that is uniform in texture thickness and appearance and is free of defects flaws or tears that may alter the strength or filtering properties .
Repair geotextile as approved by the Engineer .
Deliver rolls of geotextile or geotextilewrapped perforated pipe with an opaque plastic covering to protect the material from ultraviolet rays or contamination with mud dirt dust or debris .
Provide rolled geotextile labeled on the outside wrap and inside the core in accordance with ASTM D and as follows Manufacturer Product name and Roll number .
Ensure unprotected geotextile is not exposed to sun for more than seven days .
Replace contaminated geotextile or geotextile exposed to the sun for more than seven days if directed by the Engineer .
Provide geotextile meeting the requirements of Table or Table for the type required by the contract .
If using Type through Type geotextile produce seams meeting the requirements of Table row B Seam Breaking Strength Minimum. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Physical Properties Table Geotextile Properties Geotextile Property Test Method ASTM Type a Units c h Fabric Knit sock b B Grab Tensile Strength minimum each principal direction D lb d B Elongation minimum each principal direction D percent d B Seam Breaking Strength minimum e D lb d B Apparent Opening Size AOS maximum f D U.S. Std .
sieve size as applied B Permittivity minimum g D falling head sec . . relaxed .
. . . . B Puncture strength minimum D lb B Wide Width Strip Tensile Strength minimum each principal direction D lbft d a Minimum Average Roll Values MARV based on average of at least three tests per swatch .
b Provide socks made of knit polymeric materials and meeting the requirements of ASTM D for Type H fabric .
Ensure the sock exhibits minimum snag or run potential is factoryapplied to maintain uniform installed mass and conforms to the outside diameter of the tubing with a snug fit .
c Needlepunched nonwoven .
Do not use thermally bonded heatset fabric .
d Requirements are sitespecific and will be as specified in the contract .
The property values for B and B may not be less than shown for Type .
If the contract does not specify either B or B use a default value of lb for B .
If the contract does not specify seam strength use a default value of lb for B. e Adhere to this requirement if the contract requires or allows seams .
Strength specifications apply to factory and field seams .
Use thread for sewing that has strength of at least lb .
Sew seams with a Federal Type stitch using a twospool sewing machine and install seams facing upward .
For seaming with adhesives see the ApprovedQualified Products List available at the Departments website .
f For U.S. sieve sizes the AOS Number must be equal to or greater than the number specified .
g Permittivity P KL where K fabric permeability and L fabric thickness .
h See Table for requirements. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Nonwoven Geotextile Interlayer Material for Concrete Overlay Property Requirements Test Procedure Geotextile type Nonwoven needlepunched geotextile no thermal treatment calendaring or IR Manufacturer Certificate of Compliance Color Uniformnominally samecolor fibers Visual Inspection Mass per unit area .
ozyd ASTM D Thickness under load pressure a At .
psi .
in b At .
psi .
in c At psi .
in ASTM D Widewidth tensile strength lbft ASTM D Widewidth maximum elongation ASTM D Water permeability in normal direction under load pressure At .
psi .x fts Mod .
ASTM D or ASTM D Inplane water permeability transmissivity under load pressure a At .
psi .x fts b At psi .x fts Mod .
ASTM D or ASTM D Weather resistance Retained strength ASTM D hrs .
exposure Alkali resistance polypropylenepolyethylene Manufacturer certification of polymer .
SAMPLING AND TESTING A Certificate of Compliance Ensure the supplier submits to the Engineer a Certificate of Compliance and a document stating the manufacturers MARV with each shipment of geotextile .
MARV are two standard deviations below the mean value of all rolls tested .
Provide a copy of the Certificate of Compliance and MARV with each geotextile sample sent to the Materials Laboratory for testing .
B Sampling and Testing The Departments inspection and test results will determine acceptance of the geotextile in accordance with .
Acceptance .
In the presence of the Engineer randomly select samples in the field at the rates and sample sizes shown in the Schedule of Materials Control .
Cut samples across the full width of the roll .
Do not sample the first full turn outside layer of the roll .
Provide seam samples in addition to the regular sample .
Use the same machine or an equal machine to the one on the project to produce seam samples .
ELASTOMERIC BEARING PADS .
SCOPE Provide elastomeric bearing pads for use in bridges and other structures . .
REQUIREMENTS A General The basis of design for all bearing pads is in conformance with Method A of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
Before the start of work the supplier will be prequalified on MnDOTs approved suppliers for fabricated structural metals products list as maintained by the Structural Metals Engineer at httpwww.dot.state.mn.usbridgepdfapprovedsuppliers.pdf or at least calendar days prior to beginning work the supplier is to submit a Quality Manual QM to the Engineer for review .
Ensure the QM is written in accordance with the MnDOT Supplier Qualification Standard SQS .
The Engineer will use the SQS as the basis of acceptance for the submitted QM .
In addition to routine inspections the Engineer will audit suppliers with approved QMs on a biannual or annual basis or as otherwise directed by the Engineer to ensure the implementation of the QM .
The Department will invoke its Corrective Action Process if the routine inspections or audits indicate nonconformance .
Any and all corrective actions deemed appropriate by the Engineer are effective immediately and apply to any work remaining on a current project and all future projects .
If the Engineer determines that work does not comply with the QM or that fabrication does not follow approved fabrication procedures the Engineer will deem the materials as nonconforming in accordance with Conformity with Contract Documents and Unacceptable and Unauthorized Work .
If the Engineer finds nonconforming .
Minnesota Standard Specifications work direct the supplier to immediately correct the procedure and submit a written nonconformance report containing data required by the Engineer to ensure compliance with the QM specifications and drawings .
Perform additional testing as required by the Engineer at no additional cost to the Department .
For repeat offences or negligence the Department will require corrective action of hiring a third party Quality Control Inspector at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor may obtain a copy of the Departments Corrective Action Process from the Engineer .
Provide bearing pads no greater than ½ in thick fabricated of all elastomer .
Plain elastomer pads may be cut from larger sheets cast to the thickness shown on the plans .
Avoid heating or damaging the material when cutting .
Ensure the cutting produces smooth edges at least meeting the requirements of ANSI finish .
Provide bearings of laminated construction when pads are greater than ½ inch thick .
Refer to AASHTO M for tolerances dimensions and configurations except provide elastomer to a thickness of ¼ inch within a range from inch to inch to cover the top and bottom steel plates .
Provide laminated pads meeting the following requirements or characteristics Consisting of alternate layers of elastomer and metal reinforcement integrally bonded together Containing reinforcement spaced as shown on the plans and parallel to the top and bottom surfaces of the pad and Including the manufacturers name or trademark molded into the edge of the pad .
Including elastomer lot number and grade on the edge of the pad using indelible ink or flexible paint of contrasting color .
Do not expose the finished laminated pad to temperatures greater than F. Cover the edges of metal reinforcement with ¼ inch of elastomer .
B Physical Properties Substitute the requirements of sections .
and .
of AASHTO M comply with B .
B. in this specification .
B. Elastomer Use elastomer compound containing only virgin crystallization resistant polychloroprene neoprene or virgin natural polyisoprene natural rubber as the raw polymer .
Use only new material with no reclaimed material incorporated in the finished bearing .
Provide elastomer for bearing pads meeting the requirements of AASHTO M with durometer hardness of on the Shore A scale .
Provide elastomer compounds classified as LowTemperature Zone D Grade or meeting the requirements of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Table LowTemperature Zones and Minimum Grades of Elastomer .
Utilize cotton duck bearing pads CDP where MnDOT Bridge Details Part B and B are included in the plans or when MnDOT Bridge Details Part B or B utilize plain nonsteel reinforced elastomeric bearing pads .
Test and manufacture CDP in accordance with Military Specification MILCE .
For CDP waive additional sampling and testing requirements listed in this specification .
B .
Properties Test and accept sampled bearings in accordance with the following Natural Polyisoprene Natural Rubber Polychloroprene Neoprene Durometer Physical properties Hardness ASTM D Tensile strength ASTM D psi psi Ultimate elongation ASTM D minimum Heat resistance ASTM D Fhrs Fhrs Temperature Aging Time Hardness maximum Shore A points change Tensile strength maximum percent change Ultimate elongation maximum percent change Compression set ASTM D method B N.A .
hrs .
at F maximum percent hrs .
at F maximum percent N.A .
Low Temperature Test ASTM D procedure B No Failure No Failure Brittleness at .
F Laminated Pad Adhesion Test ASTM D method B psi psi Bond Strength Peel Test .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Compressive Strain of Laminated Bearings Test each sampled laminated pad for compressive strain .
The compressive strain in any layer of a laminated pad shall not exceed percent at pounds per in average unit pressure for the full size laminated pad .
Proof Load Testing Proof load each bearing pad per AASHTO M Section Use a compressive load of pounds per in for laminated pads and pounds per in for plain elastomeric pads .
Reject bearing pads if bulging patterns imply laminate placement does not satisfy design criteria and manufacturing tolerances or if bulging suggests inadequate laminate bond .
Also reject bearing pads if there are three separate surface cracks greater than in wide by in deep .
B .
Metal Reinforcement Provide mild steel plates at least in thick for use as metal reinforcement .
C Certification Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Manufacturer Sampling and Testing Sample and test in accordance with AASHTO M Section except as modified in this specification .
Destructive test finished laminated and plain bearing pads at a rate of two full size bearing pads per lot produced from the same raw material utilizing the same processes and procedures .
A lot shall not exceed pads and is not limited to finished sizes or thickness .
Destructive testing is defined as any test that renders the product not usable for its intended purpose .
Provide bearing pad test data and certification prior to shipping .
Test results of samples must verify compliance to product specifications .
Any bearing tested that does not meet the specifications will result in the rejection of the entire lot .
When applicable the supplier shall retain a copy of the passing test results for one year and supply the document with subsequent jobs .
The cost of all bearing pad testing is incidental to the bearing pads .
Concrete Curing Materials BURLAP CURING BLANKETS .
SCOPE Provide burlap cloth for use as a curing cover on portland cement concrete . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide burlap cloth meeting the requirements of AASHTO M Class for use as a curing cover on portland cement concrete. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
TYPE D MEMBRANE CURING COMPOUND .
SCOPE Provide clear or translucent liquid membrane forming curing compounds with a Type D fugitive dye for spray application on portland cement colored or stamped concrete surfaces where a finished white surface would mask the decorative finished concrete surface when exposed to the air . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide membrane curing compound meeting the following requirements .
Minnesota Standard Specifications All membranecuring compounds preapproved by the Department before use .
The most current approved lots and batches with product expiration dates are available on the ApprovedQualified Products List Meets the requirements of the Departments Curing Compound Manufacturer Approval Program as listed in the ApprovedQualified Products List including pretesting of materials by the manufacturer Meets the requirements of ASTM C Type D Curing Compound and The Engineer will not allow the use of curing compound that is over year from the manufacture date .
The Contractor may use Type D curing compound in other concrete applications as approved by the Engineer or as shown on the special provisions .
Use of any other Type curing compound is at the discretion of the Engineer in conjunction with the Concrete Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
Test the material at an application rate of sq .
ft per gal .
POLYALPHA METHYLSTYRENE AMS MEMBRANE CURING COMPOUND .
SCOPE Provide polyalpha methylstyrene liquid membrane curing compounds for spray application on portland cement concrete surfaces exposed to the air . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide membranecuring compound meeting the following requirements All membranecuring compounds preapproved by the Department before use .
The most current approved lots and batches with product expiration dates are available from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Meets the requirements of the Departments Curing Compound Manufacturer Approval Program including pre testing of all materials by the manufacturer .
Meets the requirements of ASTM C for the type required by the contract .
The Engineer will not allow the use of curing compound that is over year from the manufacture date .
White pigmented Type Class B. Resin is percent polyalpha methylstyrene and formulated to maintain the specified properties of Table .
Table Requirements for AMS Curing Compound Properties Range Total solids by weight of compound reflectance in h ASTM E Loss of Water kgsq .
m in h ASTM C . Loss of Water kgsq .
m in h ASTM C . Settling Test ml ml in h V.O.C .
Content gL Infrared Spectrum vehicle methylstyrene Test in accordance with the method on file at the Materials Laboratory .
Match the infrared scan for the dried vehicle from the curing compound to the infrared scan on file at the Materials Laboratory. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
Test the material at an application rate of sq .
ft per gal .
LINSEED OIL MEMBRANE CURING COMPOUND .
SCOPE Provide extreme service white pigmented heavy bodied linseed oil emulsion for application as a membrane cure and sealer . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide membrane curing compounds meeting the following requirements .
Minnesota Standard Specifications All membranecuring compound preapproved by the Department before use .
The most current approved lots and batches with product expiration dates are available on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Meets the requirements of the Departments Curing Compound Manufacturer Approval Program including pretesting of materials by the manufacturer .
Composed of a blend of boiled linseed oil and high viscosity heavy bodied linseed oil emulsified in a water solution meeting the requirements of ASTM C Type except the Department will waive the drying time .
The Engineer will not allow the use of curing compound that is over year from the manufacture date .
Sprayable at temperatures of at least F. Formulated to maintain the specified properties of Table .
Table Chemical Requirements of Linseed Oil Membrane Curing Compound volumes exclusive of added pigment Material Requirements Percent by Weight Oil phase by volume Boiled linseed oil Z viscosity linseed oil Water phase by volume .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
Test membrane curing compound at an application rate of sq .
ft per gal .
PLASTIC CURING BLANKETS .
SCOPE Provide white polyethylene sheeting for use as a curing cover on portland cement concrete . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide white polyethylene sheeting meeting the requirements of ASTM C White Opaque Polyethylene Film. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples for testing meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
MEMBRANE WATERPROOFING SYSTEM .
SCOPE Provide a membrane waterproofing system to be used for waterproofing belowgrade joints in concrete structures tunnels and other below grade applications on concrete structures . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide a membrane waterproofing system meeting the following requirements Listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List and Consists of a primer a rubberized asphalt membrane on a crosslaminated polyethylene carrier film an pointing mastic and a protection course .
A Primer Provide a solventbased primer meeting the requirements of Federal and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency VOC regulations and specially formulated for use with the waterproofing system being used .
B Membrane Provide waterproofing system with a membrane meeting the requirements of Table Table Waterproofing Membrane Requirements Property Specification Test Method Thickness mil .
mm ASTM D Method A Tensile strength psi .
MPa ASTM D Die C Elongation ASTM D Die C Composition Rubber asphalt Infrared scan .
Minnesota Standard Specifications C Carrier Film Provide membrane waterproofing system with carrier film meeting the requirements of Table Table Waterproofing Carrier Film Requirements Property Specification Test Method Thickness mil .
mm ASTM D Method A Composition Polyethylene Infrared scan D Composite Membrane Provide membrane waterproofing system with a composite membrane meeting the requirements of Table Table Waterproofing Composite Membrane Requirements Property Specification Test Method Pliability º bend in mm mandrel at F C Unaffected ASTM D Permeance .
Perms ASTM E Method B Peel adhesion lbin kgmm ASTM D Modified Water absorption .
h ASTM D percent peel after days at ºF ºC plus days at ºF ºC plus days at ºF ºC dry wet .
The peel strength is run at a rate of in mm per minute. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples in rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
The Materials Engineer may perform tests on samples taken from the product proposed for use or on samples submitted and certified by the manufacturer as representative of the membrane waterproofing system to be supplied .
INSULATION BOARD POLYSTYRENE .
SCOPE Provide extruded polystyrene insulation board for use on highway insulation applications . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide extruded polystyrene insulation board used for highway insulation applications meeting the requirements of AASHTO M except the Department will not apply the requirement for flammability .
The contract will identify the selected type of insulation board and the insulation board strength as listed in AASHTO M . . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Electrical Systems Materials RIGID STEEL CONDUIT RSC .
SCOPE Provide rigid steel conduit and fittings constructed of galvanized steel for electrical systems . .
REQUIREMENTS Use rigid steel conduit listed and labeled by an NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor and meeting the requirements of UL and UL B .
Use an NRTL listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests required by this specification .
Hotdip galvanize the inside and outside surfaces of rigid steel conduit and fittings. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Label each conduit length with the relevant NRTL label .
The Department reserves the right to sample test inspect and accept or reject conduit or fittings based on its own tests .
INTERMEDIATE METAL CONDUIT .
SCOPE Provide intermediate metal conduit and fittings for electrical systems . .
REQUIREMENTS Use intermediate metal conduit listed and labeled by a NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor and meeting the requirements of UL and UL B .
Use an NRTL listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests required by this specification .
Hotdip galvanize the inside and outside surfaces of intermediate metal conduit and fittings. . SAMPLING AND TESTING NONMETALLIC RIGID PVC AND HDPE CONDUIT .
SCOPE Provide rigid polyvinyl chloride PVC and high density polyethylene HDPE conduit and fittings for electrical systems . .
REQUIREMENTS A Rigid PVC Conduit Use rigid PVC conduit and fittings meeting the following requirements Listed by an NRTL as meeting the requirements of UL B and UL for underground use Gray in color Smooth interior and exterior surfaces Schedule conduit and conduit fittings and With the following marked on the outside .
Manufacturers name .
Size of conduit .
Conduit type and .
NRTL Certification Mark .
B High Density Polyethylene HDPE Conduit Use HDPE continuoustype conduit and fittings meeting the following requirements In compliance with ASTM F Listed by NRTL as meeting the requirements of UL B Schedule conduit and conduit fittings Red or gray in color Smooth interior and exterior surfaces and With the following marked on the outside .
Manufacturers name .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Size of conduit .
Type of conduit and .
NRTL Certification mark. . SAMPLING AND TESTING LIQUID TIGHT FLEXIBLE NONMETALLIC CONDUIT LFNCB .
SCOPE Provide liquid tight flexible nonmetallic LFNCB conduit and fittings for electrical systems . .
REQUIREMENTS Use liquid tight flexible nonmetallic conduit meeting the following Type LFNCB Listed and labeled by NRTL as meeting the requirements of UL Listed for C F in a dry location Listed for C F in a wet location Listed for C F in an oily location Sunlight resistant Rated for outdoor use and CSA certified for use at C F in dry and oily locations and for minus C F low temperature applications .
Do not provide conduit using a metallic integral reinforcement within the conduit wall. . SAMPLING AND TESTING PVC COATED HOT DIPPED GALVANIZED RIGID STEEL CONDUIT PVC COATED RSC .
SCOPE Provide NRTL listed PVC coated hotdipped galvanized rigid steel conduit and fittings with a urethane lined interior for electrical systems .
See for expansion and deflectionexpansion coupling fittings . .
REQUIREMENTS Use PVC coated hotdipped galvanized rigid steel conduit listed and labeled by an NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor and meeting the requirements of UL .
Use PVC coated fittings listed and labeled in accordance with UL B .
Use an NRTL listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests required by this specification .
A PVC Coated Hot Dipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit PVC Coated RSC Use PVC coated galvanized RSC meeting the following Conduits that comply with UL ANSI C. and NEMA RN Hotdipped galvanize the inside and outside surfaces of rigid steel conduit Gray PVC coat exterior of rigid steel conduit and fittings in compliance with NEMA RN standards Gray PVC coating shall be nominal mils in thickness continuous over the entire length of the conduit except at the threads and be free of blisters bubbles or pinholes List both PVC and zinc as the primary corrosion protection Urethane coat internal parts of conduit and fittings in accordance with NEMA RN Corrosion Resistant Internal Coatings A urethane coating uniformly and consistently applied to the interior of conduit Internal urethane coating with a nominal mil thickness and All male threads on elbows and nipples protected by the application of urethane coating or zinc metalized spray .
Pass adhesion test ETL Verified PVC or the UL Adhesion Test After Oven Aging and Salt Spray Conditioning .
B Fittings for PVC Coated Hot Dipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit Use PVC coated zinc plated metallic fittings meeting the following Fittings that comply with UL B Suitable for use with PVC coated hotdipped galvanized RSC Zinc plate the inside and outside surfaces Gray PVC coat exterior of all fittings .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Nominal mils in thickness continuous coating over the entire fitting and free of blisters bubbles or pinholes Overlapping PVC sleeves on female threaded ends for protecting and covering male threaded joints threaded into the fitting List both PVC and zinc as the primary corrosion protection Urethane coat internal parts of fittings Uniformly and consistently applied urethane coating to the interior of the fittings and A nominal mil thickness internal urethane coating .
C Hangers and Supports for PVC Coated Hot Dipped Galvanized Rigid Steel Conduit Use conduit hangers clamps straps Ubolts strut and bar supports threaded rod inserts and miscellaneous hardware for PVC coated RSC in accordance with the NEC and as shown on the Plans or if not shown as directed by the Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Label each conduit length and fitting with the relevant NRTL label .
The Department reserves the right to sample test inspect and accept or reject conduit or fittings based on its own tests .
UNDERGROUND NONDETECTABLE MARKING TAPE .
SCOPE Provide underground nondetectable marking tape as specified in the Contract . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Use underground nondetectable marking tape meeting the following in wide Lead free American Public Works Association APWA Uniform Color Code for marking underground facilities .
mil minimum thickness in accordance with ASTM D Tensile strength minimum .
psi in accordance with ASTM D Elongation minimum in accordance with ASTM DB and Printability Dynes in accordance with ATM D. B Communication Line Marking Tape In addition to the general requirements for nondetectable marking tape in this section use marking tape for underground communication lines meeting the following Orange and Black lettering imprinted with the inscription CAUTION MnDOT COMMUNICATION LINE BELOW C Electric Line Marking Tape In addition to the general requirements for nondetectable marking tape in this section use marking tape for underground electric lines meeting the following Red and Black lettering imprinted with the inscription CAUTION MnDOT ELECTRIC LINE BELOW .
SAMPLING AND TESTING The Department reserves the right to sample test inspect and accept or reject underground nondetectable marking tape based on its own tests .
LUMINAIRES .
SCOPE Provide luminaires for lighting systems as specified in the Contract . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Use a complete and operational luminaire of the type and style as specified in the Contract .
Obtain the District Traffic Engineers approval for use before installing luminaires. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Roadway Lighting Luminaire Use roadway lighting luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
B .
LED Roadway Luminaires Foot Mounting Height Provide LED roadway luminaires for mounting at feet listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
B .
LED Roadway Luminaires Foot Mounting Height Provide LED roadway luminaires for mounting at feet listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
C Rest Area Luminaires C. LED Parking Lot Luminaires Provide LED parking lot luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
C. Post Top LED Walkway Luminaires Provide post top LED walkway luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
C. Rectangular LED Walkway Luminaires Provide Rectangular LED walkway luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
D Sign Lighting Luminaire Provide sign lighting luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
Obtain the Signing Engineers approval for use before installing luminaires .
E LED Roadway Underpass Luminaire Provide LED roadway underpass luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
F High Mast Luminaires Use high mast luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
F. Symmetrical High Mast Luminaires Provide symmetrical high mast luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
F. Asymmetrical High Mast Luminaires Provide asymmetrical high mast luminaires listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
G High Pressure Sodium Lamps Use highpressure sodium lamps listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
H High Pressure Sodium SelfStarting Extended Life Lamps Use highpressure sodium selfstarting extendedlife lamps listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
LIGHT POLES .
SCOPE Design and provide light poles including shafts mast arms and base anchorages . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide a complete light pole and hardware required for installation as specified in the Contract and in accordance with AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Provide light poles designed with a service life of at least years and capable of withstanding a wind velocity of mph with a . gust factor .
Submit manufacturer pole installation detail drawings illustrating the required hardware and bolt tightening patterns sequencing and methods to ensure proper anchor rod tension .
Provide breakaway light poles with certification from the manufacturer that the pole meets the breakaway specifications in the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals. . Minnesota Standard Specifications The Engineer will reject light poles that do not meet requirements as specified in the Contract .
B Light Pole Provide mast arm or davit poles designed for a lb luminaire with a projected area of .
sq .
ft .
Provide a nominal inch schedule tenon for slip fit luminaire installation .
For twin mast arm or davit poles design for each arm to hold a lb luminaire with the projected area of .
sq .
ft .
Provide a davit or mast arm with an upward angle from horizontal of degrees degrees .
Provide mast arms or davits fabricated from the same material as the pole shaft .
Provide mast arms or davits integral to the pole or connected to the pole shaft that gives an appearance of the pole being one continuous piece as shown on the Plans .
If the mast arm or davit and pole shaft are two parts provide a slipfit type connection secured in place using an interference fit or two stainless steel through bolts .
Ensure the mast arm or davit connected to pole shaft provides a watertight connection .
Provide a transformer base integral to the pole or as a separate component designed to attach to the pole shaft .
Design and construct the base to provide internal space to accommodate a waterproof frame and a mount for fuses and ballasts .
Provide an access hole with an opening of at least sq .
in on one side of the base .
Provide the access hole with a waterproof cover with positive closure .
Place the access hole from the mast arm unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Finish exposed edges and corners of the light pole base assembly smooth and round the corners so no burrs remain .
Provide each light pole with an electrical grounding lug or threaded hole for attaching a grounding lug with tang .
Design and fabricate each light pole to provide electrical continuity to the grounding lug .
Design each pole to stand plumb with the design dead loads in place under a nowind condition .
Provide light poles with at least the shell thicknesses and shaft diameters specified in the Contract or the design analysis for the following material types B .
Coated Steel Poles Provide shafts and transformer bases fabricated from steel meeting the requirements of HighStrength LowAlloy Structural Steel .
If the plans show a galvanized coating the Engineer may approve the use of another weldable steel with a yield point of at least psi after fabrication .
Fabricate shafts with only one longitudinal seam unless otherwise allowed .
Provide mast arms made of Schedule pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade A .
Paint or galvanize component parts of the pole including hardware and fittings as specified in the contract .
Clean paint and galvanize in accordance with .. L Coating and Organic ZincRich Paint System .
B .
Aluminum Alloy Poles Provide aluminum alloy poles meeting the requirements as follows Shafts fabricated from seamless T or T aluminum alloy .
in thick tapered tubing Mast arms fabricated from T or T seamless tubing Aluminum alloy poles with a factory installed vibration dampener and an aluminum wall thickness of .
in Transformer bases for breakaway designs fabricated from cast aluminum alloy T Stainless steel screws nuts bolts washers and other miscellaneous hardware except for the anchor rod and T Base to pole assemblies meeting the requirements of .
Fasteners Requirements for stainless steel fasteners and Aluminum alloy poles with a nonspecular natural or sand belted satin finish .
B .
Stainless Steel Poles Provide shafts mast arms transformer bases and base slip fitters fabricated from material meeting the requirements of ASTM A UNS Designation S or an approved equal with a yield strength of at least psi MPa .
Provide a slip fitter accommodating the luminaire fabricated from material meeting the requirements of ASTM A Grade MT L Grade MT L or an approved equal as specified in the Contract .
Attach the transformer base to the shaft using a slip fitter at least ½ times the length of the major shaft diameter .
Accurately size the slip fitter .
Rivet the stainless steel base to the transformer base .
Design the light pole so the base to slip fitter circumferential weld and heat affected zone are visible after assembling the shaft and slip fitter .
The Engineer will approve the number and size of the base plate rivets before fabrication .
Provide annealed and waxed Type rivets or an approved equal. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Clean the complete pole with a cleaning agent that will not damage the original mill finish. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Within days after the Contract award submit the following information to the Engineer as a basis for testing and acceptance Material specifications with chemical compositions and mechanical properties for lighting pole and anchorage assembly components Dimensioned drawings of the pole and component details Manufacturing and assembly data for the pole and the components Data supporting the breakaway design features of the pole Anchor bolt test specimen that are representative of the designs Structural design computations for the lighting pole and components including design criteria allowable stresses fatigue stresses loading and designed unit stresses and A certification from a registered professional engineer competent in structural design certifying the structural adequacy of the proposed light pole .
If the Department previously approved the manufacturers design and if the manufacturer certifies in writing that the material design structural analysis manufacturing procedure and workmanship are the same as previous poles on the Project the Department will not require the data computations and certificates for items and .
The Engineer will perform final inspection and acceptance at the Project including identification and documentation of the item type size and manufacturers marking of the light poles .
The Engineer will select random samples from the material delivered to the Project or at the source before delivery .
Submit five complete sets of shop detail drawings of the light poles and anchor rods in accordance with .. B .
Shop Detail Drawings General Requirements and .. B. Submittal for Engineers Review and Approval to the Engineer for approval by the District Traffic Engineer .
Submit final reproducible drawings in accordance with .. B Shop Detail Drawings for high mast lighting installations .
After approval the Engineer will distribute the drawings to the following Contractor Contractors fabricator Engineer Traffic Electrical Systems Engineer and District Traffic Engineer Obtain the Engineers approval before installing light poles .
LIGHTING SYSTEM EQUIPMENT .
SCOPE Provide miscellaneous lighting equipment required for a complete lighting system . .
REQUIREMENTS A Luminaire Wire Holders Provide luminaire wire holders for lighting systems listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
B Insulated Wire Splice Connector Blocks Provide breakaway type insulated wire splice connector blocks listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
C Fuse Holders Provide fuse holders listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
D Photoelectric Controls Provide photoelectric controls listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
LIGHTING SYSTEM ANCHORAGES .
SCOPE Provide foundation anchor rods bolts as specified in the Contract. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS A Lighting Service Cabinet CastInPlace Equipment Pad Anchorages Provide galvanized embedded concrete L shaped anchor rods and nuts for lighting service cabinet installation on cast inplace equipment pads in accordance with Anchor Rods and meeting the following .A Type A Carbon Steel Anchor Rods Sized type and quantity as specified in the Contract and one in O.D .
stainless steel washer per anchor rod unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Do not use mechanical anchors or concrete wedge anchor bolts .
B Lighting Service Cabinet Precast Equipment Pad Anchorages Unless otherwise specified in the Contract provide stainless steel threaded rod anchors nuts and washers for lighting service cabinet installation on precast equipment pads in accordance with .
D Stainless Steel Anchor Rods and meeting the following Sized type and quantity as specified in the Contract and One in O.D .
stainless steel washer per anchor rod .
Do not use mechanical anchors or concrete wedge anchor bolts .
C Bolt Anchorages for Light Pole Foundations Provide anchor rods nuts and washers for light pole installation on concrete foundations in accordance with Anchor Rods and meeting the following .B Anchor Rods Type B Carbon Steel Anchor Rods and Sized as specified in the Contract .
D Bolt Bridge and Barrier Pole Anchor Bolt Clusters Provide anchor rods nuts and washers to make a six anchor bolts cluster foundation for light pole installation on concrete barrier in accordance with Anchor Rods and meeting the following .B Type B Intermediate Strength Anchor Rods except for bridge and barrier light pole type double davit foundations and Sized as specified in the Contract .
For bridge and barrier light poles type double davit installation provide anchor rods nuts and washers to make a six anchor bolts cluster foundation meeting the following .C Type C High Strength Anchor Rods Mechanical cage only using methods approved by Engineer .
Do not weld anchor bolts to cage or other material and Sized as specified in the Contract .
E Light Pole Steel ScrewIn Foundation Provide approved steel screw foundations with manufacturer supplied bolts nuts and washers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List web under Roadway lighting for light pole installation on steel screwin foundations .
EMERGENCY VEHICLE PREEMPTION EVP EQUIPMENT .
SCOPE Provide Emergency Vehicle Preemption EVP equipment for traffic control signal systems . .
REQUIREMENTS Use EVP systems and confirmatory indicator lights mounted on traffic control signal mast arms and traffic control signal pedestals as specified in the contract .
Use mounting hardware and attach to mast arms and pedestals as specified in the Contract and as approved by the Engineer .
A EVP Detectors Use EVP systems listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Deliver EVP phase selectors to the Departments Central Electrical Services Unit at least business days before the traffic control signal cabinet is required on the Project .
The Departments Central Electrical Services Unit will review the provided .
Minnesota Standard Specifications equipment to ensure the proposed product is listed on MnDOTs APL and install the EVP phase selectors into the Departmentprovided traffic control signal cabinet .
B EVP Light Emitting Diode LED Confirmatory Indications Only use LED EVP confirmatory indications listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
C EVP Round Outlet Box Use an EVP round outlet box for wire splicing with the following Nominal in diameter by ½ in deep Cast aluminum NRTL listed for use in wet locations Threaded openings at the top bottom and two sides with threaded caps to support ¾ in conduit One threaded opening with threaded cap to support a ¾ in conduit on the back of outlet box Galvanized or zincplated screwon cover for wet locations with weather seal and Threaded nipples with locking washers sized to fit the round outlet box for attached appurtenances .
D EVP Condulet Outlet Body Use an EVP condulet outlet body for mounting the EVP detector unit to the EVP round outlet box with the following up from horizontal Screwon cover with weather tight seal Male threaded end and female threaded end NRTL listed and For use in wet locations .
E EVP Confirmatory Indicator Lamp Holder Use EVP confirmatory indicator lamp holders listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Confirm and document the listing of the EVP systems and the EVP confirmatory indicator lamp holders on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Provide this documentation to the Engineer .
Obtain the Engineers approval of the EVP round outlet box or the EVP condulet outlet body before installation .
CABLES AND CONDUCTORS .
SCOPE Provide cables and individual conductors for use in traffic control signal systems roadway lighting systems traffic management systems sign control systems automatic traffic recorder systems and other electrical systems . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide cables and conductors meeting the following requirements unless otherwise specified in the Contract Signal control cable listed by a NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor and tested in a laboratory listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests specified in this section .
The Department will not require NRTL listing of Loop Detector Leadin cable and EVP cable .
Stranded copper conductors Insulation rated for V Meeting the requirements of ANSI NEC ASTM and ICEANEMA Standards Publications .
Wire sizes for conductors based on the American Wire Gauge AWG .
Cables except loop detector leadin cables IMSA and C AWG EVP Cable with the following information ink printed on the jacket .
Manufacturer name .
Year of manufacture date code .
Type of wire or cable .
Size and number of conductors .
Voltage rating .
Conductor insulation rating .
NRTL certification mark indicating that the cable is listed and .
Labeled as sunlight resistant Sun Res direct burial Dir Bur and oil resistant Oil Res .
Provide signal control cable with the following additional markings .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Traffic signal cable Foot markers and ºF cold bend .
Provide loop detector leadin cable IMSA meeting IMSA marking requirements .
Provide EVP detector cable C AWG surface marked in accordance with NEC and with the following additional markings Labeled as sunlight resistant Sun Res Labeled as direct burial Dir Bur Year of manufacture date code Conductor insulation rating and Foot markers .
Repeat cable markings at intervals no greater than in on the jacket surface .
B Individual Conductors B .
Service Feeder and Branch Circuit Conductors Provide individual conductors as specified in the Contract and the following Individual conductors with a color coded continuous outer finish insulation meeting these color requirements .
Black line voltage or hot conductor .
Red line voltage or hot conductor .
White neutral or grounded conductor and .
Green equipment grounding conductor EGC .
Sized as specified in the Contract and the NEC .
If conductor size is not specified in the Contract .
Provide AWG or larger for feeders and .
Provide AWG or larger for branch circuits .
Type THW THWN or XHHW insulation .
B. Roadway Loop Detector Conductors Provide roadway loop detector conductors in rigid polyvinyl chloride PVC conduit meeting the following AWG Stranded copper Insulated with Type XLPE or Type XHHW insulation in accordance with UL Marked with XLPE XLP or XHHW on the conductor and Full compliance with the requirements of International Municipal Signal Association IMSA Official Wire Cable Specification Manual latest version is required .
Provide conductors for roadway embedded sawcut loop detectors meeting the following AWG Stranded copper Insulated with filled chemically XLPE or XHHW insulation in accordance with UL and Contained in a black polyethylene tubing with an outside diameter of .
in mils and a minimum average wall thickness of mils with no point less than mils Marked with XLPE XLP or XHHW on the conductor and Full compliance with the requirements of International Municipal Signal Association IMSA Official Wire Cable Specification Manual latest version is required. . No binding of the inner insulated loop conductor and the outer encasing tube is permitted .
B. Bridge Deck Loop Detector Conductors Provide conductors for bridge deck embedded sawcut loop detectors meeting the following AWG Stranded nickel or silver plated copper conductors and Insulated with at least .
in extruded Teflon meeting the requirements of MILWD Type E. B. Blank .
Minnesota Standard Specifications B. Grounding Conductors Provide equipment grounding conductors EGC meeting the following Type THW Type THWN or Type XHHW Greencolored insulated wire AWG unless otherwise specified in contract documents Stranded strands Class B Stranding and Meeting the requirements of ASTM B for stranded wires .
Provide bare solid grounding electrode conductors and bonding jumpers as specified in the Contract meeting the following AWG unless otherwise specified in the Contract and Meeting the requirements of ASTM B Soft Annealed Copper .
Provide insulated stranded grounding electrode conductors and bonding jumpers as specified in the Contract meeting the following Type THW Type THWN or Type XHHW Greencolored insulated wire AWG unless otherwise specified in the Contract Stranded strands Class B Stranding and Meeting the requirements of ASTM B for stranded wires .
C Cables C. Direct Buried Lighting Cable C AWG Provide shielded underground cable meeting the following Listed by a NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor and tested in a testing laboratory listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests specified in this section .
Provide shielded cable tested by an NRTL and meeting the requirements of UL and UL Four conductors Each conductor is AWG Class C Strand soft drawn bare copper wire conductors meeting the requirements of ASTM B and ASTM B Suitable for use in cable trays aerial or direct buried installations Rated for volts Heat resistant Moisture resistant Sunlight resistant Insulation acceptable for use in wet and dry locations at ºF Insulated conductors with chemically XLPE insulation Individual conductors constructed with circuit identification in accordance with Method of ICEA S NEMA WC Table E Black White Red and Green Single thickness copper tape shielding meeting the requirements of ASTM B with a thickness of at least .
in and a spiral overlap of at least .
in wrapped around the binder tape and under the outer jacket PVC outer jacket with an average thickness at least mils and a thickness at any point at least mils Constructed using a tape binder Containing nonhygroscopic fillers used in the interstices of the cable where necessary to give the completed cable assembly a circular crosssection .
Do not use fillers made of jute or paper Containing a rip cord between the copper tape shield and the outer jacket Containing an outer cable jacket having a substantially circular crosssection as specified in ANSIICEA S NEMA WC and not convoluted or having a ropey appearance and Outer jacket surface ink printed with the following information .
Manufacturer name .
Year of manufacture date code .
Type of cable .
Size and number of conductors .
Voltage rating .
Conductor insulation rating .
Labeled NRTL listed .
Labeled as sunlight resistant Sun Res and direct burial Dir Bur and .
Foot markers .
C. Temporary Overhead Lighting Cable Provide quadruplex cable for the overhead distribution of circuits as specified in the Contract meeting the following .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Four conductors Each conductor is AWG Three thermoplastic insulated conductors and The fourth conductor that is an ACSR aluminum conductor steel reinforced equipment ground messenger in accordance with the current edition of ANSINEMAICEA Specification for Power Cables Rated Volts or Less for the Distribution of Electrical Energy ANSINEMA publication No .
WC ICEA publication No .
S . C. Signal Control Cable C AWG C AWG C AWG C AWG Provide signal control cable listed by an NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor and tested in a testing laboratory listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for tests specified by this section .
Provide cables tested by an NRTL and meeting the following UL UL UL ICEA T ICEA T ICEA S NEMA WC Suitable for use at ºF C in wet or dry locations Suitable for direct burial Sunlight resistant Rated for Volts Rated as a Tray Cable XHHW cable designation AWG Class B strand soft drawn bare or tinned copper meeting the requirements of ASTM B ASTM B and ASTM B Constructed with circuit identification meeting the requirements of Method of ICEA S NEMA WC Table E except as modified below .
Conductor .. Black .. White and .. Green .
Conductor .. Black .. White .. Red and .. Blackred stripe .
Conductor .. Black .. White .. Red .. Blackred stripe .. Orange and .. Blue .
Conductor .. Black .. White .. Red .. Blackred stripe .. Orange .. Blue .. WhiteBlack stripe .. RedBlack stripe .. WhiteRed stripe .. OrangeBlack stripe .. BlueBlack stripe and .. BlackWhite stripe .
Average insulation thickness of at least mil Constructed using a tape binder Cable jacket having a substantially circular crosssection as specified in ANSIICEA S NEMA WC with an outer cable jacket not convoluted or having a ropy appearance Nonhygroscopic fillers used in the interstices of the cables where necessary to give the completed cable assembly a circular crosssection Fillers not made of jute or paper .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Rip cord between the outer jacket and the tape binder May be bare copper or tinned wires Outer jacket of the conductor cable having a diameter no greater than .
in .
Outer jacket of the conductor cable having a diameter no greater than .
in Carries an oil resistance level Meets a F cold bend test Cables with a PVC jacket with a low migration grade of PVC Cable jacket passes the day h oven age test at .
F meeting the requirements of UL and Cable carries multiple ratings .
If the requirements of different ratings conflict ensure the cable meets the most stringent specification .
Submit to the Department the NRTL test qualification report provided by the manufacturer stating that the submitted cable meets the requirements of this section .
The Department will not allow substitutions after the acceptance of a cable unless otherwise approved by the Department in writing .
C. Loop Detector Leadin Cable C AWG Provide AWG conductor loop detector leadin cable meeting the requirements of International Municipal Signal Association Inc. Specification No .
Polyethylene insulated Polyethylene Jacketed Loop Detector Leadin Cable latest version for use in traffic control signal systems and traffic management systems .
C. Emergency Vehicle Preemption EVP Detector Cable C AWG Provide EVP detector cable for conduit and mast arm pull direct burial and exposed overhead installation in traffic control signal systems meeting the following Consisting of twisted threeconductor shielded cable with ground drain wire Suitable for use at F in wet or dry locations Suitable for direct burial Sunlight resistant Rated for Volts C AWG x stranded individually tinned copper color coded yellow blue orange conductors AWG x stranded individually tinned copper ground drain wire Aluminized polyester shield with at least .
in overlap Black PVC jacket with a . in nominal wall thickness Cable outside diameter nominal .
in Drain and conductor DC resistance no greater than .
Ω per ft Capacitance from one conductor to other two conductors and shield no greater than pF per foot and Cable marked with the following .
Manufacturer name .
Year of manufacture date code .
Type of cable .
Size and number of conductors .
Voltage rating .
Conductor Insulation rating .
Sunlight resistant Sun Res and direct burial Dir Bur and .
Foot markers .
C. Telephone Cables Provide voice grade telephone cable for indoor installation outdoor installation in conduit outdoor direct buried installation and telephone drop wire .
C .. a Indoor Installation Provide telephone cable installed indoors in conduit or cable trays utilizing AWG conductors and meeting the requirements of ANSIICEA S. C .. b Outdoor Conduit or Direct Buried Installation Provide telephone cable for direct buried installation or installation in conduit meeting the following requirements Gopher resistant Greasefilled Using AWG conductors and Meets the requirements of RUS CFR .
RUS Specification for Filled Telephone Cables and REA Specification for Filled Telephone Cables PE except do not use plasticcoated aluminumshielded cable with plasticcoated steelarmor CACSP. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide one of the following for cable shielding mil copper mil or mil copperclad stainless steel mil copperclad alloy steel or mil or mil alloy .
Provide cable jacket labeled as meeting the requirements of RUS .. C .. c Telephone Drop Wire Provide telephone drop wire from the traffic control signal cabinet or other type cabinet to the point of connection with the servicing telephone company conductors meeting the following Twoconductor paralleltype drop wire for use on telephone systems Meeting the requirements of RUS Bulletin FPE RUS Specification for Aerial Service Wires and Approved by the local telephone company .
C .. d Ethernet Cable Outside Plant Provide shielded Category e Ethernet cable for use in outdoor applications from the traffic control signal cabinet or other type cabinet to the point of connection with required equipment in the system meeting the following .
pairs of conductors .
Stranded tinned copper .
AWG .
Color coded pairs as follows Pair Blue WhiteBlue Pair Orange WhiteOrange Pair Green WhiteGreen Pair Brown WhiteBrown H.D .
Polyethylene conductor insulation . .
Conductor with insulation thickness of a nominal .
Inner tinned copper braid shielding AWG with a minimum coverage .
Outer aluminum Polyester tape foil in shielding .
Black Thermoplastic Elastomer outer jacket with a nominal thickness f . inches .
Cable assembly shall have an overall thickness of . . inches .
DC resistance maximum of .Ω feet .
Conductor to conductor capacitance of .pF ft MHz .
Impedance of Ω Ω MHz .
A minimum dielectric withstanding of Volts RMS .
A voltage rating of Volts .
Temperature rating of F to F. Pass a flex life test of million cycles at times the minimum radius of the outside diameter of the cable .
NRTL certified in accordance with UL section VW and be CMX certified or listed .
RoHS Compliant .
Label the outer jacket in accordance with .A RJ terminal ends used when terminating this cable must be in compliance with the cable manufacturers requirements and recommendations .
C. Blank C. Blank C. Blank C. Blank C. Blank C. Blank C. Fiber Optic Cables Provide fiber optic cable listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Traffic Management SystemsITS .
C .. a Armored Fiber Optic Pigtail Provide armored fiber optic pigtail cables listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Traffic Management SystemsITS. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Microwave and Sonic Detector Cable C AWG Provide microwave and sonic detector cable and conductors meeting the following Listed and tested by an NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor in a testing laboratory listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for tests specified by this section and meeting the following requirements .
UL .
UL and .
UL .
Suitable for use at ºF C in wet or dry locations Sunlight resistant Sun Res Rated for Volts Rated as tray cable Labeled and rated as oil resistant Oil Res Labeled and rated for direct burial Dir Bur Cable designation of TC PLTC ITC CL AWG conductors Tinned conductors Class B X strand soft drawn tinned copper meeting the requirements of ASTM B ASTM B and ASTM B XLPE conductor insulation Individual conductors constructed with circuit identification meeting the requirements of Method of ICEA S NEMA WC Table E Black White Red and Green Nonhygroscopic fillers if used Do not use fillers made of jute or paper Aluminummylar tape shield with an overlap of at least .
in AWG strand tinned copper drain wire Drain wire installed on the outside of the aluminummylar tape shield drain out Water blocking barrier tape to allow the cable to be used in underground ducts Jacket constructed of polyvinylchloride meeting the requirements of UL Black jacket Cable jacket having a substantially circular crosssection as specified in ANSIICEA S NEMA WC with the outer cable jacket not convoluted and not having a ropey appearance and Cable markings on the jacket surface ink printed with the following information .
Manufacturer name .
Year of manufacture date code .
Type of wire or cable .
Size and number of conductors .
Voltage rating .
Conductor insulation rating .
NRTL Certification Mark indicating the cable is listed .
Labeled as sunlight resistant Sun Res oil resistant Oil Res direct buried Dir Bur and .
Foot markers .
Repeat cable markings at intervals no greater than in on the jacket surface. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Department reserves the right to sample test inspect and accept or reject all conductors and cables specified in this section .
The Department may require certified test reports covering the physical and electrical properties of the signal control cable in addition to the requirements listed in the specification .
AIR OBSTRUCTION LIGHTS .
SCOPE Provide air obstruction lights meeting Federal Aviation Administration FAA requirements . .
REQUIREMENTS A Air Obstruction Lights Provide air obstruction lights listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
Minnesota Standard Specifications NAVIGATION LANTERNS .
SCOPE Provide navigation lanterns meeting U.S. Coast Guard USCG requirements . .
REQUIREMENTS A Navigation Lanterns Provide navigation lanterns listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
GROUNDING ELECTRODES .
SCOPE Provide ground rod electrodes as specified in the Contract for use in traffic control signal systems roadway lighting systems traffic management systems sign control systems automatic traffic recorder systems and other electrical systems .
Provide plate electrodes when NEC installation requirements for rod electrodes are not practical .
Obtain the Engineers approval for use before installation . .
REQUIREMENTS A Ground Rod Electrodes Provide ground rod electrodes meeting the following Listed and labeled by an NRTL in accordance with UL Meeting the requirements of ANSINEMA GR Diameter of in ft long ASTMA cold drawn steel Minimum tensile strength of psi Copper bonded copper clad outer coating Pointed and Nonthreaded .
B Plate Electrodes Provide plate electrodes meeting the following Listed and labeled by an NRTL in accordance with UL Meeting the requirements of NEC and NESC copper Minimum plate dimensions of in x in Minimum thickness of .
in and Solid bare AWG CU x ft pigtail connected to the plate with an exothermic weld connection .
HANDHOLES .
SCOPE Provide handholes as specified in the Contract .
Use only handholes for nondeliberate heavy vehicular traffic unless otherwise shown on the Plans . .
REQUIREMENTS A Handholes NonDeliberate Heavy Vehicular Traffic Only use Departmentapproved handholes listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Emboss MnDOT Signals on the cover for traffic control signals .
Emboss MnDOT Lighting on the cover for roadway lighting .
Emboss MnDOT TMS on the cover for ITS .
Emboss MnDOT AntiIcing on the cover for antiicing .
B Handholes Deliberate Heavy Vehicular Traffic Only use handholes in accordance with Standard Plate that are in full compliance with Article .
of the NEC and meet the requirements of AASHTO H Deliberate Vehicular Traffic Applications .
Emboss MnDOT Signals on the cover for traffic control signals .
Emboss MnDOT Lighting on the cover for roadway lighting .
Emboss MnDOT TMS on the cover for ITS. . Minnesota Standard Specifications PULLING VAULTS .
SCOPE Provide pulling vaults as specified in the Contract . .
REQUIREMENTS A Pulling Vaults Only use Departmentapproved pulling vaults listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Traffic management systemsITS .
Emboss MnDOT Signals on the cover for traffic control signals .
Emboss MnDOT Lighting on the cover for roadway lighting .
Emboss MnDOT TMS on the cover for ITS .
Emboss MnDOT AntiIcing on the cover for antiicing .
SPLICE VAULTS .
SCOPE Provide splice vaults as specified in the Contract . .
REQUIREMENTS A Splice Vaults Only use Departmentapproved splice vaults listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Traffic management systemsITS .
Emboss MnDOT Signals on the cover for traffic control signal projects .
Emboss MnDOT Lighting on the cover for roadway lighting projects .
Emboss MnDOT TMS on the cover for ITS projects .
Emboss MnDOT AntiIcing on the cover for antiicing projects .
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MAST ARM POLES MAST ARMS LUMINAIRE POLE EXTENSIONS AND LUMINAIRES .
SCOPE Provide mast arm poles in accordance with Standard Plates and as shown on the Plans for supporting mast arm mounted and pole mounted vehicle and pedestrian signal heads and supporting luminaires as part of a traffic control signal system . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Use mast arm poles of the type specified in the Contract including the following Transformer base Vertical pole shaft Traffic control signal mast arm and If specified in the Contract use one of the following vertical pole extensions .
Luminaire shaft extension with luminaire .
Luminaire and camera extension with luminaire or .
Camera extension .
Use mast arm poles designed and constructed in accordance with AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
B Anchor Rods Provide anchor rods of the type specified in the Contract and sized in accordance with MnDOT Standard Plates or as applicable to the foundation being constructed .
C Transformer Base Use square transformertype bases with an access hole that provides an opening as specified in the Contract on one side of the base .
Provide a cover for the access hole with a positive closure and locking mechanism that is an integral part of the door. . Minnesota Standard Specifications D Mast Arm Use a ¾ in halfcoupling and plug on the top side of the traffic control signal mast arm at the location specified in the Contract .
If specified in the Contract provide swingaway hinges with the traffic control signal mast arm .
Obtain the Engineers approval before installation .
Install the swingaway hinges so the traffic control signal mast arm swings away from the intersection .
D. Mast Arm Signal Head Mounts Mount vehicle signal heads on the extended end of traffic control signal mast arms using highstrength cast aluminum angle or straight plumbizer mounts and threaded hub and flange adaptors .
Only use threaded hub and flange pole adaptors listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
If specified in the Contract mount vehicle signal heads midarm on traffic control signal mast arms using straight plumbizer mounts as specified in this section .
Only use straight mount plumbizers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Mount vehicle signal heads on the end of the mast arm using angle mounts as specified in this section .
Only use angle mount plumbizers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
D. Twoway Mast Arm Signal Head Mounts Mount twoway vehicle signal heads on the extended end of traffic control signal mast arms as specified in the Contract using highstrength cast aluminum twoway plumbizer mounts .
Only use two way mount plumbizers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
D. Vertical Pole Signal Head Mounts Mount vehicle and pedestrian signal heads on the vertical pole using highstrength cast aluminum angle plumbizer mounts and threaded hub and flange adaptors .
Only use threaded hub and flange pole adaptors listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
If specified in the Contract mount vehicle cluster head dog house style signal head assemblies on the vertical pole using angle plumbizer mounts with extended threaded pole adaptors .
Only use angle mount plumbizers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Only use extended threaded pole adaptors listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
E Luminaire Pole Extension Provide luminaire pole extensions for luminaires atop mast arm pole standards as specified in the Contract and meeting the following Designed for a lb luminaire with a projected area of .
sq .
ft A nominal in schedule pipe slipfitter tenon A mast arm with an upward angle from horizontal of degrees degrees and A ft mast arm unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
E. Luminaires Provide LED Roadway Luminaires foot mounting height in accordance with and as shown on the Plans .
E. Luminaire Wire Holder Provide wire holders listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit four complete sets of shop detail drawings of the mast arm pole standard anchor rods in accordance with .. B .
Shop Detail Drawings General Requirements and .. B. Submittal for Engineers Review and Approval to the Engineer for approval .
After approval the Engineer will distribute the drawings to the following Contractor Contractors Fabricator Engineer and District Traffic Engineer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL PEDESTAL .
SCOPE Provide inch trade size diameter traffic control signal pedestals that support vehicle signal heads pedestrian signal heads and warning flashers . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide traffic control signal pedestals in accordance with applicable provisions of MnDOT Standard Plates MnDOT and as specified in the Contract .
Provide traffic control signal pedestals meeting the applicable requirements for structural supports specified in AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
Submit shop drawings in accordance with .A .
for the pedestal to obtain the Engineers approval before procurement .
Provide traffic control signal pedestals with a shaft and a base .
B Pedestal Shaft B .
Steel Pedestal Shafts Provide steel pedestal shafts in accordance with Standard Plate and the Plans .
Clean the inner and outer surfaces of pedestal shafts .
Blast clean the outer surface .
Paint the inner and outer surfaces of the pedestal shafts with two coats of prime paint in accordance with Exterior Polyurethane Paint .
Ensure a total dried primer thickness of mil .
Finish paint the outside of the shaft with two coats of yellow paint in accordance with Exterior Polyurethane Paint unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Ensure a total thickness of the dried primer and finish coats at least ½ mil .
Do not install shafts with scratches or other damages to the paint .
Repair or replace pedestal bases scratched or damaged during installation as approved by the Engineer .
B .
Aluminum Pedestal Shafts Provide aluminum pedestal shafts in accordance with Standard Plate and as shown on the Plans .
C Pedestal Base Provide pedestal bases in accordance with Standard Plate and as shown on the Plans .
C. Blank C. Ground Connector Mount one NRTL listed ground wire connector with a single bolt on each adjacent sidewall to the access door in in from the door and in above the base bottom of each sidewall .
Use a cross slot head screw to secure the ground wire to the connector .
Ensure the connector accommodates a AWG stranded copper wire .
Install the connectors with the connector down .
Ensure every device in the pedestal base is constructed from compatible materials .
C. Anchor Rods Provide anchor rods in the size specified on MnDOT Standard Plate .
Provide anchor rods nuts and washers in accordance with .
Type A Carbon Steel Anchor Rods or Type BIntermediate Strength Anchor Rods unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Provide pedestal washers meeting the following requirements unless otherwise specified in the Contract Roundformed at least Grade hardened steel washers as specified in .. B High Strength Structural Steel Bolts Galvanized by the hotdip process or by the mechanical process as specified in Galvanized Hardware and Dimensions in accordance with MnDOT Standard Plate .
C. Reinforcing Collars When required provide pedestal reinforcing collars wind collars listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Painted Pedestal Base Shop paint pedestal bases on the inner and outer surfaces with two coats of prime paint meeting the requirements in Exterior Polyurethane Paint if specified in the Contract .
Ensure the dried primer is mil thick .
Finish paint the outer surface with two coats of green paint meeting the requirements of Exterior Polyurethane Paint or the equivalent manufactures shop coat paint as specified in .. T Painting .
Ensure the combined thickness of the primer and finish coats is ½ mil .
Repair or replace pedestal bases scratched or damaged during installation as approved by the Engineer .
C. Pedestal Base Access Door Provide aluminum pedestal access doors in accordance with MnDOT Standard Plate and with an anodic coating meeting the requirements of MILA for Type II Class I Coating .
C. Pedestal Cap Provide aluminum pedestal caps listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals and with an anodic coating meeting the requirements of MILA for Type II Class I Coating .
Provide pedestal caps for each pedestal shaft if using straight mount plumbizers for signal and pedestrian head mounting .
C. Pedestal Slipfitter Collar Provide pedestal slipfitter collars manufactured as specified in MnDOT Standard Plate No .
and with an anodic coating meeting the requirements of MILA for Type II Class I Coating .
Before ordering from the signal supplier ascertain from the Engineer the number of required ½ inch inside threaded hubs side openings in the pedestal slipfitter collar. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer will inspect and approve the pedestal shafts and pedestal bases before installation .
Provide test reports from an FHWAapproved independent laboratory certifying the tests made on pedestal bases showing results that meet AASHTO breakaway requirements .
Submit a certification from the FHWA provided by the manufacturer stating FHWA acceptance and approval of tests made on pedestal bases .
ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL APS PUSH BUTTONS AND MOUNTING HARDWARE .
SCOPE Provide touchactivated Accessible Pedestrian Signals APS with information signs and required mounting hardware to detect and instruct pedestrians as shown on the Plans . .
REQUIREMENTS Locate and mount APS push buttons and information signs on vertical mast arm pole shafts APS push button stations traffic control signal pedestal shafts or similar equipment approved by the Engineer or on separate mountings as specified in the Contract .
A. APS Push Buttons Use APS push buttons listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified List under Signals .
A. APS Pole Adaptor Use accessible pedestrian pole adaptors listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
A. APS Push Button Mounting Spacer Use APS push button mounting spacers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
A. APS Push Button Base Use APS push button bases listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
A. APS Push Button Base Anchorages and Adhesive Provide a quantity of four inch UNC stainless steel threaded rods nuts and washers in accordance with MnDOT .D.for the anchors .
Rod length ½ ¼ inches .
The top and bottom of the rod must have chamfered rounded edges to allow easy installation of the required nut .
Provide nut and washer for each rod. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide APS push button base adhesive anchoring systems to secure the stainless steel threaded rods into the concrete .
Only use APS push button base adhesive anchoring systems listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List for Signals. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Confirm and document the listing of the APS units and other components on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Provide this documentation to the Engineer .
Obtain the Engineers approval of the APS before installation .
VEHICLE SIGNAL HEADS .
SCOPE Provide standard traffic control signal heads to control vehicle movements as part of a traffic control signal system or freeway ramp control signal . .
REQUIREMENTS A Standard ITE Vehicle Signal Heads A .
General Use standard ITE black polycarbonate vehicle signal housings listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Use adjustabletype vehicle signal housings capable of rotation about a vertical axis .
Use vehicle signal heads made up of at least three separate vehicle signal sections .
Ensure each vehicle signal section consists of a housing housing door visor optical unit and wiring .
Provide and install the required throughbolts for connecting the individual sections .
Fasten together the signal sections above or below the straight or angle mount by means of a noncorrosive bolt mounting assembly .
Use locknuts for the bolt mounting assembly to prevent the assembly from loosening .
Use signal indications for traffic control signal systems of the nominal size as specified in the Contract .
Arrange vehicle signal sections in a vehicle signal head in accordance with Part IV Highway Traffic Signals of the MN MUTCD .
For each intersection install standard ITE vehicle signal heads from the same manufacturer .
Install and mount each vehicle signal head at the location shown on the Plans .
Always provide vehicle signal heads with provisions to attach a background shield regardless of the Contract requirement for background shields .
A. Visor Provide each signal section of each signal head with a removable visor .
Use visors meeting the following characteristics Made from black polycarbonate material Designed to fit tightly against the housing door to prevent filtration of light between the visor and the housing door At least ½ in long for a nominal in vehicle signal indication and At least in long for a nominal in vehicle signal indication .
Mount the visor with twiston slots and stainless steel screws positioned for vertical or horizontal mounting of the signal section and with a downward tilt of at least .
For traffic control signal system heads provide tunneltype visors that enclose percent of the lens circumference .
A .
Signal Indications Use LED signal indications listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List for Signals and as s the Contract .
A. Backplates Background Shields Use backplates listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Mounting Vehicle and Pedestrian Signal Heads Mount vehicle and pedestrian signal heads using straight angle or twoway plumbizer signal mounts .
Provide signal head mounts and required appurtenances for mounting vehicle and pedestrian signal heads to mast arms vertical pole shafts and pedestal shafts as specified in the Contract .
Use straight angle or twoway plumbizers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Provide and install metal support plates on the inside of the signal section at the attachment point of the straight or angle mount plumbizers or signal bracketing .
Provide and install angle and straight mount caps when installing pedestrian indications .
Only use angle and straight mount caps listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Provide four and fivesection signal heads and signal head mounting spacers at the point of mounting to the plumbizer .
Use signal head mounting spacers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
C Signal Brackets and Pipefittings If the Contract specifies signal brackets and pipe fittings for mounting vehicle and pedestrian signal heads provide signal brackets and pipe fittings in accordance with the following Use nominal ½ in diameter standard anodized aluminum pipe signal bracket and pipe fitting for signal brackets and pipe fittings for mounting vehicle and pedestrian signal heads Provide signal brackets long enough to provide vehicle and pedestrian signal head alignment to allow programming of optically programmed vehicle signal heads or of a length directed by the Engineer Provide locknuts nipples locknipples gaskets washers and other hardware used to fasten vehicle and pedestrian signal heads to signal bracketing and pipe fittings fabricated of anodized aluminum and traffic signal industry standard signal hardware Mount signal brackets and pipe fittings plumb or level symmetrically arranged and securely assembled and Construct signal brackets and pipe fittings to conceal traffic control signal conductors watertight and free of sharp edges or protrusions to prevent damage to the traffic control signal conductor insulation. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Obtain the Engineers approval before installing the material specified in this section .
PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL HEADS .
SCOPE Provide pedestrian signal heads to direct pedestrian movements as part of a traffic control signal system . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Use standard ITE black polycarbonate pedestrian signal housings listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified List under Signals unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
Provide LED modules for pedestrian signal indications with countdown timers listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
B Signal Brackets and Pipe Fittings C . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit four sets of manufacturers drawings warranty information and the product invoice to the Engineer for approval .
STAINLESS STEEL WOVEN WIRE CLOTH .
SCOPE Provide stainless steel woven wire cloth in pole bases for controlling rodent intrusion from the interior of the pole . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide a stainless steel woven wire cloth with the following characteristics .
x . per inch mesh .
inch wire diameter .
inch opening width and .
open area .
Minnesota Standard Specifications SERVICE EQUIPMENT .
SCOPE Provide service equipment for controlling and distributing electrical power providing overcurrent protection and a means to cutoff power to items of electrical equipment as part of a traffic control signal system roadway lighting system automatic traffic recorder system or other electrical system . .
REQUIREMENTS A Service Equipment A .
General For the service provide and install as specified in the Contract and the following Meter socket Disconnecting means Two ground rods Grounding and bonding materials Conduit Conduit fittings and Service conductors .
In addition for installations on wood poles provide and install as specified in the Contract and the following Conduit risers and Weather head .
For installations on wood poles size the service conductors that run above the disconnecting means and through the meter socket to the weather head for the rating of the service disconnect .
Ensure these service conductors meet the requirements of the electric utility company and extend beyond the weather head for connection to the service conductors from the source of power .
Provide parts of the service equipment that use copper conductors and have connections that are NRTL listed for use with copper conductors .
Refer to NEC article for the definition of the term Listed .
A .
Meter Socket Use a commercialtype meter socket with the following Rated for A V Containing a positive bypass mechanism Containing lugs that allow the service conductors to be stripped and laid into the lugs without cutting and Approved by the electric utility company .
The electric utility company will provide and install the meter .
A .
Circuit Breaker Load Center Unless otherwise specified in the Contract provide a disconnecting means meeting the following Threewire Solid neutral A VAC NEMA R raintight enclosure for outdoor use Circuit breaker load center and NRTLlisted for use as service equipment .
Use a load center with a front cover and inner dead front cover capable of easy removal for installation maintenance and wiring .
Ensure the front cover is hinged at the top with a sliphinge arrangement that allows the cover to be left in an open position and a snap closure at the bottom .
Provide lugs for service conductor connections in the load center that are NRTLlisted for use with copper wire .
Provide solderless set screwtype lugs sized for the conductors assigned to each lug .
Provide the circuit breaker load center with an isolated bondable neutral bar with the capacity to accept the number and size of neutral and grounding conductors as specified in the Contract or the NEC .
Ensure neutrals bond in accordance with NEC .
Provide and install circuit breakers in the load center as specified in the Contract .
Label the circuit breakers with the on and off positions and with the load carried .
Provide circuit breakers and load center enclosures from the same manufacturer. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
General Duty Safety Switch Use a general duty safety switch with an isolated bondable neutral bar capable of accepting the numbers and sizes of neutral and grounding conductors as specified in the Contract or the NEC .
Ensure bonding of the neutral in accordance with NEC .
If specified in the Contract provide a disconnecting means with the following Threewire Fusible Twopole Solid neutral Single throw A VAC NEMA R raintight enclosure for outdoor use NRTLlisted for use as service equipment .
Ensure lugs contained in the safety switch are sized for the conductor material and size assigned to each lug .
Provide the required fuses .
A .
Heavy Duty Safety Switch Install a safety switch to turn off power to the sign lights .
Provide a safety switch with the following A NEMA R rain tight enclosure for outdoor use made from sheet metal and zinccoated with a gray finish A heavyduty singlethrow fusible with an insulated solid neutral Rated for VAC for a V sign lighting system and VAC for a V sign lighting system With two A cartridge type fuses and Threewire pole for either switch .
For the VAC switch the Contractor may use wire pole .
Install the safety switch in a vertical upright position .
A .
Enclosed Main Circuit Breaker If specified in the Contract provide and install an enclosed main circuit breaker as shown on the Plans for cutting power to the electrical system or systems .
Mount the circuit breaker in a NEMA R raintight enclosure for outdoor use .
Provide a circuit breaker with the following Twopole A VAC Thermomagnetic breaker NRTLlisted for use as service equipment and Clearly marked with on and off positions and identified with the load it is carrying .
If lugs are needed to connect the feeder conductor to the breaker provide NRTLlisted solderless set screwtype lugs for use with copper wire .
Include provisions for a padlock on the raintight enclosure .
A .
Signal Service Cabinet Type SSB Provide a signal service cabinet with the following A meter socket Main and branch circuit breakers A luminaire test switch Enclosed photoelectric controls and Provisions for a battery backup system .
Use signal service cabinets Type SSB listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Provide uninterrupted power supplies for signal service cabinets listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
Use batteries for uninterrupted power supplies listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Signals .
For signal service cabinets Type SSB provide anchor rods and nuts in with the following In accordance with Anchor Rods for Type A or Type B anchor rods With a diameter of ¾ in in .
in long before bending a in L on one end With at least in of thread Hotdip galvanize each anchor rod length in accordance with Galvanized Hardware .
and Provide stainless steel washers in in diameter in accordance with Anchor Rods. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Transformer and Circuit Breaker Assembly B. Transformer Provide an outdoor general purpose drytype transformer meeting the following Primary V two percent taps below V Secondary VAC Rating .
KVA single phase and Size in high in wide and ½ in deep .
Provide transformers and related wiring compartments that are NRTLlisted for indooroutdoor applications and meeting the requirements of relevant NEMA and IEEE standards .
Mount the transformer on the equipment pad as specified in the Contract and as approved by the Engineer .
B .
Enclosed Circuit Breaker To protect the transformer provide the following A circuit breaker mounted in a NEMA R rain tight enclosure rated for outdoor use pole A VAC thermomagnetic circuit breaker NRTLlisted solderless set screwtype lugs for use with copper wire if lugs are needed for feeder conductor connections to the breaker Provisions for a padlock on the raintight enclosure and Mount the circuit breaker enclosure as specified in the Contract and as approved by the Engineer. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit six sets of manufacturers drawings and specifications for the proposed transformer and circuit breaker assembly to the Engineer for approval .
After approval the Engineer will distribute the drawings to the following Contractor Contractors fabricator Engineer Traffic Electrical Systems Engineer District Traffic Engineer and Traffic Control Signal Cabinet or other pad mount cabinet .
JUNCTION BOXES .
SCOPE Provide junction boxes as part of a traffic control signal system freeway ramp control signals automatic traffic recorder systems roadway lighting systems or other electrical systems for the following Accessing wiring Facilitating installation of wiring and Changing from field cable wiring to individual conductors . .
REQUIREMENTS A Metal Junction Boxes Attached to a Bridge Use NRTL listed metal junction boxes attached to a bridge meeting the following NRTL Listed in accordance with UL and UL E Equipped with a removable cover made of the same material as the box attached with stainless steel hexhead screws or bolts and containing a composition fiber gasket around the cover perimeter Malleable iron with interchangeable side hub plates stainless steel hardware composition fiber gaskets for cover and hub plates for use with rigid steel or intermediate metal conduit Triple coated with the following zinc electroplate chromate and epoxy powder coat Inside dimensions of ½ in ½ in in unless otherwise specified in the Contract Equipped with four mounting holes on the inside of the enclosure Bossed conduit entrances capable of accommodating the nominal outside diameter of the conduit shown on the plans and threaded to provide five full threads Bossed conduit entrances of the following dimensions ½ ¾ inches and A field installed drain fitting .
Minnesota Standard Specifications B Metal Junction Boxes on Wood Poles Provide and install metal junction boxes with terminal blocks on wood poles for the following Temporary traffic control signal systems Flashing beacon systems Advance warning flashers or Vehicle pedestrian signal heads or flashing signal indications .
Use metal junction boxes on wood poles meeting the following Meeting the requirements of NEC NEMA Type R At least in in in deep ¼ in drain hole on the bottom side Equipped with a cover with a gasket around the perimeter and attached with stainless steel screws and Equipped with terminal blocks in accordance with .. J Wiring for terminating field conductors and traffic control signal conductors attached to the back of the junction box so the terminal screws of the terminal block face the box opening and covered with an electrical insulating coating after conductor terminations on the terminal block .
Provide and install liquidtight flexible nonmetallic conduit and conduit fittings in accordance with and as shown on the Plans .
Install conduit between the metal junction box and each wood polemounted signal bracket .
C Junction Boxes in Rigid PVC Conduit Runs Attached to a Bridge For junction boxes mounted to bridges use PVC junction boxes with the following Equipped with a cover attached by stainless steel screws At least in in in deep Attached to the bridge as approved by the Engineer and Meeting the requirements of NEC .
D Blank E Junction Boxes for Roadway Lighting Systems Use NRTL listed metal junction boxes meeting the following NRTL listed and labeled in accordance with UL and UL E Equipped with a removable cover made of the same material as the box attached with stainless steel hexhead screws or bolts and containing a composition fiber gasket around the cover perimeter Malleable iron with interchangeable side hub plates brass cap screws composition fiber gaskets for cover and hub plates for use with rigid steel or intermediate metal conduit Triple coated with the following zinc electroplate chromate and epoxy powder coat Inside dimensions of ½ in ½ in in unless otherwise specified in the Contract Equipped with four mounting holes on the inside of the enclosure Bossed conduit entrances that accommodate the nominal outside diameter of the conduit shown on the Plans and threaded to provide five full threads Bossed conduit entrances of the following dimensions ½ ¾ in and A field installed drain fitting. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit three sets of shop drawings of the proposed metal junction boxes and mounting details to the Engineer for approval .
CONDUIT EXPANSION AND DEFLECTIONEXPANSION COUPLING FITTINGS .
SCOPE Provide PVC coated and urethane lined metallic conduit expansion fittings and PVC coated metallic deflectionexpansion coupling fittings for PVC coated RSC runs encased in concrete hanging or surface mounted . .
REQUIREMENTS Refer to the NEC article for the definition of the term Listed .
A Expansion Coupling Fittings Provide expansion coupling fittings with the following NRTL listed in accordance with UL B and CSA certified to C. . Minnesota Standard Specifications NRTL listed for use in wet or dry locations Minimum of in longitudinal movement Supports conduit trade sizes ¾ in thru in NRTLlisted PVC coated iron or steel and protected by galvanizing or plating for use with RMC or IMC and Flexible internal bonding jumper copper braid .
B DeflectionExpansion Coupling Fittings Provide deflectionexpansion coupling fittings with the following Provides for movement of ¾ in from normal alignment in all directions Allows for a deflection of degrees from normal alignment in any direction Supports conduit trade sizes in thru in PVC coated zinc plated iron hubs one female and one three piece coupling Erickson type union Neoprene sleeve Flexible internal bonding jumper copper braid Tamperproof stainless steel bands Watertight rain tight concrete tight NEMA rated and NRTLlisted in accordance with ULB and CSA certified to C .. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Obtain the Engineers approval before installing the expansion and the deflectionexpansion coupling fittings .
WOOD POLES .
SCOPE Provide wood poles for traffic control signal systems electric lighting systems and mounting service equipment . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide wood poles meeting the following ANSI The length shown on the plans Class II unless otherwise specified in the Contract The species specified by Table Bored Hole Diameter Requirements Treated with preservative in accordance with Preservatives and Preservative Treatment of Timber Products. . SAMPLING AND TESTING SPONGE RUBBER EXPANSION JOINT .
SCOPE Provide AASHTO M Type sponge rubber expansion joint for wrapping conduit expansion and deflectionexpansion fittings . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide sponge rubber expansion joint meeting the following Compliance with AASHTO M Type Compliance with ASTM D Type Compliance with Corps of Engineers CRDC Type Compliance with FAA Specification Item P. Compliance with Federal Specification HHF F TYPE II ¼ in thick Gray in color Uniform thickness Blown sponge rubber Density of not less than lb.ft.³ and Is easily compressed and has a recovery of or more. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Department reserves the right to sample test inspect and accept or reject sponge rubber expansion joint based on its own tests .
Minnesota Standard Specifications ANTISEIZE AND LUBRICATING COMPOUND BRIDGE GREASE .
SCOPE Provide antiseize and lubricating compound to metallic hardware as specified in the Contract for lubricating and preventing corrosion of bolted connections . .
REQUIREMENTS Use an approved antiseize and lubricating compound listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Bridge and specified as Bridge grease .
ANTIOXIDANT JOINT COMPOUND .
SCOPE Provide antioxidant joint compound for conductor terminations as specified in the Contract to prevent corrosion and oxidation and improve conductivity and the integrity of electrical connections . .
REQUIREMENTS Before terminating conductors coat conductor ends and connectors with antioxidant joint compound meeting the following Color BlackGray Temperature Range F to F C to C Thickener Type Calcium Complex Particle Size .
Mil Maximum microns Density GCM .
to .
ASTM D Flash Point F C ASTM B Salt Fog Test Hrs ASTM D Copper Corrosion Test F C Hrs No Corrosion ASTM D Work Penetration Strokes F C ASTM D NLGI Grade ASTM D Dropping Point F C Torque Coefficient K factor .
ASTM D Water Washout loss F . ASTM D Water Washout loss F . ASTM D Bearing Rust Test Pass ASTM D Four Ball EP Load Wear Index .
ASTM D Four Ball EP Last NonSeizure Load scar kgf .mm ASTM D Four Ball EP Last Seizure Load scar kgf .
mm ASTM D Four Ball EP Weld Load kgf ASTM D Fretting Wear at F C Hrs mg loss . . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Department reserves the right to sample test inspect and accept or antioxidant joint compound based on its own tests .
LABELS .
SCOPE Provide labels for labeling in accordance with .P .
Lighting System Numbering and .P .. c Luminaire Classification . .
REQUIREMENTS Use approved labels listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
LIGHTING SERVICE CABINET .
SCOPE Provide service cabinets for distributing electrical power providing over current protection and providing a means to cut off power to roadway lighting systems . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Use lighting service cabinets and subassemblies listed and labeled by a National Recognized Testing Laboratory NRTL as defined by the U.S. Department of Labor. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Ensure the NRTL is listed by OSHA in its scope of recognition for the tests conducted in accordance with this section .
Provide lighting service cabinets meeting the following Complete and operational as specified in the Contract NEMA R rated for the enclosure Provides electrical service for roadway lighting Listed and labeled by the NRTL as in compliance with UL and UL A Listed and labeled by the NRTL as suitable for use as service equipment Listed and labeled by the NRTL as approved for outdoor use and With all available branch circuit breakers installed .
B Type L Service Cabinet Use Type L service cabinets listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
C Type L Service Cabinet Use Type L service cabinets listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
D Type Rural Lighting and Flasher RLF Service Cabinet Use Type RLF service cabinets listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
E Type B Service Cabinet Use Type B service cabinets listed on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Department reserves the right to test inspect and accept or reject lighting service cabinets that are not in compliance with requirements as defined in the cabinet specifications posted on MnDOTs ApprovedQualified Products List under Roadway lighting .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Planting Materials PLANT STOCK .
SCOPE Provide species and varieties of trees shrubs vines and perennials suitable for roadside landscape planting .
The Department will use the term plant to describe trees shrubs vines or perennials . .
REQUIREMENTS Unless otherwise specified as collected stock wild or grown in other than nursery conditions or as Departmentprovided plants provide plants grown in a nursery for at least years and meeting the requirements of the current edition of the Inspection and Contract Administration Manual for MnDOT Landscape Projects ICAMMLP for grading and accepting plant stock .
Provide a Certificate of Nursery Inspection from the Department of Agriculture of the state of plant origin in accordance with .. A .
Plant Stock and Materials Documentation .
A Classification of Plants The Department will classify trees shrubs vines and perennials for landscaping purposes by species variety and size or age as required by the contract .
If the contract requires a dimensional size provide plants with the minimum range of height stem caliper or spread acceptable meeting the requirements of the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
B Plant Names The Department will specify the botanical and common names of plant materials based on the requirements of Hortus Third .
C Plant Hardiness Provide plant stock hardy to the Minnesota zone that includes the project and meeting the following requirements Documented as continuously grown for at least the last years within the acceptable growing range limits as shown on the standard planting detail A in the plans or If grown outside the acceptable growing range limits documented as having the seed source or root and graft stock originating from within the acceptable growing range limits as shown on the standard planting detail A in the plans .
The Engineer will resolve questions regarding plant stock hardiness or botanical identification .
D Blank E Quality and Condition Provide a Certificate of Nursery Inspection from the Department of Agriculture of the state of plant origin in accordance with .. A .
Plant Stock and Materials Documentation .
Provide plant species or variety shown on the plans free of disease disfiguring knots sun scald insect infestations dead or broken branches bark abrasions and other unacceptable conditions as described in the current edition of ICAMMLP .
Provide plants that meet all applicable criteria for plant type size and age as listed in the current edition of the ICAMMLP for each plant shown on the plans .
Provide container grown plants with root systems capable of holding the soil intact after removal from the container .
The Engineer will reject nursery grown plants with root systems not consistent with criteria listed in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
The Engineer will reject plants delivered with broken or bruised branches stems or canes unless the Contractor prunes the damaged growth without affecting the size or symmetry .
The Engineer will reject balled and burlapped plants delivered with broken or disturbed balls .
Deliver and install bare root plants in a dormant condition unless otherwise approved by the Engineer .
If installing plants that have broken dormancy as approved by the Engineer the Department will withhold payment for the initial planting operations until the Engineer determines the plant acceptability after the first year of plant establishment .
Provide coniferous trees meeting the dimensional requirements in the current edition of the ICAMMLP and containing buds or new growth at the terminal ends of the branches .
During the spring planting season the Contractor may plant coniferous plants with new growth during storage in a holding bin .
The Engineer will reject coniferous plants dug after producing new growth .
The Engineer will reject coniferous trees not fully branched from bottom to top. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide pine trees with a terminal leader bud and terminal leaders no longer than in mm .
Train a new central leader in conifers delivered with multiple or missing leaders .
F Digging and Handling Dig and handle plants with reasonable care and skill to prevent damage to stems roots branches and the trunk .
For balled and burlapped plants preserve a firm ball of undisturbed soil around the root system .
Provide balled and burlapped plants meeting the requirements of the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
Wrap and bound balled and burlapped plants to maintain an intact and solid soil ball during handling shipment and planting .
Handle balled and burlapped plants by the soil ball and not by the branches or trunk .
The Contractor may use wire baskets with balled and burlapped plants unless otherwise specified in .. F Installation of Plants .
G Packing and Shipping Ship plant material meeting the requirements of the nursery inspection and plant quarantine regulations of the states of origin and destination and the Federal regulations governing interstate movement of nursery stock as administered through each state Department of Agriculture .
Ship plants true to name .
Legibly and securely label each bundle bale or individual plant with the following information for each species or variety Name Size and Quantity .
Package and ship plants without damage .
After digging the plants cover the roots with a suitable moistureholding material to protect the roots from drying out .
Do not remove the material until delivery to the planting site .
Protect roots from the sun wind and freezing temperatures .
If transporting plants in closed vehicles provide ventilation to prevent bud break. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer will inspect plants at time of delivery of plants to the project site .
Acceptance requirements for each plant stock and form are described in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
The Engineer may randomly inspect no greater than three balled and burlapped or container plants of each variety delivered to the planting site for condition and size of the root system .
The Engineer may pull back the burlap and wire basket or remove plants from containers .
Replace plants becoming unsuitable for planting from the inspection at no additional cost to the Department .
The Engineer will reject plants not meeting dimensional requirements as described in the current edition of the ICAMMLP .
The Engineer will measure the height of coniferous trees of the pine spruce and fir species to the upper limit at the midpoint of the terminal leader .
Remove and replace rejected plants unless otherwise directed by the Engineer .
FILTER BERM .
SCOPE Provide filter berms to slow filter and divert storm water runoff and other pollutant water . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide the following types of filter berms .
Dimensions may vary by the contract A Type Compost Provide compost berms meeting the following requirements and characteristics Grade Compost per Trapezoidal shape with ft. base width Min .
height ft. in loose volume and VH side slopes .
B Type Slash Mulch Provide slash mulch berms meeting the following requirements and characteristics Type Mulch per Trapezoidal shape with ft. base width .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Min .
height ft. in loose volume and VH side slopes .
C Type Rock Weeper System Provide rock weeper systems meeting the following requirements and characteristics Type IV Geotextile Fabric per Trapezoid shape with .
ft. base width Max height .
ft. VH side slopes Front half composed of Coarse Filter Aggregate per .. H and Back half composed of Class I Riprap per .
D Type Topsoil Provide topsoil filter berm meeting the following requirements and characteristics Topsoil Excavation material per Trapezoid shape with ft. base width Min .
height ft. and VH side slopes .
E Type Rock Provide rock filter berm meeting the following requirements and characteristics Type IV Geotextile fabric per as a liner Class II Riprap per Trapezoid shape with ft. base width Max .
Height .
ft. and VH side slopes. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK WATER TREATMENT .
SCOPE Provide water treatment methods to minimize turbid water levels from dewatering practices that discharge to receiving waters . .
REQUIREMENTS A Passive Use passive dewatering treatment methods using time and gravity to settle out sediments if draining basins traps ditches or sumps to prepare the construction site for the next storm event .
A .
Rock Weepers Provide rock weepers for vegetated or impermeable lined channels per .. C A. Perforated Riser Standpipe Provide a riser pipe in a pond basin or trap outlet structure meeting the following requirements or characteristics Twothirds the height of the outlet above the floor of the structure Made of perforated PVC or metal pipe of the same diameter as the outlet structure and Surrounded by clean rock from in to in for the entire height of the riser pipe .
Install a trash guard on the top overflow .
A. Blank A .
Floating Head Skimmer Provide a schedule PVC pipe at least .
in diameter for the floating head skimmer .
Provide a flocculant per Flocculants with a floating head skimmer for additional treatment if shown in the plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications A .
Portable Sediment Tanks Provide prefabricated portable sediment tanks meeting the following requirements and characteristics Designed to settle sands loamy sands and sandy loams Contain cu .
ft of storage per gallon per minute of pump discharge capacity Contain orifice attachment portals for dewatering hoses and sediment cleanout access Include weirs and replaceable media filters of slash mulch excelsior fibers or other filter media to meet the project pollutant load and Used in accordance with Flocculants .
Provide additional tanks to meet item above or if outfall water is not visibly clear .
B Active Provide pumps hoses pressurized tanks or a combination of these items to depress the water table allowing for construction work to be completed in dry soil conditions .
B .
Rock Barrel Provide a gal barrel with in slits cut into the base .
Install a sleeved in diameter perforated pipe in the barrel .
Provide a flocculant sock per Flocculants and place the sock at the bottom of the barrel and around the base of the perforated pipe .
Surround the slits in the bottom of the barrel with clean rock with a diameter from in to in .
Place the clean rock on a VH slope around the barrel .
B. Inline Flocculant Sock Provide a flocculant per Flocculants in the hose connecting one containment facility to another .
Locate the flocculant sock after the pump .
B. Inline Pressurized Filter Systems Provide a portable water quality monitoring system consisting of sand media pressurized bags or cartridges to produce required turbidity or chemical reduction .
Use liquid flocculants in accordance with Flocculants if necessary .
Provide a portable water quality monitoring system meeting the discharge requirements shown on the plans. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Blank SEED .
SCOPE Provide seed for planting to establish temporary and permanent vegetative cover . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide seed meeting the following requirements and characteristics From a vendor listed on the ApprovedQualified Product List and approved to blend or sell the type of mix used Meeting the requirements of Minnesota Statutes .. and any applicable federal regulations including those governing labeling and weed seed tolerances Conditioned to remove all pieces of stem straw or other chaff longer than ½ in .
so that it can pass through a drill seeder without plugging Supplied on a pure live seed PLS basis and Meeting the tolerance requirements for germination and purity factors of the following Minnesota Seed Law Rules applied to seed lots sampled and tested by the following Association of Official Seed Analysts AOSA methods . . . . . . . . . . and .
..
Apply Rhizobial inoculants to legume seed with the rhizobial culture appropriate for the species being inoculated as directed by the manufacturer or as shown on the special provisions .
Apply Mycorrhizal inoculants for native warm season grasses as shown on the plans .
Apply Azospirillum innoculants to grass seed as shown on the plans. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Use inoculants before the expiration date .
Provide a label showing the expiration date of the innoculant .
Store seed and innoculant in accordance with Storage of Materials and under controlled conditions .
Before planting maintain seed at or below F and at or below percent moisture content and protect seed from rain direct sunlight rodents and insects .
The Department defines PLS as the product of the percent of viable seed total germination and hard seed or dormant seed when applicable multiplied by the percent of pure seed divided by percent .
A Blank B Blank C Blank C. Blank C. Blank C. Blank D Seed Mix Designations D. Standard Seed Mixes Use seed of the species and germplasm meeting the requirements of the Seeding Manual and the Seed Mixture Components Requirements Table or as specified in the special provisions .
Table State Seed Mixes Category Mix No .
PLS Rate lbacre Name Oats Cover Crop Winter Wheat Cover Crop Soil Building Cover Crop Twoyear Stabilization Fiveyear Stabilization Sandy General Roadside Low Maintenance Turf Mesic General Roadside Agricultural Roadside High Maintenance Turf Native Construction Stormwater South and West Dry Swale Pond Stormwater Northeast .
Wetland Rehabilitation Emergent Wetland .
Riparian South West .
Wet Prairie Wet Meadow South West .
Riparian Northeast .
Wet Meadow Northeast .
Dry Prairie General .
Mesic Prairie General Dry Prairie Northwest Mesic Prairie Northwest .
Dry Prairie Southwest Mesic Prairie Southwest Dry Prairie Southeast Mesic Prairie Southeast .
Woodland Edge South West .
Woodland Edge Northeast .
Woodland Edge Northwest .
Woodland Edge Central .
Minnesota Standard Specifications D. Site Specific Seed Mixes Provide seed mixes in accordance with Native Seed Mix Design for Roadsides if shown on the plans .
E Blending Provide uniformly blended seed mixes as required by the contract and meeting the requirements of the Seeding Manual .
Blend mixes meeting the requirements of the Departments Approved Seed Vendor Agreement .
E. Nonnative mixes and cover crop mixes Combine all components of nonnative mixes and cover crop mixes E. Native seed mixes Blend and package components of native seed mixes according to size to allow installation from the appropriate seed box of native seeding equipment and in accordance with the following Combine the seeds of sedges and rushes for installation by hand or with the small seed box Combine the seeds of small and medium seeded forbs for installation with the small seed box Combine the seeds of most grasses and largeseeded forbs for installation with the fluffy seed box and Combine large seeds of cover crop species such as oats and winter wheat for installation with the grain box .
F Minimum PLS Provide seed meeting the minimum purity and germination requirements for certification in accordance with the seed certification standard on file with the appropriate seed certifying agency .
If using noncertified seed approved as substitutions provide seed meeting the minimum PLS requirement listed on the Seed Mixture Component Requirements Table .
G Acceptable Varieties and Origin Use seed of introduced species that has been certified by the Minnesota Crop Improvement Association MCIA or the appropriate seed certifying agency in the seeds state of origin .
Use seed of varieties listed in the document Seed Mixture Component Requirements which includes approved substitutions and is available on the MnDOT website .
Where native species occur in predominately nonnative mixes use seed varieties as listed in the Seed Mixture Component Requirements Table or seed certified as Source Identified by the MCIA .
In native seed mixtures use seed of native species certified in the Source Identified class by the MCIA .
In native seed mixtures use seed of native species with a genetic origin from Minnesota or the following regions of adjacent states Table Native Species from Adjacent States State Counties North Dakota Barnes Benson Cass Cavalier Dickey Eddy Foster Grand Forks Griggs Lamoure Nelson Pembina Ramsey Ransom Richland Sargent Steele Stutsman Towner Traill Walsh South Dakota Aurora Beadle Bon Homme Brookings Brown Clark Clay Codington Davison Day Deuel Douglas Grant Hamlin Hanson Hutchinson Jerauld Kingsbury Lake Lincoln Marshall McCook Miner Minnehaha Moody Roberts Sanborn Spink Turner Union Yankton Iowa Allamakee Bremer Buena Vista Butler Cerro Gordo Cherokee Chickasaw Clay Clayton Dickinson Emmet Fayette Floyd Franklin Hancock Howard Humboldt Kossuth Lyon Mitchel OBrien Osceola Palo Alto Plymouth Pocahontas Sioux Winnebago Winneshiek Worth Wright Wisconsin Ashland Barron Bayfield Buffalo Burnett Chippewa Clark Crawford Douglas Dunn Eau Claire Grant Iowa Iron Jackson La Crosse Lafayette Monroe Pepin Pierce Polk Price Richland Rusk Saint Croix Sawyer Taylor Trempealeau Vernon Washburn G. RangeLimited seed mixes If a seed mix is identified on the plans as RangeLimited supply seed in accordance with the following requirements as specified on the plans .
Minnesota Standard Specifications RangeLimited At least percent of native components have a genetic origin from within miles of the project RangeLimited At least percent of native components have a genetic origin from within miles of the project RangeLimited At least percent of native components have a genetic origin from within miles of the project .
H Substitutions The Contractor may substitute species or germplasm listed in the Seeding Manual with corresponding species or germplasm listed in the Seed Mixture Component Requirements Table. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Testing and Viability Provide seed tested in accordance with the official rules for testing on file with the AOSA and meeting the minimum germination requirements of .. F Minimum PLS during installation .
Plant seed within months of viability testing exclusive of the month the test was completed .
Upon request by the Engineer provide seed test reports from a registered seed technologist for each lot of seed being used .
Take samples of seed lots delivered to the project in accordance with the Schedule for Materials Control for testing and inspection or more often as requested by the Engineer .
The Department will use a tetrazolium test in lieu of a standard germination test for quality control .
If the Departments inspection and testing results disagree with those obtained at the origin the Departments findings will be conclusive and binding .
The Contractor may challenge the Departments seed test results and may request retesting at no additional cost to the Department .
B Blank C Labeling Label each container of seed with the following information in addition to information required by the Minnesota Seed Law Section .
Total PLS weight for the container Net weight for the container Area covered by the amount of seed in the bag when applied at the rate specified for that mix in Seeding Manual or special provision When listing origin of mix components list county of genetic origin for native species and PLS percent for each component Variety of each component for which a variety is required according to the Seed Mixture Component Requirements Table List the following information for each mix component that is percent or less of the seed mix include on the label for each container or supply as a separate sheet for each seed mix lot Species Variety Origin production area for introduced species county of genetic origin for native species Pure seed percent Germination percent Hard dormant seed percent and PLS percent for each component .
When bags of small seeded species are placed inside larger bags of largeseeded species of the same mix mark smaller bags to clearly identify the components contained in the bag and what mix they belong to .
Attach the MnDOT Approved Seed Vendor tag and the seed label to the outer bag .
Attach applicable certification tags from appropriate seed certifying agencies to each bag containing certified seed or provide a certification certificate with the certified seed .
Attach a MnDOT Approved Seed Vendor tag to each bag of seed .
Ensure that the tag matches the type of mix labeled .
The Department considers the labeling and tags required in this section and by state and federal law as the certificate of compliance for the provided seed. . Minnesota Standard Specifications TOPSOIL MATERIAL .
SCOPE Provide topsoil material for use as a medium to establish plant growth for water quality and permanent erosion protection .
Provide manufactured soils for use as a medium for treating and filtering stormwater in rain gardens horizontal filter berms dikes bioswales and bioslopes . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide loam to sandy loam topsoil from Type A andor Type B horizon soils defined in the soil profile section of the Grading and Base Manual from alluvial deposits or blended from defined sand compost and loam to sandy loam topsoil sources .
Manufactured topsoils in section E F G and H are blended on a volume basis of materials .
When the individual components have been verified to meet the appropriate specification the blended material in the ratio indicated shall meet this specification .
In addition to the requirements any of the topsoil types may require soil conditioners plant hormones or root stimulators in accordance with Soil and Root Additives .
Aggregate material from sources other than gravel pits and quarries must also meet the minimum contaminants requirements in US EPA or Minnesota Rule .
Subp .
Sec .
A .
A Common Topsoil Borrow Provide Common topsoil borrow ranging from a silt loam loam clay loam sandy clay loam or sandy loam soils for general use as a turf growing medium and in accordance with Table .
Common topsoil borrow material is a blend of Type A andor Type B horizon soils defined in the soil profile section of the Grading and Base Manual and is similar to topsoil found adjacent to the project .
Table Common Topsoil Borrow Requirements Requirement Range Test Method Material passing No in Clay ASTM D Silt ASTM D Sand ASTM D Organic matter ASTM D pH . . ASTM G Largest materials size dimension not to exceed .
inches B Loam Topsoil Borrow Provide topsoil borrow consisting mostly of loam ranging into sandy clay loam sandy loam silt loam and clay loam soils as a plant growing medium for landscape and planting beds and in accordance with Table Table Loam Topsoil Borrow Requirements Requirement Range Test Method Material Passing the ¾ in ASTM D Material passing No .
Clay ASTM D Silt ASTM D Sand ASTM D Organic matter ASTM D pH . . ASTM G Soluble salts .
siemensm C Sandy Clay Loam Topsoil Borrow Provide topsoil borrow mostly consisting of a sandy clay loam and ranging into clay loam sandy loam and loam soils for use as a plant growing medium in critical areas such as steep slopes and as a top dressing for Turf Reinforcement Mats and in accordance with Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Sandy Clay Loam Topsoil Borrow Requirements Requirement Range Test Method Screened Material passing the ¾ in ASTM D Material passing No .
ASTM D Clay ASTM D Silt ASTM D Sand ASTM D Organic matter ASTM D pH . . ASTM G Soluble salts .
siemensm D Blank E Rooting Topsoil Borrow Provide topsoil borrow consisting of three blended components of loam topsoil sand and compost for use as a well drained course sand medium for vegetative plant restoration plant preservation or as a plant growing medium for rooting water quality and infiltration .
The components consist of the following by volume .
Sixty percent sand in accordance with .. J Fine Filter Aggregate or .K sand cover Twenty percent Grade compost in accordance with Compost and Twenty percent topsoil meeting the requirements of Loam Topsoil Borrow .
Supplement with root additives to stimulate root establishment in water quality treatment facility .
F Boulevard Topsoil Borrow Provide topsoil borrow containing three blended components consisting of loam topsoil sand and compost for use as structural soil for plant establishment in streetscape boulevards .
The components consist of the following by volume .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Onethird topsoil meeting the requirements of Loam Topsoil Borrow Onethird sand accordance with .J Fine Filter Aggregate or .K sand cover and Onethird compost in accordance with Grade Compost .
G Filter Topsoil Borrow Provide topsoil borrow containing two blended components of sand and compost for water quality plant growing medium and filtration medium with a filtration rate of at least inh .
The components consist of the following by volume sand meeting the gradation requirements of Fine Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete and Grade compost per Compost .
H Organic Topsoil Borrow Provide topsoil borrow containing two blended components of topsoil and compost for a plant growing medium to enhance existing soils .
The components by volume consist of existing salvaged topsoil and compost meeting requirement of Grade Compost .
Provide Type fertilizer in accordance with plant hormones in accordance with . . SAMPLING AND ACCEPTANCE Provide material from vendors that have been approved by MnDOTs Erosion and Storm water Management Unit or submit a list of prospective sources for topsoil material to the Engineer at the preconstruction meeting to allow for inspecting testing and approving the sources .
Submit preapproval test results to the Office of Environmental Stewardship Erosion Stormwater Management Unit .
If federal or state chemical or biological requirements conflict provide material meeting the most stringent requirement .
Test blended topsoil for each individual component before blending .
The contractor shall conduct fertility testing in accordance with the standard testing procedures of the University of Minnesota Soils Testing Laboratory Soil Science Department .
SOD .
SCOPE Provide sod for turf establishment erosion control energy dissipation of low flow water outfalls river banks and channel bottoms . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide sod consisting of denselyrooted bluegrass or other permanent grasses and flowers depending on sod type shown on the plans .
Provide material from vendors on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Cut turftype sod in uniform strips at least in wide and ¾ in thick .
Cut the sod thicker to retain and expose the dense root system in the bottom side of the sod .
Cut the sod when it contains sufficient moisture to withstand exposure and handling during the transplant operations .
Rake the sod free of debris and trim the top growth to a height from in to in .
Do not use sod strips with dry or dead edges upon delivery .
Between June and September do not cut sod more than h before delivery .
Provide native sod in the dimensions specified in the plans or by the manufacturers recommendations for handling immediately before installation .
Before delivery provide certification from the grower to the Engineer stating the grass varieties contained in the sod .
Do not place sod until the Engineer approves the certification .
Provide salt tolerant and the netted sods from certified growers as defined by the Minnesota Crop Improvement Association and the Office of Environmental Services .
The Engineer will require certification of conformance based on third party inspection and documentation process for all material from certified growers .
A Lawn Sod Provide lawn sod meeting the following requirements and characteristics Soil is moist Uniform texture Dark green Max .
grass blade widths .
in .
Weedfree Max .
thatch thickness .
in .
over the base soil Consists of a blend of or fine leafed turf grasses and At least twothirds of the grasses as determined by initial seeding proportions consist of improved and elite type Kentucky bluegrass varieties as specified in the Seeding Manual. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Blank C Salt Tolerant Sod Provide salttolerant sod for use along boulevards or in a potential salt environment meeting the following requirements and characteristics Low maintenance type Fine leafed Uniform texture Free of noxious broadleafed and grassy weeds Contains less than percent coarse grasses and Originated from the blend of grass seed of seed components listed by the Minnesota Crop Improvement Association Minnesota Turf Association and the Office of Environmental Services .
D Mineral Sod Provide mineral sod meeting the following requirements and characteristics Commercially produced on or harvested from mineral based soils consisting of no greater than percent organic matter by weight Fine leafed Uniform texture Free of noxious broadleafed or grassy weeds Contains less than percent coarse grasses Consists of a blend of or fine leafed turf grasses and At least percent of the grasses as determined by initial seeding proportions consist of improved type Kentucky bluegrass varieties as specified in Seed .
E Native Sod Provide native sod meeting the following requirements Commercially produced from native grass and flower seed mixtures per Seed and as shown on the plans and Seeded and grown in turf reinforcement mats or natural organic mats for at least days before delivery and installation. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer will obtain test samples for determination of soil organic matter content of mineral sod from the soil exposed in the bottom side of the sod rolls .
The Engineer will test for organic matter content meeting the requirements of ASTM D . The Department may conduct its own inspection during sod production in the fields or at the project .
Provide representative samples of the sod to the Engineer if requested .
Do not deliver sod until the Engineer approves the samples .
AGRICULTURAL LIME .
SCOPE Provide Agricultural Liming Material ALM containing calcium compounds magnesium compounds or both capable of neutralizing soil acidity and providing an increase in soil pH within six months of placement into the soil . .
REQUIREMENTS ALM includes the following forms Limestone calcite or dolomite Burned lime Slaked lime and Marl .
Gypsum is not a liming product .
Provide lime product containing at least percent Total Neutralizing Power TNP ground fine to provide the following characteristics At least percent including fine particles obtained in the grinding process passes through a No sieve At least percent passes through a No .
sieve At least percent passes through a No .
sieve A maximum water content of percent ALM with a rating of at least lb .
Effective Neutralizing Power ENP per ton of ALM. . Minnesota Standard Specifications Obtain the ALM from a Minnesota Department of Agriculture MDA licensed distributor or producer .
For ALM supplied in bulk deliver the ALM to the project with the following information on a billing delivery invoice or scale ticket label Distributor or producers name address telephone number and source of production or stockpile location Customers name Date of sale or transfer Type of ALM Minimum weight in pounds of ENP per ton accurate within percent and Weight or cubic yards of ALM distributed and weight per cubic yard .
For ALM supplied in bags or other container types affix the following information to the bag or container Distributor or producers name and address Minimum weight in pounds ENP per ton accurate to within percent and The net weight. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Collect samples in accordance with the MDA Agricultural Lime Official Sampling Methods .
Submit samples to MDA or the University of Minnesota testing lab for analysis of the following Percent of TNP Percent passing the No .
sieve No .
sieve and No .
sieve Percent dry matter and The weight in pounds ENP per ton of ALM rating .
Perform sampling and testing within days before applying the lime material to the land .
The weight in pounds ENP per ton of ALM is defined as follows T W PDM ENP ton lb When ENP TNP FI Fineness Index FI .
. . . . . . passNo passNo passNo passNo passNo PDM percent dry matter Moisture W weight lb .
ENP T Ton of ALM The Engineer may accept material provided in accordance with this section on the basis of the distributors or producers guaranteed analysis .
The Department reserves the right to sample test inspect and accept or reject the material based on its own tests .
FERTILIZER .
SCOPE Provide fertilizer for use in establishing vegetative cover and landscape plantings . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide a manufactured grade of inorganic or organic fertilizer produced in granular or granulated form .
The fertilizer label shall contain the requirements of each type and at least the minimum analysis shown on the plans .
The fertilizer shall consist of a blended or homogeneous form containing the specified percentages of total nitrogen available phosphoric acid or phosphorous and watersoluble potash or potassium in that order .
Fertilizer supplied in closed containers shall have the following clearly marked on the containers and in accordance with Minnesota Department of Agriculture MDA regulations The weight .
Minnesota Standard Specifications The type of nutrients and The manufacturers guaranteed analysis .
Fertilizer supplied in bulk shall provide the above information in an invoice delivery ticket or written form .
Include a suitable billoflading with each shipment that contains the information in accordance with MDA regulations .
B Types Provide fertilizer meeting the requirements for the following types as shown on the plans .
B .
Type Commercial Fertilizer Provide commercial fertilizer meeting the following characteristics Consisting of dry granulated nutrients produced by mining and manufacturing processes and commonly used in the agricultural or lawn care industries and Containing nitrogen phosphorous and potassium .
B .
Type PhosphorousFree Fertilizer Provide commercial fertilizer meeting the following characteristics Consisting of dry granulated nutrients produced by mining and manufacturing processes and commonly used in the agricultural or lawn care industries and Contains nitrogen and potassium .
B .
Type SlowRelease Fertilizer Provide slowrelease fertilizer with the following characteristics Specifically processed to release nitrogen at a slow rate over a growing season Containing nitrogen phosphorous and potassium The primary nitrogen sources shall be in a coated prilled urea form and At least percent of the nitrogen component shall be slowrelease waterinsoluble nitrogen .
B .
Type NaturalBased Fertilizer Provide naturalbased fertilizer with the following characteristics With at least percent of the mass and at least percent of the macronutrients derived from natural or organic material Consisting of dry granulated nutrients with a moisture content of less than percent Consisting of granules with an approximate size from No .
sieve to No .
sieve Derived from aerobically composted feed stock supplemented with ammonium sulfate ferrous sulfate and sulfate of potash to meet the ratios shown on the Plans and Free of sewage sludge raw manure or uncomposted organic matter. . SAMPLING AND ACCEPTANCE The Department may approve the fertilizer based on the manufacturers guaranteed analysis and certificate of compliance of each type supplied .
The Department reserves the right to sample and test the material at the source or at the project before final acceptance .
The Department will perform chemical analysis tests in accordance with the methods established by the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists .
MULCH MATERIAL .
SCOPE Provide mulch material for controlling erosion and establishing vegetative cover . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide mulch material meeting the requirements of one of the following types as required by the contract .
A Type Provide Type mulch with the following characteristics Grain straw hay cuttings of agricultural grasses and legumes .
Free of noxious weeds as defined by the rules and regulations of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture MDA Free of cattail Typha sp reed canary grass Phalaris arundinacea birdsfoot trefoil Lotus corniculatus and crown vetch Coronilla varia Queen annes lace Daucus carota and In an airdried condition at the time of delivery. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Blank C Type Provide Type mulch with the following characteristics Clean Agricultural grain straw Wheat Oats Rye Barley or clean straw harvested from native grass production fields certified by the Minnesota Crop Improvement Association MCIA to be free of noxious weeds Free of cattail Typha sp reed canary grass Phalaris arundinacea birdsfoot trefoil Lotus corniculatus Crown vetch Coronilla varia and Queen annes lace Daucus carota Bales are in an airdried condition at the time of delivery and Attached to each bale is the MCIA inspection tag .
D Type Provide Type mulch with the following characteristics Type or Type mulch and Hydraulic Stabilized Fiber Matrix meeting the requirements of .
E Type Provide Type mulch with the following characteristics Raw wood slash from hard or soft timber harvested during clearing and grubbing operations on the project Product of a mechanical chipper hammermill or tub grinder Maximum length of individual pieces shall not to exceed in and .
Maximum width of individual pieces shall not exceed in .
Provide mulch from a supplier outside of the Emerald Ash Borer quarantine areas or if the mulch originates from within the quarantine areas obtain a Compliance Agreement with the Minnesota Department of Agriculture MDA .
The Department will not allow mulch transported in or through a quarantine area to be transported outside the Emerald Ash Borer quarantine area without approval from the MDA .
Contact MDA for more information .
F Type Provide Type mulch with the following characteristics Raw wood material from hard or soft timber and that is the product of a mechanical chipper hammermill or tub grinder Material is free of mold dirt sawdust and deleterious material Do not use wood material in an advanced state of decomposition chippedup manufactured boards or chemically treated wood including wafer board particle board Chromated Copper Arsenate CCA or penta treated wood Material is air dried Do not allow unattached bark greenleaf composition to exceed percent by mass Maximum length of individual pieces shall not to exceed in and Maximum width of individual pieces shall not to exceed in .
Provide mulch from a supplier outside of the Emerald Ash Borer quarantine areas or if the mulch originates from within the quarantine areas obtain a Compliance Agreement with the MDA .
The Department will not allow mulch transported in or through a quarantine area to be transported outside the Emerald Ash Borer quarantine area without approval from the MDA .
Contact MDA for more information .
G Blank H Type Provide Type mulch with the following characteristics Consisting of prairie hay Has not been thrashed to remove seeds so it consists of directlybailed material Harvested from native stands or from native grass fields Free of noxious weeds as defined by the rules and regulations of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture MDA and Free of cattail Typha sp reed canary grass Phalaris arundinacea birdsfoot trefoil Lotus corniculatus and crown vetch Coronilla varia and Queen annes lace Daucus carota .
I Type Provide Type mulch with the following characteristic Consists of naturally occurring mineral materials Contains no topsoil or organics and Aggregate ranging in size from ⅜ in .
to in .
with percent by mass passing the ⅜ in .
sieve. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Obtain test samples at a rate in accordance with the Schedule of Materials Control .
Test for moisture content in accordance with ASTM D and sieve analysis in accordance with ASTM D . Minnesota Standard Specifications HYDRAULIC EROSION CONTROL PRODUCTS .
SCOPE Provide hydraulically applied Hydraulic Erosion Control Products HECPs to control erosion on all soil types and to establish vegetative cover . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide HECPs meeting the following requirements and characteristics Noncorrosive to hydraulic application equipment Nonfoaming or containing mixture enhancers to prevent foaming and mixing problems during agitation in the application equipment and Safe to the applicator adjacent workers and the environment if properly applied in accordance with the EPA and OSHA .
Apply HECPs with equipment capable of mechanical agitation and slurry bypass .
Manufacture of Polyacrylamide Tackifier Organic Fiber Matrix Bonded Fiber Matrix and Reinforced Fiber Matrix shall certify Applicators of their product and provide them an Applicators Certificate .
A Hydraulic Tackifiers A .
Natural Tackifier Provide the following types of natural tackifiers with an erosion control performance no greater than months Water soluble natural proteins Vegetable gums Guar gums at least percent guar gum by weight and the remaining weight consisting of dispersing and crosslink additives Starch nonionic coldwater soluble pregelatinized granular cornstarch Psyllium finely ground muciloid coating of plantago seeds applied as a dry powder or a wet slurry to the surface of the soil Pitch non ionic emulsion with a solids content of at least percent Rosin types blended with gelling and hardening agents consisting of at least percent of the total solids content or Water soluble blends of hydrophilic polymers viscosifiers sticking aids and other gums .
Use noncorrosive waterdiluted emulsion soil stabilizer capable of curing to waterinsoluble binding and cementing agent upon application .
A .
Synthetic Tackifier Provide synthetic tackifiers with an erosion control performance no greater than months and meeting the following characteristics and requirements Consists of polyvinyl acetate emulsion formulations containing at least percent active solids Does not contain polyacrylates or polyvinylacrylics Watersoluble Remains flexible and does not reemulsify after curing Does not inhibit water and oxygen infiltration Consists of organic biodegradable nonpolluting nonvolatile nontoxic material Effective on all soil types with either acid or alkaline condition and Air cures within hours .
A. Polyacrylamide Tackifier Provide polyacrylamide PAM tackifiers meeting the following requirements and characteristics Break down within months Naturally break down in soil Liquid formulation containing PAM as the primary active ingredient and meeting the following requirements .
Linear anionic copolymer of acrylamide and sodium acrylate .
Residual monomer content of the PAM no greater than .
percent by weight and .
Formulated as a waterinoil emulsion containing at least .
lb .
pure PAM per gal and containing at least percent active pure PAM or .
Formulated as a liquid dispersed polyacrylamide LDP containing at least .
lb .
pure PAM per gallon and containing at least percent active pure PAM .
Drying time no greater than hours. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B Hydraulic Matrix Tracer dyes or pigments when provided with product to facilitate application and metering shall be water soluable non toxic and nonleachable .
B. Organic Fiber Matrix OFM Provide hydraulic organic fiber matrix meeting the following characteristics and requirements Shall be premixed formulation .
Contains a minimum of percent organic material that may be derived from compost peat moss wood cellulose straw fibers wood bark biochar flax fibers or other organic fibers Product shall be phytosanitized to eliminate potential pathogens and weed seeds Contains one or more of the following humus enzymes vitamins natural sugars plant proteins auxins amino acids Contains an approved tackifier Contains zero ecotoxicity as per EPA .
in hours Passes EPA Metal Limits .
Passes CFR Class A for pathogen reduction .
Provides a homogeneous slurry mixture Contains maximum moisture as per ASTM D B. Mulch Provide hydraulic mulch meeting the following characteristics and requirements Contains shredded wood paper fibers natural fibers or both containing no germination or growth inhibiting factors Contains from .
percent to .
percent tackifier by weight premixed in the bag Contains moisture content no greater than percent at the time of delivery If washed on a No .
sieve at least percent retained on the sieve and Functional for no greater than months after application B. Stabilized Fiber Matrix SFM Provide stabilized fiber matrix meeting the following requirements and characteristics Premanufactured matrix containing defibrated organic fibers with at least one of the following additives .
Soil flocculants .
Crosslinked hydrocolloidal polymers or .
percent Crosslinked tackifiers .
Contains maximum moisture by weight Cure time within hours and Functional for at least of months .
B. Bonded Fiber Matrix BFM Provide bonded fiber matrix meeting the following requirements and characteristics Composed of wood fibers or wood byproducts At least percent of the fibers average .
in long and with at least percent retained on No .
sieve Contains percent percent blended hydrocolloid crosslinked polymers Contains slowrelease and agricultural based fertilizers or other proprietary chemicals no greater than percent by volume Binder and crosslinked polymers do not dissolve or disperse upon rewetting Contains moisture content no greater than percent by weight and Functional for at least months .
B. Reinforced Fiber Matrix RFM Provide fiber reinforced matrix composed of a chemical and mechanical matrix containing the following Defibrated organic fibers Crosslinked insoluble or linear hydrocolloidal tackifiers Reinforcing natural or synthetic fibers and Cure time within hours and Functional for at least months .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Follow Schedule of Materials Control .
ROLLED EROSION CONTROL PRODUCTS .
SCOPE Provide temporary rolled out products to control erosion aid the establishment of vegetation and reinforce vegetation and temporary reinforce slopes ditch bottoms and shorelines .
Provide netting opening dimensions large enough to germinate plants reduce animal entanglement and keep fill material intact . .
REQUIREMENTS A Erosion Control Blanket Requirements Provide blankets that conform to the general requirements listed in Table Table and Table Table Erosion Control Blanket Criteria Criteria Category Wood Cellulose Fiber S NT Wood Fiber S mass per yd min ASTM D . oz .
oz Permissible Shear stress Minimum nonvegetated ASTM D . lbSq .
ft. . lbsq .
ft. Target Service Life months months Fill Fiber length greater than .
in in Material Wood Cellulose Excelsior Netting Material Degradable Degradation ASTM D Cycle A months Stitching Material Degradable Degradation ASTM D Cycle A months Max spacing in S No netting stitching only S Netting on one side NT No threadstitching .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Erosion Control Blanket Criteria Criteria Category P Category N Category P Category N Straw S Wood Fiber S StrawCoconut S Wood Fiber S mass per yd min ASTM D . oz .
oz .
oz .
oz Permissible Shear stress min nonvegetated ASTM D . lbsq .
ft . lbsq .
ft . lbsq .
ft .lbsq .
ft Tensile Strength ASTM D MD lbsft lbsft TD lbsft lbsft Fill Fiber length greater than in in in in Material Straw Excelsior Straw Coconut Excelsior Target Service Life months months months months Netting Material Degradable Synthetic or Natural Degradable Synthetic or Natural Degradable Synthetic or Natural Degradable Synthetic or Natural Netting Degradation ASTM D Cycle A months months months months Stitching Material Degradable Synthetic or Natural Degradable Synthetic or Natural Degradable Synthetic or Natural Degradable Synthetic or Natural Stitching Degradation ASTM D Cycle A months months months months S Netting on two sides P P Synthetic netting N N Natural netting and natural stitching combination of photo heat and moisture degradation .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Criteria Table Erosion Control Blanket Criteria Category StrawCoconut S Wood Fiber S Min mass per yd ASTM D . oz .
oz Fiber Length greater than in in Material Straw and Coconut Fibers Excelsior Fibers Netting and Stitching Target Service Life months months Netting and Stitching Material Black UV Stabilized Polypropylene Black UV Stabilized Polypropylene A .
Material Fiber Provide fill material with a uniform web of interlocking fibers with uniform thickness and with the material fibers evenly distributed over the entire area of the blanket .
A .
Anchors Provide anchors for each category of blanket meeting the requirements in Table .
Table Anchor Specification Blanket Category Material Type Minimum Length in Biodegradable Stake and Steel Wire Gauge Steel Wire Gauge For frozen ground use D in .
common nail with washer B Turf Reinforcement Mat Requirements Provide Turf Reinforcement Mats TRM made of a threedimensional matrix of synthetic material continuously bonded at filament intersections meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Turf Reinforcement Mat Criteria TRM Category Minimum Permissible Shear Stress lbsq ft Minimum Tensile Strength lbft ASTMD Matrix Composition .
Nylon Polypropylene Polyolefin or Polyester Nylon Polypropylene Polyolefin or Polyester Nylon Polypropylene Polyolefin or Polyester Nylon Polypropylene Polyolefin or Polyester Provide mats with cells at least ⅜ ¾ in in depth to allow soil filling and retention .
ASTM D vegetated .
Minimum Average Roll Value of either direction .
UV stability ASTM D at hours of percent. . Minnesota Standard Specifications B .
Fill Material Fill category and Turf Reinforcement Mats TRM with in soil meeting table sandy clay loam topsoil borrow .
B .
Anchors Provide anchors for Turf reinforcement Mat meeting the requirements in Table .
Table Anchor Specification Blanket Category Material Type Minimum Length in TRM Steel Wire Gauge Adjust anchor selection to assure RECP is held in place securely .
C Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat Provide a flexible concrete mat consisting of concrete blocks meeting requirements of ASTM D and connected together by an interlocking geogrid .
Place the mats side by side and anchor to provide one homogeneous erosion protection system .
C. Physical Requirements Provide a minimum open area of that allows topsoil infilling if specified .
Minimum permissible Shear stress as per ASTM vegetated lbs .
per sq .
ft. C. Interlocking Geogrid Interlocking geogrid shall have the following physical characteristics of Table .
Table Interlocking Geogrid Characteristics MassUnit Area min ASTM D . ozyd Aperture Size min Measured .
x . inch Wide Width Tensile Strength Machine Direction MD Min ASTM D lbft Transverse Direction TD min ASTM D lbft Elongation at Break Max ASTM D Tensile Strength Machine Direction MD min ASTM D lbft C. Anchoring System Provide Number J hooked rebar minimum foot length for pneumatic driven installation depth flush to Flexible Concrete Geogrid Mat surface .
C. Concrete Provide wet cast blocks meeting Specification Structural Concrete and the following Manufactured in a plant with a Department approved quality control plan Design air content of .
percent Absorption no greater than .
percent when tested in accordance with ASTM C and Minimum Design Strength of psi at days when tested in accordance with ASTM C D Concrete Fabric Mat Provide Concrete Fabric Mat CFM that is a cement impregnated fabric that hardens when hydrated to form a water resistant mat .
It can be installed underwater and has a working time of several hours after hydration .
It shall meet the following requirements of Table Table Physical Characteristics Type Thickness in Dry Weight sq ft Hydration Min .
Water volume galft Compressive strength ASTM C day psi A . . . B . . . C . . . . Minnesota Standard Specifications Provide rolls capable of handling from spreader beams or bars .
Provide proper storage and handling methods capable of dry storage until placement .
Provide means capable of cutting into structure configurations and openings prior to hydration and again after placement as necessary for proper fit and transport of flowing water .
D. Anchor Pins Provide foot long formed crozier or Ushaped sharpened rebar pins or other manufactured recommendation anchoring systems .
D. Overlap and LapJoint Bonding Agents Provide appropriate sealant capable of bonding to both the PVC backing and fiber surface of the Concrete Fabric Mat .
The sealant must work in both wet and dry conditions prior to hydration and remain functional during hydration .
D. Hydration Water Provide water to the Concrete Fabric capable of surface saturation when no longer applying water for minutes .
Provide sufficient water hour later on fabrics thicker than .
inches ditch grades greater than percent slopes greater than and temperatures greater than degrees Fahrenheit to complete the hydration process. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Approved products for this specification are on file on the MnDOT web page in the Materials Engineering Section .
The Contractor shall inspect the flexible concrete mats upon delivery .
Flexible concrete Mats missing more than concrete blocks per square feet section shall be rejected .
SILT FENCE .
SCOPE Provide silt fence to retain sediment .
Provide Machine Sliced MS silt fence consisting of a woven geotextile fabric installed by machine and supported by steel posts .
Provide Hand Installed HI silt fence consisting of a woven geotextile fabric installed by hand and supported by steel posts .
Provide Super Duty SD silt fence consisting of concrete or water filled jersey barriers with fabric wrapped around the front face of the barrier .
The Contractor may provide woven or nonwoven geotextile fabric or polypolyreinforced sheeting .
Provide PreAssembled PA silt fence consisting of a woven geotextile fabric supported by wood posts preattached to the fabric .
Provide Turbidity Barrier TB silt fence consisting of a low permeable fabric barrier installed in water and supported by steel cable and steel posts . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide geotextiles for MS and HI silt fences from the ApprovedQualified Products List .
A Fabric Provide fabric meeting the following requirements and characteristics Uniform in texture Uniform in appearance Contains no defects flaws or tears affecting the physical properties Contains UV inhibitors and stabilizers providing a minimum service life of at least years during outdoor exposure and Meets the requirements specified in Table .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Table Silt Fence Requirements Silt Fence Type Width in Grab Tensile machine direction lb Apparent Opening Size Puncture Strength UV Stability h MAX Permittivity Flow Rates gpmsq .
ft MS HI woven geotextile No .
sieve .
s PA woven geotextile No .
sieve .
s SD woven or nonwoven geotextile No .
sieve TB polyester or polyvinyl Fabric lb impervious Values in table are Minimum Average Roll Values MARV ASTM D ASTM D Maximum average roll value .
ASTM D ASTM D ASTM D Provide MS HI woven geotextile with monofilament in both directions .
Do not make substitutions .
The Contractor may use polypolyreinforced sheeting with a thickness of at least mil or an equivalent .
For TB fabric width is finished width with a inch overlap heat sealed hem pocket at the top .
B Fasteners Provide fasteners with a tensile strength of at least lb .
Use plastic ties to fasten geotextile to posts on MS HI and TB applications .
Use wire ties or plastic ties to fasten geotextile to anchor points on SD applications .
C Supports Provide steel posts for MS HI and TB silt fence types per HotRolled Steel Fence Posts and the following Table Steel Silt Fence Post Requirements Characteristic Requirement Type Tpost Weight .
lbft Length .
ft Embedment in Post spacing .
ft Provide wood posts for PA silt fence type meeting the following requirements Table Wooden Silt Fence Post Requirements Characteristic Requirement Type Hardwood Size in in Length .
ft Embedment in Post Spacing .
ft D Portable Precast Concrete Jersey Barriers For SD use portable precast concrete barriers per Portable Precast Concrete Barrier for main support and strength .
If placing the barrier adjacent to traffic provide a barrier with a shape meeting the requirements of the standard plates .
Minnesota Standard Specifications design designation shown on the plans .
The Contractor may use barriers meeting obsolete standard plate designs in nontraffic areas .
E Portable Water Filled Jersey Barriers For SD provide main support strength of at least lb .
when filled with water .
Provide a plastic waterfilled barrier .
If placing the barrier adjacent to traffic provide a barrier with a shape meeting the requirements of the standard plates design designation shown on the plans .
F Steel Cable Provide a top line for TB made of a in .
galvanized steel cable with a breaking strength of at least lb .
Incorporate into the inch hem pocket at top of fabric. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide the following to the Engineer with each shipment of geotextile A manufacturers Certificate of Compliance and Document stating the manufacturers minimum average roll values MARV and maximum average roll values for the geotextile .
The Department defines MARV as two standard deviations below the mean value of the rolls tested .
FLOTATION SILT CURTAIN .
SCOPE Provide flotation silt curtain to contain suspended sediment and floating debris in open water . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide floatation silt curtains meeting the following requirements and characteristics Made of fabric fastened to a flotation carrier Weighted along the bottom edge Depth as shown on the plans and referring to the dimension of the curtain fabric extending below the flotation portion of the curtain and Table Flotation Silt Curtain Requirements .
Table Flotation Silt Curtain Requirements Characteristic Type Light Duty Heavy Duty Curtain fabric material type Impermeable vinylnylon laminate Impermeable vinylcoated nylon Weight oz per sq .
yd kg per sq .
m . . .
Grab tensile strength lb kN . .
Depth of curtain ft ft . m m ft ft . m m Flotation in mm diameter marine quality expanded polystyrene diameter marine quality expanded polystyrene Net buoyancy lb per ft N per m Top load carrying components Fabric only Fabric plus in mm galvanized steel cable at least lb kN break strength Ballast .
lb per ft . kg per m enclosed ¼ in mm galvanized chain .
lb per ft . kg per m enclosed in mm galvanized chain Connection between sections Laced grommets Aluminum collar reinforced quick disconnects Minimum average roll value meeting the requirements of ASTM D As required by the contract .
Remove the curtain upon completion of work .
Do not allow resuspension of sediment or loss of trash and oil into the water during the curtain removal. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Submit to the Engineer a manufacturers Certificate of Compliance for the floatation silt curtain and components .
POLY SHEETING .
SCOPE Provide poly sheeting for temporary soil stabilization . .
REQUIREMENTS A Poly Sheeting Provide plastic sheeting meeting the following requirements Minimum thickness of mil .
mm and Reinforced Polyethylene sheeting or reinforced polyester tarps .
Targeted Service life of months B Anchors Provide Anchor system consisting of nonpuncture type anchor weights or sand bags with cords or ropes of adequate strength to support the weights on the slope new or used chain link fence metal posts rebar or wood stakes sufficient to keep poly sheeting from lifting from soil surface .
COMPOST .
SCOPE Provide compost material for soil amendment for landscape planting or turf establishment . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide material from vendors listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List .
Provide compost meeting one of the following sets of requirements Option The US Composting Council Seal of Testing Assurance STA Program requirements for animal or plant based feedstocks .
Facilities accepting SSOM for composting are required to comply with the US Composting Council Seal of Testing Assurance Program .
STA testing is optional for facilities accepting only leaves or yard waste .
SSOM means compostable materials in accordance with Minnesota Rule .
Subpart a .
Option Not Available for facilities accepting SSOM Consists of a natural humus product derived from the aerobic decomposition of organic wastes .
Considered mature and useable when percent decomposition has been achieved as determined by an ignitionloss analysis test method and any one additional test method including the Solvita test value of equal to or greater than .
This means that the compost product has no offensive smell no identifiable organic materials and will not reheat to more than F above the ambient temperature .
Produced by a process to further reduce pathogens PFRP and weed seeds and the process is verified by fecal coliform or Salmonella sp .
tests where applicable .
Compost foreign particle restrictions up to percent at .
in apply to the shredded pieces from the plastic bags used to transport feedstocks to the composting facility but will be considered acceptable if visible in the finished product .
Meets the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency requirements for allowable levels of inherent contaminants Minnesota Rules Chapter .
subp .
Sec A or the Code of Federal Regulations Title section .b amended for mercury .
Provide compost that is registered for sale with the State of Minnesota .
Do not mix the compost with materials that do not comply with the Minnesota Rules Chapter Hazardous Waste .
Compost must not exceed percent of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agencys Superfund residential soil cleanup guidelines termed Soil Reference Values or SRVs i.e .
of individual chemical or chemical mixture Hazard Index Hazard Quotient or acceptable cancer risk level .
Chemical contaminant including pesticides can not be present in concentrations that would result in toxic effects to soil organisms plants or animals that reside in or on the composted soil areas or use the treated area for food or shelter .
At the time of delivery to the project the compost shall be in a condition considered safe for exposure to dusts during handling .
A Grade Compost Provide Grade compost for use in turf establishment meeting the following requirements and characteristics .
Minnesota Standard Specifications Nutrient rich type Derived from the decomposition of animal material and animal byproducts Texture similar to a highly organic soil and Meeting the requirements of Table .
Table Grade Compost Requirements Requirement Range Organic matter content dry weight CN ratio NPK ratios dry weight pH . . Moisture content Bulk density lb per cu .
yd lb per cu .
yd Inert material at .
in Soluble salts mmho per cm Germination test Screened particle size ¾ in To obtain the nitrogen phosphorus or potassium levels specified the compost may be fortified with commercial fertilizer .
Germination test must list the species of Cress or lettuce or cucumber seed used .
B Grade Compost Provide Grade compost as a landscape planting medium and meeting the following requirements Derived from the decomposition of leaves yard wastes or SSOM or a blend .
Texture similar to a shredded peat and Meeting the requirements of Table Table Grade Compost Requirements Requirement Range Organic matter content dry weight CN ratio NPK ratios Max .
dry weight pH . . Moisture content Bulk density lb per cu .
yd lb per cu .
yd Inert material at .
in Soluble salts mmho per cm Germination test Screened particle size ¾ in .
Includes plastic bag shreds .
Germination test must list the species of Cress cucumber or lettuce seed used .
C Grade Compost Provide Grade as a blend of Grade compost and no greater than percent Grade compost. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Follow MnDOT Materials Control Schedule .
If federal or state chemical specific requirements conflict provide compost meeting the most stringent requirement .
TEMPORARY SLOPE PIPE DRAIN .
SCOPE Provide material for temporary slope pipe drains to intercept direct and convey surface runoff or ground water down an embankment to control erosion . .
REQUIREMENTS A General Provide temporary slope drains consisting of the following A .
Corrugated Polyethylene PE Pipe Provide non perforated PE pipe A .
Corrugated Polyethylene PE Drainage Tubing A .
Thermal Plastic TP Pipe A .
Corrugated Steel Pipe Provide each slope drain with the same diameter pipe over the entire length of the drain .
Size temporary slope drains in accordance with Table .
Table Slope Drain Sizing Drainage Area acres Pipe Diameter in .
.. .. .. Place slope drain in conjunction with diversion mounds or dykes .
B Blank C Joints Use watertight connecting bands or joint to connect pipe sections .
D Anchors Anchor the slope drain with stakes in accordance with the following characteristics and requirements Nominal in in crosssection At least ft. long Pointed end .
SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer will visually inspect temporary slope drains .
SANDBAGS .
SCOPE Provide material for sandbags to dikeoff construction areas or serve as temporary erosion control installations. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Use sandbags consisting of a woven polypropylene fabric sewn together with double stitching .
Provide polypropylene fabric in accordance with Table Table Polypropylene Fabric Properties Property Test Minimum Tolerance Grab Tensile Strength ASTM D N UV Stability ASTM D Provide sandbags with an overall size of at least in in. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK SOIL AND ROOT ADDITIVES .
SCOPE Provide soil and root additives to improve soil or root stock to stimulate growth and improve the health of plant stock or seed . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide soil and root additives registered and approved for sale in Minnesota by the Department of Agriculture MDA listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List by the Departments Erosion and Stormwater Management Unit and meeting the following requirements as required by the contract A Plant Hormones Provide rooting hormone powder or liquid to stimulate rooting of plant cuttings bare root stock and perennial plant material .
The material shall contain known root hormones including any of the following Indolebutyric acid IBA Indole acetic acid IAA or Cytokinins .
Provide powder that does not contain inert ingredients that are harmful to the environment .
B Hydrophilic Polymers Provide superabsorbent polymer or hydrophilic compound meeting the following requirements and characteristics Organic Made of fully biodegradable crosslinked polymer or other hydroscopic compound with waterbinding groups Minimum life span of at least days in the soil and One of the following .
Potassium polyacrylatepolyacrylamide copolymer .
Sugar alcohols .
Polysaccharides .
Humates and .
Alphahydroxypropionic acid or other documented hydrophilic compound .
Apply the hydrophilic polymers at the rate recommended by the manufacturer .
C Mycorrhizal Inoculum Provide mychorrhizal inoculum meeting the following requirements and characteristics Contains microorganisms symbiotic with and beneficial to plant roots Capable of being applied to the soil or base of a plant as a liquid powder or pellet and Contains defined live spore count .
When known use Minnesota origin materials .
Apply the mycorrhizal inoculum as recommended by the manufacturer for new plantings .
Provide a mycorrhizal inoculum that does not contain antagonistic pathogens or at trace levels as defined by the MDA .
C. Type Type is for use with native grass plantings .
Provide species of Endomycorrhizal fungi containing at least species of glumos fungi .
Additional species of Gigaspora Scutellospora Entrophospora Acaulospora or Sclerocystis may also be present .
Ectomycorrhizal species of Pisolithus or Rhizopogon can also be present. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C. Type Type is for use with plant stock such as shrubs trees etc .
Provide species of ectomycorrhizal fungi containing species of Rhizopogon fungi and other cold tolerant species .
D Iron Sulfate Provide ferric sulfate or ferrous sulfate in pellet or granular form containing at least .
percent iron expressed as metallic iron to lower pH .
The Engineer will accept the product based on information contained on its label .
E Activated Charcoal Provide activated charcoal to neutralize or deactivate residual organic pesticide or chemical contaminants in the soil meeting the following requirements Finely ground to increase absorptive surfaces and Electrically charged to attract the molecules of organic chemicals .
F Rhizobium Innoculum Provide rhizobium inoculum as a delivery system of living organisms to address atmospheric nitrogen when part of native and nonnative legume plant roots and meeting the following characteristics and requirements Sterilized carbon based carrier lignitecharcoal peat or compost of legume specific rhizobium strains Capable of being applied with a sticking agent to legume seeds or broadcast during seeding and some fertilizing operations Within pH unit of neutral Particles size based on manufacturer recommended application and installation method Low level of measurable contaminates based on Pikovskave SS Malate Medium and Capable of maintaining appropriate moisture and air content for living nitrogen fixing organisms .
Store rhizobium inoculum at temperatures from F to F and away from direct sunlight .
Use the rhizobium inoculum per the manufacturers recommendations .
Do not use pesticides some seed treatments and typical chloridebased fertilizers .
Provide nonnative legume rhizobium inoculum for clovers and alfalfa crop species on lignite or charcoal carriers .
Provide native legume seed rhizobium inoculum for seeds of native legumes of Amorpha Astragalus Chamaecrista Dalea Desmodium and Lespedeza species seedapplied on peat or compost carrier .
Provide native legumebroadcast rhizobium inoculum for native legumes of Amorpha Astragalus Chamaecrista Dalea Desmodium and Lespedeza species broadcast on a peat or clay carrier in a pelletized form .
G Compost Tea Provide commercially produced compost tea produced from compost in accordance with and containing the following biological organisms based on certified test results Active bacteria At least µg per gram of compost Total bacteria At least µg per gram of compost Active fungi At least µg per gram of compost Total fungi At least µg per gram of compost Average fungal hyphal diameter At least ⅛ in Individual fungal hyphal diameter At least in The following types of protozoa .
At least flagellates per gram of compost .
At least amoebae per gram of compost and .
Zero ciliates per gram of compost .
Aerobic nematodes are acceptable if present .
Anaerobic root nematodes or nematode feeding nematodes are not acceptable .
The Contractor may choose to modify the Compost Tea by one of the two following methods G. BacteriaDominated Compost Tea Provide bacteriadominated compost tea consisting of the following Highnitrogen feedstocks and Green materials including the following .
Manure .
Minnesota Standard Specifications .
Grass clippings .
Legumes including alfalfa peas clover and bean plant residues .
Additional green feedstock materials containing sugars and proteins may include any green plant debris plant based food scraps and coffee grounds .
Use bacteriadominated compost tea as a foliar spray for herbaceous plants and turf grass to prevent foliar diseases .
G. FungiDominated Compost Tea Provide fungidominated compost tea consisting of the following Animal manure Green plant material and Shredded wood material including the following .
Wood chips .
Saw dust and .
Paper products .
Use fungidominated compost tea to suppress woody plant diseases and to introduce beneficial fungi for root development immediately after tree planting .
H Blank .
SAMPLING AND TESTING Blank SEDIMENT CONTROL LOG .
SCOPE Provide sediment control logs for slowing water velocities filtering sediment and diverting storm water runoff . .
REQUIREMENTS A Straw Provide straw logs meeting the following requirements and characteristics Type mulch in accordance to Mulch Material Encased in photodegradable synthetic or natural netting with a service life from months to months and with openings ½ in ½ in Diameter from in to in Consisting of at least percent of the fiber material at least in long and Dry weight of to lbs .
per cu .
ft. B Wood Fiber Provide wood fiber logs with the following requirements and characteristics Excelsior wood fibers Encased in a photodegradable synthetic or natural netting with a service life from to months and with openings ½ in ½ in Diameter from in to in Consisting of at least percent of the fiber material at least in long and Dry weight from .
lb per cu .
ft to .
lb per cu .
ft C Blank D Wood Chip Provide wood chip logs meeting the following Type mulch in accordance to Mulch Material Encased in a photodegradable synthetic or natural fiber casing with to openings with a service life from months to months and Diameter of in to in E Compost Provide compost logs meeting the following characteristics and requirements Consisting of the following blend of compost and wood chips .
Minnesota Standard Specifications a From percent to percent Grade compost in accordance with Compost with at least percent compost retained on the ⅜ in .
sieve b From percent to percent Type mulch in accordance to Mulch Material Encased in photodegradable synthetic woven or natural fiber casing with to in .
openings with a target service life from to months and Diameter of in .
to in .
F Rock Provide rock logs meeting the following requirements and characteristics Washed in to ½ in Class A B C or D rock in accordance with Coarse Aggregate for Portland Cement Concrete Encased in a geotextile material with a minimum grab tensile strength of lb .
ASTM D and a minimum Mullen Burst Strength of psi and Diameter from in .
to in .
G Coir Provide coir logs meeting the following requirements and characteristics Coir fibers placed in coir netting service life of at least years Diameter of at least in and Dry weight of at least lb .
per cu .
ft. H Wood Fiber and Blanket Provide Wood fiber log placed on top of an Erosion Control Blanket meeting the following requirements Meet requirements of .B wood fiber log Meet Requirements of .
Category wood fiber erosion control blanket minimum blanket roll width of feet .
m and Blanket staple pattern every ft .
I Anchoring Provide wood stakes for A B D and G with the following dimensions in .
in .
and in .
to in .
long with a pointed end. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples and sample sizes meeting the Schedule of Materials Control .
FLOCCULANTS .
SCOPE Provide naturally derived additives for coagulating dispersed clays and reducing turbidity in storm water runoff and use flocculants as part of a designed storm water treatment system . .
REQUIREMENTS Use environmentally benign flocculants that are biodegradable and consist of natural origin biopolymers to improve water quality and protect aquatic biota .
Use flocculants meeting the following requirements detailed by each type .
A Liquid Flocculant Store the flocculant in a concentrated liquid state .
Ensure the manufactures label is affixed to the container and lists the percent of concentration in the container and the application dose rate .
Obtain the Engineers verification of the dose rate calculations before applying to the treatment system .
B Flocculant Sock Use flocculant in a gelatinlike state packaged in individual compartments of the encasing sock material .
Ensure the encasing material allows water to flow through it so the water comes in contact with the gelatinlike flocculant material .
Use a Flocculant Sock with attachment anchor cords or grommets for use in pipes sediment control filter systems and ditch bottoms .
Provide a Flocculant Sock capable of treating at least gal .
of the water flowing through it. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C Granular Flocculant Store the flocculant in a granulated state .
Ensure the manufactures label is affixed to the bag or container and states the purity of the product and the application mixing rate .
Obtain the Engineers verification of the dose rate calculations before applying the treatment system. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Before delivery and use on the project submit to the Engineer a Certificate of Compliance and MSDS for approval .
Miscellaneous Materials FORM COATING MATERIAL .
SCOPE Provide form coating material that will prevent bonding between a form dowel or other object and concrete . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide form coating material listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List and meeting the following requirements Made of a chemical release agent that does not contain ordinary lubrication oil conventional form oil fuel oil or kerosene and has a flash point of at least F when tested in accordance with ASTM D Prevents bonding to concrete Does not penetrate stain or leave a residual film on the concrete surface and Does not attract dirt or other deleterious matter .
Apply the form coating material at a rate recommended by the manufacturer to provide a smooth surface free of dusting action caused by reactions of the chemical release agent .
As a substitute for a form coating material listed on the ApprovedQualified Products List the Contractor may provide epoxy coated dowel bars utilized in dowel bar baskets and dowel bar retrofits DBR coated with a factory applied Departmentapproved petroleum paraffin based lubricant with a manufacturer stated use as a bond breaker. . SAMPLING AND TESTING BLANK WATER FOR CONCRETE AND MORTAR .
SCOPE Provide water for use in mixing and curing portland cement concrete and mortar . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide water for mixing concrete meeting ASTM C and the following Not salty or brackish Clean and Free of injurious quantities of deleterious substances such as oil acid alkali and organic matter .
Provide water for use in curing concrete that does not contain impurities at concentrations that cause discoloration or surface etching .
A POTABLE WATER Potable water is defined as water suitable for human consumption .
The Engineer will allow potable water without testing .
B NONPOTABLE WATER Nonpotable water is defined as water not fit for human consumption or contains quantities of substances that discolor make it smell or have an objectionable taste .
Nonpotable water does not contain water from concrete production operations .
The Engineer may conduct testing to determine allowable use of a nonpotable Contractor proposed water source .
Provide nonpotable water meeting the requirements of Table of ASTM C. . Minnesota Standard Specifications C CLARIFIED WATER Clarified water is defined as water from concrete production operations that was processed by filtration or a settling system such as a pond or weirs to clarify the water .
Supply clarified water only from sources listed on the ApprovedQualified Products list .
Provide clarified water meeting the requirements of Table and Table of ASTM C. The density of the combined mixing water must not exceed .. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide representative samples of water in clean containers to the Engineer for testing as required by the Schedule of Materials Control .
ROCK SALT .
SCOPE Provide rock salt for use as a deicer for road construction and maintenance purposes . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide rock salt meeting the following requirements at the time of delivery ASTM D for Type Grade material Free of lumps aggregations and foreign matter and With no greater than .
percent moisture content. . SAMPLING AND TESTING The Engineer may sample and inspect the rock salt at the suppliers unloading and storage facilities or at the point of delivery .
The Engineer in conjunction with the Materials Engineer will perform the following Sampling meeting the requirements of ASTM D as modified by the Laboratory Manual Moisture testing in accordance with the Laboratory Manual Sieve analysis meeting the requirements of ASTM C for Sieve Analysis of Fine and Coarse Aggregate as modified by the Laboratory Manual and Chemical analysis for determination of sodium chloride content meeting the requirements of the Rapid Test Method for Sodium Chloride by Silver Nitrate Potentiometric Titration or the Reference Method for Chemical Analysis of Sodium Chloride as modified by the Laboratory Manual .
CALCIUM CHLORIDE .
SCOPE Provide liquid and solid calcium chloride for use in dust control accelerating the hardening of concrete and other purposes . .
REQUIREMENTS Provide liquid or solid calcium meeting the requirements of AASHTO M for the type and grade required by the contract .
Unless the contract requires otherwise provide liquid calcium chloride with at least percent anhydrous CaCl by weight .
Provide liquid calcium chloride that is clear and free of solid matter. . SAMPLING AND TESTING Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
Perform sampling in accordance with ASTM D . The Materials Engineer will perform tests meeting the requirements of ASTM D . MAGNESIUM CHLORIDE SOLUTION .
SCOPE Provide magnesium chloride solution for dust control or other purposes. . Minnesota Standard Specifications .
REQUIREMENTS Provide magnesium chloride solution meeting the following characteristics and requirements Water clear Free of deleterious substances Consists primarily of magnesium chloride Anhydrous magnesium chloride content of at least percent by mass SO sulfate content no greater than .
percent by mass and Alkali chlorides content no greater than percent by mass. . SAMPLING AND TESTING A Sampling Provide samples at rates and sizes meeting the requirements of the Schedule of Materials Control or as required by the contract .
B Testing The Materials Engineer will perform testing meeting the following requirements B. Magnesium chloride MgCl Laboratory Manual B. Sulfate SO Laboratory Manual B. Alkali chlorides as NaCl ASTM E . Minnesota Standard Specifications Traffic Management Center BURIED CABLE SIGNS .
SCOPE Provide buried cable signs to mark the route of underground fiber optic cables . .
REQUIREMENTS A Buried Cable Sign Install aluminum signs meeting the following requirements and characteristics In accordance with Signs Delineators and Markers and Traffic Signs and Devices Meeting the requirements of Standard Signs Manual in in mm mm and Black legend on a nonreflective orange face .
Before purchasing the buried cable signs obtain the Engineers approval of the sign design .
Install the ground mounted signs to .
lb per ft . kg per m galvanized steel fence posts in accordance with Flanged Channel Sign Post .
If installing the signal mounted signs to the Ramp Control Signal use stainless steel bands and fittings .
B Legend and Logo Size Provide an in in mm mm aluminum buried cable sign with black legend silk screened on an orange face meeting the requirements of the Standard Signs Manual and the following Table Buried Cable Sign Legend Line Number Line Text Character Size and Color in mm Background Size and Color in mm CAUTION .
orange .
black BURIED .
black FIBER OPTIC .
black CABLE .
black BEFORE DIGGING .
black CALL .
black GOPHER STATE ONE CALL .
black .
black MnDOT LOGO Center the information on the background The MnDOT logo is a circle with a diameter of .
in mm and the phrase MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION in black letters in the margin with an orange background .
The left half of the logo inside the margin has an orange silhouette of the left one half of a coniferous tree on a black foreground .
The right half of the logo inside the margin has an orange five point star silhouette inside a black foreground .
C Sign Placement Place the signs no greater than ft m apart and at each change of direction along the route of direct buried fiber optic cable. . SAMPLING AND TESTING END
