STATE OF MAINE Department of Transportation Standard Specifications November Edition MaineDOT i Table of Contents DIVISION GENERAL CONDITIONS SECTION CONTRACT INTERPRETATION SECTION BIDDING SECTION AWARD AND CONTRACTING SECTION GENERAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES SECTION GENERAL SCOPE OF WORK SECTION QUALITY SECTION TIME SECTION PAYMENT SECTION CHANGES SECTION INDEMNIFICATION BONDING AND INSURANCE SECTION RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES SECTION DEFAULT AND TERMINATION APPENDIX A TO DIVISION A DIVISION EARTHWORK SECTION CLEARING RIGHTOFWAY SECTION REMOVING STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS SECTION EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENT SECTION SHOULDER REHABILITATION SECTION SHOULDER RECONSTRUCTION SECTION STRUCTURAL EXCAVATION SECTION BRUSH MATTING SECTION SAND DRAINS SECTION WICK DRAINS SECTION DITCH AND INSLOPE EXCAVATION DIVISION BASES SECTION AGGREGATE BASE AND SUBBASE COURSE SECTION RECLAIMED MATERIAL FOR STABILIZED BASE SECTION FULL DEPTH RECYCLED PAVEMENT SECTION FULL DEPTH RECLAMATION WITH STABILIZING ADDITIVES SECTION FOAMED ASPHALT SECTION PLANT MIXED RECYCLED ASPHALT PAVEMENT SECTION COLD INPLACE RECYCLED ASPHALT PAVEMENT DIVISION PAVEMENTS SECTION HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT SECTION PAVEMENT SMOOTHNESS SECTION HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT ii SECTION VACANT SECTION BITUMINOUS TACK COAT SECTION BITUMINOUS SURFACE TREATMENT SECTIONS VACANT SECTION SAWING AND SEALING JOINTS IN BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT SECTIONS THROUGH VACANT SECTION CRACK SEAL SECTION RECYCLED BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT SECTION HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT FOR SPECIAL AREAS SECTION LIGHT CAPITAL PAVEMENT DIVISION STRUCTURES SECTION FOUNDATION PILES SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE SECTION REINFORCING STEEL SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL SECTION STUD WELDED SHEAR CONNECTORS ANCHORS FASTENERS SECTION SHOP APPLIED PROTECTIVE COATING STEEL SECTION RAILINGS SECTION WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE SECTION STRUCTURAL PLATE PIPES PIPE ARCHES ARCHES METAL BOX CULVERTS ..
SECTION SPECIAL DETOURS SECTION COFFERDAMS SECTION FRENCH DRAINS SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION SECTION CURING BOX FOR CONCRETE CYLINDERS SECTION PROTECTIVE COATING FOR CONCRETE SURFACES SECTION STYRENEBUTADIENNE LATEX MODIFIED PORTLAND CEMENT SECTION SHOTCRETE SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE REPAIR SECTION VACANT SECTION EXPANSION DEVICES NONMODULAR SECTION FINGER JOINT AND FABRIC TROUGHFABRIC CURTAIN SECTION EXPANSION DEVICES MODULAR SECTION BEARINGS SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS SECTION GRANITE MASONRY SECTION CONCRETE BARRIER iii SECTION ENERGY ABSORBING UNIT SECTION STRUCTURAL TIMBER SECTION NAVIGATIONAL AIDS SECTIONS to VACANT SECTION PRECAST STRUCTURAL CONCRETE SECTION PRECAST PRESTRESSED CONCRETE SUPERSTRUCTURE DIVISION MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION SECTION GABIONS AND MATTRESSES SECTION PIPE LINING SECTION PIPE CULVERTS AND STORM DRAINS SECTION MANHOLES INLETS AND CATCH BASINS SECTION UNDERDRAINS SECTION GUARDRAIL SECTION FENCES SECTION SIDEWALKS SECTION CURB SECTION STONE FILL RIPRAP STONE BLANKET AND STONE DITCH PROTECTION SECTION Reserved SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALING SECTION EROSION CONTROL BLANKETS SECTION GEOCELL SLOPE PROTECTION SECTION LOAM SECTION SODDING SECTION SOIL CONDITIONERS SECTION SEEDING SECTION MULCH SECTION GEOTEXTILES SECTION LANDSCAPING SECTION TRANSPLANTING SHRUBS HEDGES AND TREES SECTION MONUMENTS SECTION VACANT SECTION WATER SERVICE SUPPLY LINES SECTION FOUNDATIONS CONDUIT AND JUNCTION BOXES FOR HIGHWAY SIGNING LIGHTING AND SIGNALS SECTION PAVEMENT MARKINGS SECTION VACANT SECTION HAND LABOR iv SECTION VACANT SECTION EQUIPMENT RENTAL SECTION and VACANT SECTION HIGHWAY LIGHTING SECTION DUST CONTROL SECTION BRIDGE LIGHTING SECTION ENGINEERING FACILITIES SECTION VACANT SECTION REST AREA FACILITIES SECTION STEPS SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNALS SECTION GLARE BARRIER SECTION HIGHWAY SIGNING SECTION through VACANT SECTION MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC SECTION POLYSTYRENE PLASTIC INSULATION SECTION VACANT SECTION ELECTRICAL WORK SECTION TEMPORARY SOIL EROSION AND WATER POLLUTION CONTROL SECTION REHABILITATION OF PITS SECTION ACRYLIC LATEX COLOR FINISH SECTION MOBILIZATION SECTION ONTHEJOB TRAINING SECTION GABION WALL SECTION DRY CAST SEGMENTAL BLOCK WALL SECTION PRECAST CONCRETE BLOCK GRAVITY WALL SECTION WET CAST SMALL LANDSCAPE BLOCK WALL SECTION PREFABRICATED CONCRETE MODULAR GRAVITY WALL SECTION SOIL NAIL WALL SECTION SOLDIER PILE AND LAGGING WALL SECTION MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH RETAINING WALL SECTION GEOSYNTHETIC REINFORCED MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH RETAINING WALL SECTION FIELDSTONE RETAINING WALL SECTION ROCKERY WALL SECTION PRECAST AGGREGATEFILLED CONCRETE BLOCK GRAVITY WALL DIVISION MATERIALS SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE RELATED MATERIAL SECTION BITUMINOUS MATERIAL v SECTION AGGREGATES SECTION MASONRY UNITS SECTION JOINT MATERIAL SECTION NONMETALLIC PIPE SECTION METALLIC PIPE SECTION PAINTS AND PRESERVATIVES SECTION REINFORCING STEEL AND WELDED STEEL WIRE FABRIC SECTION FENCE AND GUARDRAIL SECTION MISCELLANEOUS BRIDGE MATERIAL SECTION MISCELLANEOUS HIGHWAY MATERIAL SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL AND RELATED MATERIAL SECTION JOINT SEALS SECTION LIGHTING MATERIAL SECTION STRUCTURAL ALUMINUM AND RELATED MATERIAL SECTION ROADSIDE IMPROVEMENT MATERIAL SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNALS MATERIAL SECTION SIGNING MATERIAL SECTION STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS FOR HIGHWAY SIGNS LUMINAIRES AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS SECTION BREAKAWAY DEVICES SECTION GEOTEXTILES Chapter DIVISION GENERAL CONDITIONS .
Replacement of Former Standard Specifications and Standard Details This edition of the Maine Department of Transportations Standard Specifications and Standard Details for construction The Standard Specifications was drafted and adopted by the Department pursuant to the authority granted by MRSA .
These Standard Specifications and Standard Details replace and supersede all previous Standard Specifications and Details .
The Standard Specifications and Details for Construction are Contract provisions issued by the Department which govern the relationship between the Department and the Departments Contractors .
By virtue of submitting a Bid on a project each Bidder is bound by the terms of these Standard Specifications .
SECTION CONTRACT INTERPRETATION Scope of Section This Section consists of abbreviations definitions and general rules of interpretation. . Abbreviations Abbreviations are defined in the following list .
Abbreviations not defined in this Section or otherwise in the Contract shall have the meaning that is commonly accepted in the Engineering and construction industry .
AAN American Association of Nurserymen Incorporated AAR Association of American Railroads AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ACI American Concrete Institute ADA Americans with Disabilities Act AGC Associated General Contractors of America AIA American Institute of Architects AISC American Institute of Steel Construction ANLA American Nursery Landscape Association ANSI American National Standards Institute ARA American Railway Association AREMA American Railway Engineering and Maintenanceofway Association ARTBA American Road Transportation Builders Association ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers ASD Allowable Stress Design ASLA American Society of Landscape Architects ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials ATSSA American Traffic Safety Services Association AWWA American Water Works Association AWPA American Wood Preservers Association AWS American Welding Society BMP MDOTs Best Management Practices for Erosion and Sediment Control CFR Code of Federal Regulations DBE Disadvantaged Business Enterprise DREW Daily Reports of Extra Work DRB Dispute Review Board EIA Electronic Industries Association EEO Equal Employment Opportunity EMS Emergency Medical Service FAA Federal Aviation Administration FHWA Federal Highway Administration FRA Federal Railroad Administration FSS Federal Specifications and Standards General Services Administration IES Illuminating Engineering Society IMSA International Municipal Signal Association IPCEA Insulated Power Cable Engineers Association ISEE International Society of Explosives Engineers ISO Insurance Services Office ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers LFD Load Factor Design LRFD Load and Resistance Factor Design LURC Land Use Regulation Commission Maine MCTCB Maine Concrete Technician Certification Board MDEP Maine Department of Environmental Protection MDOT Maine Department of Transportation MIL Military Specifications MRSA Maine Revised Statutes Annotated MUTCD Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices NBS National Bureau of Standards NEC National Electrical Code NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association NEPCOAT Northeast Protective Coating Committee NESC National Electric Safety Code NETTCP New England Transportation Technician Certification Program NHS National Highway System NICET National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies OJT OnTheJob Training OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration PCI PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute PIN Project Identification Numbers QA Quality Assurance QC Quality Control QCP Quality Control Plan QPL Qualified Products List RFI Request for Information SAE Society of Automotive Engineers SEWPCP Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Plan SHA State Highway Agency as used by FHWA meaning MDOT SPCCP Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure Plan SSPC The Society for Protective Coatings TAPPI Technical Association of Pulp and Paper Industry TCP Traffic Control Plan USC United States Code USDA United States Department of Agriculture UL Underwriters Laboratory VECP Value Engineering Change Proposal .
Definitions Words terms and phrases are defined below .
Capitalized words in this Standard Specifications book are defined under this Section .
Words terms or phrases that are not defined in this Section .
or otherwise in the Contract shall have the meaning commonly accepted in the engineering and construction industry .
Acceptable Work Work that Conforms or Substantially Conforms to the Contract and is satisfactory to the Department .
Acceptance Consideration of operations inspections samples tests certifications proper QCP implementation and end product properties to determine whether the product will be accepted for payment including any adjustments to compensation as provided in the Contract .
Acceptance Test Test utilized by the Department to evaluate the quality of a Material or product .
Actual Costs Direct Projectspecific costs actually incurred by the Contractor in the performance of Work .
Actual Costs consist of labor Material Equipment and administrative overhead .
For related provisions see Section .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time and Section ..
Basis of Payment Addendum See Bid Amendment .
Aggregate Inert Material such as sand gravel broken stone crushed stone or a combination of any of these Materials .
Agreement Agreement means Contract Agreement .
Apparent Low Bidder A Bidder that submits the lowest apparently responsive Bid .
The Apparent Low Bidder may not be Awarded the Contract if a the Bid is later found to be nonresponsive in accordance with Section .
b the Bidder is found to be not responsible c the Bidder fails to comply with all applicable preAward Conditions other preexecution requirements of the Contract or d the Department chooses not to Award a Contract .
Apparent Successful Bidder The Bidder with the lowest responsive Bid as determined by the Department .
A responsive responsible Bidder usually the Apparent Low Bidder that is Awarded the Contract .
The Department may not execute the Contract with the Apparent Successful Bidder if a the Apparent Successful Bidder fails to comply with all applicable preAward conditions or other preexecution requirements of the Contract or b if the Department chooses not to Award a Contract .
Award The execution of the Contract by the Department conditioned upon the Successful Bidders performance of all preexecution requirements of the Bid Documents .
Award Conditions PreAward or preexecution requirements that the Contractor must meet before Contract Execution including bonding and insurance .
For a related provision see Section .
Award Conditions .
Best Value Procurement Process Using a Request for Proposals A process for procuring contractual services in which price is only one of several factors used in determining the successful Proposer .
See Proposer Request for Proposals and DesignBuild Contract .
Bid The offer by a Bidder on forms prescribed by the Department to perform the Work in Conformity with all provisions of the Bid Documents for the prices set forth .
Bid Amendment A written change to the Bid Documents issued by the Department after advertisement and before the Bid Opening .
Bid Bond A bond furnished with a Bid by a Bidder and its Surety in the amount set forth in the Notice to Contractors or elsewhere in the Bid Documents .
The Bid Bond is forfeited if the Apparent Low Bidder refuses to enter into a Contract with the Department .
Bid Contact Person The person identified in the advertised Notice to Contractors usually the Project Manager as the person to whom the Bidder must refer technical or Engineering questions from the time of advertisement through Contract Execution said person being duly authorized by the Commissioner .
The Contracts Engineer may be contacted regarding Bidding and contracting procedures .
If no one is so identified the Bidder must refer questions to the Contracts Engineer .
All technical or project specific questions must be submitted as described in the Notice to Contractors .
Bidder An individual firm corporation limited liability company partnership joint venture sole proprietorship or other entity that submits a Bid .
Upon Contract Execution the successful Bidder becomes the Contractor .
Bid Documents Documents issued by the Department to solicit Bids from Contractors .
Bid Documents generally include the Bid Book Notice to Contractors Plans and Specifications including these Standard Specifications Standard Details Special Provisions Bidding instructions and any Bid Amendments issued by the Department .
Documents attached to or referenced in the Bid Documents are part of the Bid Documents .
Contrast Bid Documents with Bid Escrow Documentation as may be defined by Special Provision .
Bid Escrow Documentation All writings working papers computer printouts charts schedules of prices and data compilation that contain or reflect information quantities unit costs data or calculations used by the Bidder to determine the Bid price or technical and price proposal in the case of a DesignBuild or Best Value Procurement type of Contract shall be submitted including but not limited to material relating to the determination and application of Design Costs Equipment rates Overhead rates and related time schedules Labor rates Arithmetic extensions Subcontractor and Material Supplier Quotations Any manuals standard to the industry used by the Bidder in determining the Bid are also considered Bid Escrow Documentation .
These manuals may be included in the Bid Escrow Documentation by reference and shall show the name and date of the publication and the publisher .
Bid Escrow Documentation need not include Bid Documents provided by the Department to all Bidders .
Bid Guaranty A bond or other acceptable security specified in the Notice to Contractors or elsewhere in the Bid Documents that is forfeited if the Apparent Low Bidder refuses to enter into a Contract with the Department .
For a related provision see Section .
Bid Guaranty .
Bid Opening The date and precise time by which the Bidder must Deliver its Bid to be publicly opened and read as specified in the Notice to Contractors or any applicable Bid Amendment .
For related provisions see Sections .
Delivery of Bids and .
Bid Opening .
Blue Book The edition of publications entitled Rental Rate Blue Book for Construction Equipment or Rental Rate Blue Book for Older Construction Equipment as applicable published by Primedia Information Inc. that was current when the Work being priced was performed .
Bridge Bridge means a structure including supports designed principally to carry motor vehicles that is erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water a highway or a railway and has an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than feet between the undercropping of abutments or spring lines of arches or the extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
It also includes multiple pipes when the clear distance between openings is less than of the smaller contiguous opening .
A .
Length The length of a Bridge structure is the overall length measured along the construction centerline back to back of backwalls of abutments if present otherwise end to end of the Bridge floor but in no case less than the total opening of the structure .
B. Roadway Width The width measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the Bridge between the bottom of curbs or guard timbers or in case of multiple heights of curbs between the bottoms of the lower risers .
Business Day Every Calendar Day less Saturdays Sundays and Holidays .
Calendar Day Every day shown on the calendar beginning at a.m. and ending at midnight .
Change Order See Contract Modification Chief Engineer The Chief Engineer of the Department .
Closeout Documentation All documentation required by the Department to finish the Project in accordance with State federal and other requirements .
These documents include Letter All Bills Paid on Contractors letterhead Request for Final Payment on Contractors letterhead Buy America Statement Certificate of Materials DBE Goal Attainment Verification Form Agreement with Final Quantities on Contractors letterhead Testing Compliance Letter The Department reserves the right to amend this list of required Closeout Documentation Commissioner The Commissioner of Transportation established by MRSA .
Compensable Delay See Section .. Definitions Types of Delays .
Completion Completion occurs when the Contractor has finished all Work pursuant to the Contract including Delivery of all Closeout Documentation .
Completion does not mean substantial Completion .
Unless the context indicates otherwise Completion also does not mean Completion of Physical Work .
Completion of Physical Work Completion of Physical Work occurs when the Work is complete and has undergone a successful final inspection .
Conduit A pipe used for receiving and protecting wires or cable .
Conform or Conformity The performance of an item of Work in strict compliance with all applicable provisions of the Contract .
For a related definition see Substantially Conform .
Construction Easement A right acquired by the Department to use or control property outside of the established RightofWay .
Construction Limit Line A line usually outside of the RightofWay within which the Contractor may Work and outside of which Work may not be performed without authorization by the Department .
Contract All documents affecting the respective rights and responsibilities of the Department and the Contractor .
These documents include but are not limited to the Contract Agreement Project specific proposal Bid Book the Notice to Contractors Plans the Departments Standard Specifications and Standard Details Special Provisions Bid Amendments Contract Modifications Geotechnical Information Permits Bid Escrow Documentation if any the Contractors Bid prices as corrected mathematically pursuant to Section .. Unit Prices Govern if necessary and all documents incorporated by reference .
Contract Bonds The forms of security approved by the Department executed by the Contractor and its Surety or Sureties guaranteeing performance of the Work and the payment of all obligations pertaining to the Work .
For related provisions see the definitions of Bid Guaranty Performance Bond and Payment Bond .
Contract Completion Time Length of time allowed under the Contract to complete the Work pursuant to the terms of the Contract .
Contract Completion Date The required completion date of all Work pursuant to the Contract except the landscape establishment period and warranty work .
The Contract Completion Date is usually included in Special Provision and on the Contract Agreement Offer Award form .
Contract Documents Contract Documents are all documents whether physically attached or incorporated by reference which make up the Contract .
Contract Execution Execution of the Contract by the Commissioner or their authorized agent by signing the Contract Agreement Offer Award form which action upon written notification to the Contractor forms a Contract as provided in Section .
Execution of Contract by Department .
Contract Modification A general term describing a formal change to a Contract .
Types of Contract Modifications include change orders extra work orders resident work orders and supplemental agreements .
For a related provision see Section .
Contract Modification Contract Time See Contract Completion Time and Section .
Contract Time and Completion Date .
Contractor After the Department has executed the Contract by cosigning the Contract Agreement Offer Award form provided in the Bid Documents previously signed by the successful bidder the Successful Bidder in a low Bid process or the successful Proposer in a best value type of Contract becomes the Contractor .
The Contractor will be the single point of responsibility for all Contract obligations to the Department .
The Contractor shall be an independent Contractor with respect to the Department and shall not be an employee agent or representative of the Department .
Alternatively Contractor with a lower case c may mean a firm engaged in construction Work .
Critical Path The sequence of activities from the Project start to its Completion having the greatest cumulative elapsed time thereby determining the minimum time duration of the entire Project .
The Critical Path is identified by the sequence of those activities with the least float .
Critical Rock Slopes Critical rock slopes shall be rock slopes higher than feet with an overburden slope steeper than HV and all rock slopes greater than feet high .
Culvert Any structure not defined as a Large Culvert Bridge or Minor Span that provides a Drainage opening less than feet under the Roadway or approaches to the Roadway .
Days Calendar Days .
Default See Section .
Default .
Defects or Defective Work Work that is unsatisfactory faulty or deficient in that it is not in Conformity with the Contract or with prevailing industry standards applicable to the Work at the time of submission of the Bid as determined by the Department or its agents .
For related provisions see the definition of Acceptable Work and Section ..
Meaning of Approved Etc .
Delay To cause to be late .
See Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
Deliver To cause Receipt by a means set forth in the definition of Received or Receipt .
Department The Department of Transportation of the State of Maine as established by MRSA et seq .
for the administration of Highway Bridge and other public Works acting through the Commissioner and hisher duly authorized representatives .
For related provisions see definitions of Project Manager and Resident .
DesignBuild Contract A contract in which the Contractor is responsible for both design and construction requirements under the contract .
In a DesignBuild Contract the Contractor maybe procured through a BestValue Procurement process using a Request for Proposals and evaluation of submitted Proposals using price as one of several evaluation factors as outlined in MRSA .
Differing Site Conditions See Section .
Differing Site Conditions .
Disadvantaged Business Enterprise A business that is at least owned and controlled by a woman minority or economically disadvantaged person and certified as such by the Department .
Disputes Disagreements claims counterclaims matters in question and differences of opinion between the Department and the Contractor and those Working for or through the Contractor regarding matters related to the Work that arise after Contract Execution .
These include but are not limited to interpretation of the Contract compensation and costs time for performance and quality .
Drainage The system of pipes Drainage ways ditches and Structures by which surface or subsurface waters are collected and conducted from the Highway area .
Drawings See Plans .
Dredge Material Dredge Spoils Dredge materials means sand silt mud gravel rock or other sediment or material removed from beneath any surface water .
The term beneath any surface water has been interpreted by the MDEP to mean that area that falls beneath the plane bounded by the normal high water line of any stream river brook pond lake vernal pool etc .
Note that the entire area of Dredge Material removal could be dry at the time of excavation .
Environmental Information Hazardous waste assessments dredge material test results boring logs geophysical studies and other records and reports of the environmental conditions .
For a related provision see Section ..
Interpretation and Interpolation .
Equipment All machinery supplies for repair and maintenance of such machinery tools and other apparatus necessary or appropriate for Completion of the Work in Conformity with the Contract .
Equitable Adjustment An adjustment to compensation and time due to a change in the nature or scope of the Work made a part of a Contract by a formal Contract Modification .
For a related provision see Section .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time .
Excusable Delay See Section .. Definitions Types of Delays .
Extra Work Work that is outside the scope of the Contract and that the Department determines is necessary .
Extra Work Order See Contract Modification Fabrication Engineer The Departments representative responsible for Quality Assurance of prefabricated products that are produced offsite .
Federal Contract Provisions Supplement Appendix A of the Standard Specifications and the Bid Book which set forth additional provisions that apply to federally funded Contracts .
Final Acceptance Acceptance by the Department for all Work and responsibility for the Project from the Contractor except for any Contractor warranty obligations .
Force Account Work Prescribed Work paid on the basis of Actual Costs and additives as set forth in Section .. Force Account Work .
Geometrics The physical location horizontally and vertically and shape of the object under consideration .
Geotechnical Information Boring logs soil reports geotechnical design reports ground penetrating radar evaluations seismic refraction studies and other records of subsurface conditions .
For a related provision see Section ..
Interpretation and Interpolation .
Haul Road A private way leading to a public way that is used by the Contractor to move Equipment and Materials related to the Work .
Hearing Unless otherwise specified by the Department in writing a Hearing is a review of a decision that includes a review of existing documentation on file with the Department and any additional documentation including written arguments and supporting exhibits that may be submitted by any interested party .
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise a Hearing need not include an evidentiary Hearing for the oral presentation of evidence if such an evidentiary Hearing is not requested or if the Department reasonably determines that such an evidentiary Hearing is not necessary to adequately review the matter at issue .
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise a Hearing shall not be construed as an adjudicatory proceeding within the meaning of the Maine Administrative Procedure Act .
Highway A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the RightofWay .
Holidays New Years Day Martin Luther King Day Presidents Day Patriots Day Memorial Day Independence Day Labor Day Columbus Day Veterans Day Thanksgiving Day the Friday after Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day .
For a related provision see Section .. Sundays and Holidays .
IncentiveDisincentive Payment An adjustment to the contract price of a predetermined amount for each day the Work is completed ahead of or behind the Contract Time Contract Completion Date or some specified intermediary milestone .
A disincentive is not a penalty but an estimate of user and other costs incurred by the people of the State of Maine .
Incidentals The terms Incidentals and Incidental to the Contract mean items that are accessory to or incorporated into the Work and that have no separate Pay Item .
Unless otherwise provided in the Contract the cost of Incidentals shall be included in the Contractors prices for the Pay Items .
There will be no separate payment .
Incomplete Not complete as defined above by Completion .
Independent Assurance IA Independent assessment of the reliability of test results obtained from Acceptance Testing .
Inexcusable Delay See Section .. Definitions Types of Delays .
Inspector An authorized representative of the Resident assigned to make detailed inspections of the Work to determine compliance with the Contract .
In Stream Work Any activities conducted in the water see permits in individual contract documents .
Laboratory Unless the context indicates otherwise the testing laboratory of the Department or its designee .
Landscape Establishment Period The period of time commencing at initial Acceptance of each planting and extending for two years unless otherwise provided in the Contract .
For a related provision see Section Landscaping .
Landscape Establishment Period Obligations The obligations of the Landscape Subcontractor during the Landscape Establishment Period .
Unless otherwise provided in the Contract these obligations consist of monthly inspection and reporting from March through November of the condition of all plants installed and replacing plants that are not in a healthy vigorous growing condition .
For a related provision see Section Landscaping .
Landscape Items Items starting with the number in the Schedule of Items .
Landscape Subcontractor The individual or firm performing Landscape Items generally a Subcontractor .
Lane A strip of Roadway intended to accommodate a single line of vehicles .
Large Culvert Any structure not defined as a Culvert or Bridge that provides a Drainage or nondrainage opening under the Roadway or approaches to the Roadway that is over feet but less than feet in nominal diameter .
Liquidated Damages An amount due and payable to the Department by the Contractor normally realized through a reduction of amounts to be paid to the Contractor .
Said amount is calculated by multiplying a daily amount set forth in the Contract by the number of Days the Work remains Incomplete after the Contract Completion Time has expired .
Major Item An individual Pay Item that constitutes or more of the amount of the Awarded Contract calculated using the Contractors Bid prices and the estimated quantities contained in the Bid Documents .
Material Any substance specified for use in the construction of the Project and related approaches .
Minor Item All Pay Items that are not Major Items .
Minor Span Same definition as Bridge except having an opening of at least feet but less than feet .
Modification See Contract Modification .
National Highway SystemNHS A system of Interstate Highways and major collectors specifically designated by the Federal Highway Administration .
It includes the Interstate System other urban and rural principal arterials highways that provide motor vehicle access between the NHS and major intermodal transportation facilities the defense strategic highway network and strategic highway network connectors .
Nonconforming Work All Defective Unauthorized or Uninspected Work .
Notice of Award A written notice to the Contractor stating that the Contract has been executed .
Notice of Intent to Award A written notice to the Successful Bidder stating that the Department has conditionally accepted its offer and upon receipt of a payment bond performance bond insurance certificate and the fulfillment of any other preaward conditions the contract will be signed executed by the Department .
For a related provision see Section .
Notice of Award .
Notice to Contractors The advertisement or invitation for Bids published in accordance with Maine law including electronic advertising applicable to the Department .
Offer A response to a solicitation that if accepted would bind the offeror to perform the resultant Contract .
Submission of a Bid constitutes an Offer by the Bidder .
Order A directive from the Department requiring compliance by the Contractor .
Owner The legal or record Owner of the building or Premises on which the Project is to be constructed generally the State of Maine acting by and through the Department .
Partnering See Section .. Partnering .
Pavement Structure The combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
A .
Base Course One or more layers of specified Material thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface course .
B. Subbase Layers of specified Material thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course .
C. Surface Course The top layers of a Pavement Structure designed to accommodate the traffic load resist skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
This layer is sometimes called the Wearing Course .
Pay Item An item of Work set forth in the Schedule of Items for which the Contractor must provide a price .
Payment Bond The security furnished by the Contractor and its Surety to guarantee payment of all obligations incurred by the Contractor related to the Contract .
For a related provision see Section .. Bonds .
Performance Bond The security furnished by the Contractor and its Surety to guarantee performance of the Work in Conformity with the Contract .
For a related provision see Section .. Bonds .
Permits Permits granted to the Department for the Project .
Permits often required include a environmental Permits including Natural Resources Protection Act NRPA permit from MDEP and Army Corps of Engineers Permit and b a U.S. Coast Guard permit .
Physical Work All Work specified in the Contract that affects the physical environment including all Work within the Project Limits final cleaning up and finishing and Completion of Punch List Items as provided in Section .
Project Closeout and removal of traffic control devices .
Plans When the context so indicates Plans mean applicable construction drawings including plan profile typical cross sections Working Drawings Standard Details Supplemental Standard Details and supplemental Drawings or exact reproductions thereof or electronically displayed equivalents that show the location character dimensions and details of the Work .
Where the context so indicates Plan may also mean a detailed process program or method worked out beforehand for the accomplishment of an objective .
Examples include QCP the SEWPCP the TCP Safety Plan and Project specific emergency planning .
Premises Land of the Owner on which the building or buildings now stand or to which they are to be moved .
Prequalification Application The Contractors Prequalification Application form submitted by the Contractor which is to be used to request prequalification and provide information that the Department will rely upon to determine the responsibility and qualifications of a Contractor .
Said form is available through the Departments Contracts Section and the Departmental webpage .
Prequalification Procedure The current procedure and requirements contained in the Contractors Prequalification Procedure first adopted by the Department in April and administered through the Departments Contracts Section .
Process Control Test Test performed at the source of supply of Material to determine whether the Material meets the Specification prior to Delivery .
Profile Grade The trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top of the wearing surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
Profile Grade means either elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context .
Program The specific working unit within the Departments Bureau of Project Development within which a particular Department project is developed designed constructed and administered .
Such Programs include the Highway Program Urban and Federal Bridge Program Maintenance Operations and Multimodal Program .
Progress Meeting See Section .. Progress Meetings .
Project The Bridge Highway railroad pier airport building bike path pedestrian path or other infrastructure improvement being constructed rehabilitated or repaired together with all appurtenances and Incidentals .
Project Limits Areas within the RightofWay or Construction Limit Lines shown on the Plans or otherwise indicated in the Contract .
If no Project Limits are indicated in the Contract the Project Limits shall be the area actually occupied by the Bridge Highway or other infrastructure before construction extending to and including A the area outside the Shoulders and ditch lines and within any landmarks or historic features such as fences fence posts tree rows stone walls corner stones or other monuments indicating the boundary line or B in the absence of any landmarks or historic features Sidewalks Shoulders and ditch lines to the top of cuts or toe of fills .
For a related Maine statute see MRSA .
Project Manager The Departments duly authorized representative for overall coordination of the Project .
Project Records Records or data of any type on any media including those produced by the Contractor or its consultants Subcontractors suppliers or manufacturers that are related to the Project .
Project Records include but are not limited to Plans Working Drawings Specifications manufacturers recommendations catalog cuts daily time reports records of Force Account Work schedules and scheduled updates or revisions quality control Plans and related documentation inspectors reports traffic control Plans and log safety program and incident reports soil erosion and water pollution control Plans and log employment records payrolls internal accounting records equal opportunity and affirmative action records onthejob and Disadvantaged Business Enterprise reports preconstruction conference records Progress Meeting records Partnering records correspondence emails and any other documents related to the Work .
Proposal The response to a Request for Proposals .
Proposals will normally be requested for anticipated Best Value procurements .
See DesignBuild Request for Proposal and Best Value Procurement .
In another context sometimes the Departments solicitation for bids is called a Bid Proposal .
Proposer The entity submitting a Proposal .
Punch List See Sections .. NoticeInspectionPunch List and ..
Notices Final InspectionsPhysical Work Completion .
Quality Assurance QA All planned and systematic operations to ensure that the operation material andor end product meets Specifications .
Quality Assurance includes A approval and oversight of the Contractors Quality Control Plan B review of inspector sampler tester and Laboratory qualifications C inspection for Conformity with Contract requirements D Contractor Quality Control E Acceptance Testing and F Independent Assurance .
Quality Control QC Planned and specified actions or operations necessary to produce an end product that Conforms to the quality requirements of the Contract .
Unless otherwise specified QC includes inspection and testing for process control to the extent determined necessary by the Contractor .
Quality Control is also referred to as Process Control .
Quality Control Plan QCP The program and documentation of that program approved by the Department which specifies the actions inspection sampling and testing necessary to keep production and placement operations within Specifications including provisions to quickly determine when an operations becomes out of control and those actions that the Contractor will take to restore compliance .
Receipted Bill written Evidence provided by the Contractor that the cost of materials has actually been paid by the Contractor .
This could take the form of a copy of a cancelled check a copy of an invoice with written verification from the Subcontractor that the bill has been paid or a written declaration from the Subcontractor on its letterhead that the bill has been paid .
Received or Receipt When considering documents unless the context indicates otherwise Receipt by regular US mail overnight courier service in hand or by fax or electronic transmission with confirmation of Receipt originating from the recipient which may be a telephone confirmation .
If Delivered by regular US mail notices that are properly addressed will be deemed Received three Days after mailing unless the recipient admits earlier Receipt in which case Receipt will be the date admitted .
Reference Stake A stake set beyond the proposed grading areas for use as a control for the new construction .
Related Entities All general partners joint venturers parent firms subsidiaries or sister firms that are owned or controlled by the Bidder or other entity under consideration .
Request for Proposal The Departments solicitation in a Best Value Procurement Process for Proposals such as when soliciting for an anticipated DesignBuild Contract .
See Proposal and Best Value Procurement Process .
Resident The Departments onsite representative .
Resident Work Order See Contract Modification RightofWay A general term denoting land property or interest therein usually in the form of a strip acquired for or devoted to the Project or other purposes .
Road A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the RightofWay .
Roadbed The graded portion of a Highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the Pavement Structure and Shoulders .
Roadside A general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the Roadway .
Extensive areas between the Roadways of a divided Highway may also be considered Roadside .
Roadside Development Those items necessary to complete the Highway that provide for the preservation of landscape Materials and features the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers and such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the Highway .
Roadway The portion of a Highway including Shoulders for vehicular use .
A divided Highway has two or more Roadways .
Schedule of Items A document containing the list of items of Work provided in the Bid Documents on which the Contractor provides prices .
The Schedule of Items is a Special Provision .
Schedule of Work A written Work schedule submitted and maintained by the Contractor by which the Contractor Plans and prosecutes the Work .
The Schedule of Work contains dates of commencement and Completion of various items of Work within the Contract Time and all authorized extensions .
For a related provision see Section ..
Schedule of Work Required .
Shop Drawings See Working Drawings .
Shoulder The portion of the Road or Roadway that is contiguous with the traveled Way and that is provided for accommodation of stopped vehicles emergency use and lateral support of base and surface courses .
Sidewalk A way constructed primarily for the use of pedestrians .
Skew or Skew Angle The acute angle formed by the intersection of the line normal to the centerline of the Roadway or the Working line of the Superstructure with a line parallel to the face of the Substructure or in the case of structural plate units and Culverts with the centerline of the structural plate units and Culverts .
Special Provision Revisions to the Standard andor Supplemental Specifications applicable to an individual Project or Contract .
Specifications A written or electronic textual compilation of provisions and requirements for the performance of the Work including incorporations by reference .
Standard Details Detailed Drawings published and approved by the Department for general application and repetitive use .
Standard Specifications Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specifications and Standard Details for Construction Revision of .
Published and approved by the Department pursuant to MRSA for general application and repetitive use on Projects .
State The State of Maine acting through its authorized agencies and representatives .
Street A general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the RightofWay .
Structures Bridges Culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers services pipes underdrains foundation drains and other manufactured features .
Strut See Large Culvert Subcontractor An individual firm corporation limited liability company partnership joint venture sole proprietorship or any other entity to whom the Contractor subcontracts a portion of the Work .
A subcontracting arrangement shall be considered to exist when a person or firm assumes obligation through a written contract with the Contractor for performing part of the Work using its own Equipment and Workers procuring its own Materials and supplies and furnishing its own supervision with only general overall supervision being exercised by the prime Contractor or higher tier Subcontractors .
Unless the context indicates otherwise Subcontractors include suppliers vendors fabricators and any other entities with which the Contractor contracts to perform any portion of the Work .
Subgrade The top surface of a Roadbed upon which the Pavement Structure Shoulders and curbs are constructed .
Subgrade Treatment Modification of Roadbed Material by stabilization .
Substantially Conform or Substantial Conformity Substantially Conform or Substantial Conformity means that the Work at issue though not in strict accordance with the Plans Specifications or other Contract requirements Conforms sufficiently to the applicable standard such that it may be acceptable to the Department possibly with a credit to the Department and not require removal as determined by the Department .
For a related definition see Conformity .
For a related provision see Section ..
Substantially Conforming Work .
Substructure All of that part of the Structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans Skewbacks of arches and tops of footings of rigid frames together with the backwalls parapets and wingwalls of abutments .
Successful Bidder The low responsive responsible bidder to whom the Department intends to award the Contract .
This status is evidenced by a Notice of Intent to Award Letter sent to the Successful Bidder .
Superintendent The Contractors authorized onsite representative who is in charge of and responsible for the Work .
Superstructure Excluding backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railing the portion of the Structure above The bearings of simple and continuous spans the skewbacks of arches the top of footings of rigid frames .
Supplemental Liquidated Damages Liquidated Damages for additional costs resulting from Contractors failure to complete a specific Work item phase or milestone within the time specified in the Contract for that item .
Supplemental Liquidated Damages are in addition to and separate and distinct from Liquidated Damages .
Supplemental Specification Approved additions or modifications to the Standard Specifications .
Supplemental Standard Details Approved additions or modifications to the Standard Details .
Surety The corporation limited liability company partnership or individual or other entity other than the Contractor that executes or is obligated under a Contract Bond or Bid Bond .
Traveled Way The portion of the Roadway that is intended for the movement of vehicles exclusive of Shoulders and auxiliary Lanes .
Unacceptable Work All Work that does not Substantially Conform to the Contract as determined by the Department .
Unauthorized Work Work performed without providing the Resident with reasonable notice of the date and time that the Work is to be performed Work performed contrary to the instructions of the Department or any Extra Work performed without written Contract Modification or Agreement .
For a related provision see Section ..
Unauthorized Work .
Uncontrollable Events Events or acts that were unforeseeable at the time of Bid submission and that were beyond the Contractors control in that the risk of the event or act could not have been prevented or managed by the Contractor with proper planning coordination Subcontractor management insurance bonding maintenance erosion control traffic control security precautions Workers or Equipment .
Uncontrollable Events are of two types A severe weather events that meet the requirements of the first sentence of this definition andor B nonweather events that meet the requirements of the first sentence of this definition which might include acts by foreign enemy quarantine restrictions strikes not involving the Contractor action or inaction by governmental authorities action or inaction by Utility Companies or other third parties not Subcontractors working on Project related Work within the Project Limits and freight embargoes .
Uncontrollable Events specifically do not include fires unless caused by a weather event described in this definition above acts by other third parties including vandals and members of the traveling public non performance of Subcontractors except in cases of unforeseeable permanent and complete cessation of all operations by the Subcontractor for reasons unrelated to the Contractor and difficult but foreseeable weather for the location and time of the Work including but not limited to cold snow and ice in the winter flooding caused by snow melt and rain in the spring rain in the fall and thunderstorms in the summer .
Uninspected Work Work that was performed without inspection by the Department .
Unit Price The price for one unit of Work submitted by the Bidder in its Bid .
Utility Companies All persons or entities set forth in A MRSA .
Utility Facilities All Structures facilities Equipment and all appurtenances thereto used by Utility Companies including but not limited to poles wires support poles guys anchors water pipelines sewer pipelines gas pipelines all other pipelines fire alarms service connections meter boxes valve boxes light standards cableways Conduits signals and manholes .
Value Engineering Change Proposal See Section .
Value Engineering .
Wetlands Areas inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions .
Wetlands generally include swamps marshes bogs and similar areas .
Winter Suspensions See Section .. Winter Suspensions .
Work All labor services personnel Materials Equipment tools supplies and Incidentals required or indicated by the Contract in Conformity with the same .
For a related provision see Section .
Intent of the Contract .
Working Day A calendar day exclusive of Saturdays Sundays holidays and the period from November th to May th inclusive on which weather and other conditions not under the control of the Contractor will permit construction operation to proceed for of the hours of the usual working day with normal working force .
Saturday shall be considered one half of a working day if the Contractor works or more hours during the forenoon .
If the Contractor works after oclock noon it shall be considered as one working day .
If after approval work is performed on a Sunday or Holiday the day shall be considered a working day .
Work necessary either for the safety of the traveling public or maintenance performed on Sundays or Holidays which is neither caused by nor resulting from any fault of the Contractor shall not be considered a working day .
Working Drawings Plans sketches or Drawings provided by the Contractor or its Subcontractors vendors or fabricators for the purpose of supplementing the Plans provided in the Bid Documents and being necessary to demonstrate that the Work will comply with the Contract and meet the intent of the Contract .
Working Drawings shall be of sufficient detail to meet the purpose set forth in the preceding sentence .
Examples include Shop drawings erection Plans falsework Plans cofferdam Plans and bending diagrams for reinforcing steel .
Work Order See Contract Modification. . General Rules of Interpretation ..
Meaning of Approved Etc .
Unless the Contract clearly indicates otherwise whenever anything is to be done or is not to be done unless approved accepted authorized ordered required determined directed specified designated established suitable satisfactory sufficient unacceptable or a similar word or phrase the word or phrase shall be interpreted as if it were followed by the words by the Department or to the Department as applicable .
.. Referenced Publications The Contractor is responsible for obtaining all manuals Specifications reference guides or other publications referenced or indicated by the Contract and performing the Work in Conformity with the same .
Unless a specific date or version is specified the Contractor shall use the most recent version of such publication that existed at the time the Bid was submitted .
.. Cross References Crossreferences are sometimes provided in the Contract .
Example For a related provision see Section __ .
These crossreferences are provided for convenience only and are not a comprehensive listing of related Sections .
The lack of a cross reference or an incorrect reference shall not be interpreted as indicating that there are no related provisions and does not relieve the parties of the obligation to read the Contract as a whole .
.. Headings and Tables of Contents All headings indices titles and tables of contents are for convenience only .
They do not control interpretation and do not relieve the parties of the obligation to read the Bid Documents or Contract as a whole .
..
Calculated Dimensions Control In the case of discrepancy between calculated dimensions and scaled dimensions calculated dimensions shall control .
..
Priority of Conflicting Contract Documents If the Contractor discovers any ambiguity error omission conflict or discrepancy ambiguity etc .
related to the Contract Documents that may significantly affect the cost quality Conformity or timeliness of the Work The Contractor must comply with Section .. Duty to Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered .
In the case of ambiguity etc .
the following components of the Contract Documents shall control in the following descending order of priority Bid Amendments most recent to least recent Project Specific Permit Requirements Special Provisions Notes on Plans Plans Supplemental Specifications Supplemental Standard Details Standard Specifications Standard Details ..
Multiple Pay Items When there is more than one Pay Item for similar Work governed by one Specification the item number in the Specification may be appended with additional digits to differentiate such multiple Pay Items .
For example Specification item .
also covers Pay Items .
. . and .
etc .
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise .
SECTION BIDDING Scope of Section This Section includes requirements related to eligibility to Bid and the Bidding process from advertisement for Bids through Bid Opening to the analysis of Bids . .
Eligibility to Bid ..
Basic Requirements To be eligible to Bid prospective Bidders must A not have been debarred or suspended from Bidding and B not be in Default with respect to any outstanding Contract with the Department unless the Department grants written permission to Bid despite such Default .
For related provisions see Sections .
Bid Opening and .
PostBid Qualification .
..
Suspension From Bidding The Department may suspend the right of a Contractor to submit Bids as the general Contractor on construction Projects being developed by the Departments Bureau of Project Development for up to two years pursuant to Departments Rules Regarding Suspension From Bidding .
.. Debarment The Department may debar a Contractor from Bidding subcontracting or being employed in any capacity regarding any Project administered by the Department pursuant to Rules Regarding Debarment of Contractors Maine Department of Transportation Register Chapter October . . Advertisement Notice to Contractors A Notice to Contractors will provide a solicitation or an invitation to bid and be advertised in printed or electronic media pursuant to Maine law .
Such Notice will contain a brief and general description of the nature and location of the Work and information about how to Bid and how to provide any prequalification requirements . .
Examinations of Documents Site and Other Information Before submitting a Bid the Bidder is responsible for A obtaining and examining the Plans Specifications all Bid Amendments and all other Bid Documents B examining the Geotechnical Information and all other information provided or referenced in the Bid Documents C examining the sites of Work and making other examinations and investigations that are needed to Make the Bidder fully aware of the conditions that would be encountered in performing the Work and D communicating with the Department as provided in Section .
Communication Before Bid Opening .
For a related provision see Section ..
Effects of Signing and Delivery of Bid .
.. Geotechnical Information Bidders and Contractors are obligated to examine and if necessary obtain geotechnical information .
If one is available the project geotechnical report may be accessed at the Departments web site .
The Department shall not be responsible for the Bidders and Contractors interpretations of or estimates or conclusions drawn from the Geotechnical Information .
Data provided may not be representative of the subsurface conditions between the boring locations .
This section does not diminish the duties imposed upon parties in Section or in any other sections . .
Estimated Quantities Quantities shown in the Bid Documents are estimates only to be used for the preparation and comparison of Bids .
For related provisions see Sections .
Changes in Quantities and .
Elimination of Items. . Communication Before Bid Opening ..
Questions From Bidders Bidders shall direct all technical or Engineering questions including requests for explanations or interpretation in writing to the Bid Contact Person noted in the Notice to Contractors typically the Project Manager .
All questions must be transmitted as described in the Notice to Contractors and must be received by the Department at least hours before Bid Opening .
General questions relating to the Bidding process may be referred to the Departments Contracts Section .
For a related provision see Section .. Bid Amendments .
..
Bidders Duty To Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered Bidders shall not take advantage of any ambiguity error omission conflict or discrepancy ambiguity etc .
relating to the Bid Documents Geotechnical Information site conditions or any other information that may significantly affect the cost quality Conformity or timeliness of the Work .
If a Bidder discovers any such ambiguity etc .
it must notify the Bid Contact Person immediately in writing .
Failure to provide such notice constitutes a waiver of any claim for entitlement for additional compensation or time related to such ambiguity etc .
.. Bid Amendment The Department will interpret or modify the Bid Documents only by written Bid Amendment or other writing issued by the Departments Contracts Section .
The Department is not bound by any other oral or written representations including information exchanged verbally at preBid meetings .
The Department will issue written Bid Amendment in response to questions from Bidders when the answers A relate to ambiguous incorrect or missing information in the Bid Documents B are not apparent to Contractors experienced in the type of Work covered by the potential Contract and C could have a significant impact on the cost quality Conformity or timeliness of the Work .
For a related provision see Section ..
Questions From Bidders. . Bid Guaranty Bids must be accompanied by a Bid Guaranty that complies with all the requirements of this Section unless noted otherwise in the Notice to Contractors and the Bid Documents .
The Bid Guaranty must be A in the amount specified in the Notice to Contractors and the Bid Documents B made payable to the Treasurer State of Maine and C one of the following types a Bid Bond Conforming to the next paragraph a cashiers check a certified check or a United States Postal money order .
Bid Bonds must be A issued by an insurance company licensed or approved by the State of Maine Department of Business Regulation Bureau of Insurance to do business in the State of Maine B properly signed by the Bidder as Principal and a duly authorized representative of the insurance company referenced above and C on the Departments Bid Bond form or an exact copy thereof OR must not contain any significant variations from said form as determined in the sole discretion of the Department .
Bid Bonds for electronic Bids must be delivered received or faxed to the number in the Notice to Contractors before the Bid Opening time .
Original Bid Bonds must be received within hours for faxed submittals .
Electronic Bid Bonds which accompany electronic Bids are acceptable . .
Delivery of Bids ..
Location and Time The Bidder must Deliver its Bid and Bid Guaranty in a sealed envelope to the exact location and before the precise time as determined by the Department specified in the Notice to Contractors or any applicable Bid Amendment .
The Bid and Bid Guaranty must be signed by duly authorized individuals .
The sealed envelope must be labeled with the Bidders name the Project location WIN and the words Bid Enclosed .
As a minimum the Bidder will submit a Bid Package consisting of the Notice to Contractors the completed Acknowledgement of Bid Amendments form the completed Schedule of Items copies of the completed Agreement Offer Award form a Bid Bond or Bid Guarantee and any other Certifications or Bid Requirements listed in the Bid Book .
For a related provision see Section .
Bid Responsiveness .
Electronic Bids must be submitted to the appropriate electronic bid system before the precise time as determined by the Department specified in the Notice to Contractors or any applicable Bid Amendment .
..
Effects of Signing and Delivery of Bids A .
Offer and Agreement to Preexecution Terms The signing and Delivery of a Bid represents an offer by the Bidder to perform the Work for the prices submitted within the times specified and in Conformity with all provisions of the Bid Documents and the Bidders Agreement to all the provisions of the Bid Documents governing requirements and procedures applicable before Contract Execution .
The Bidders offer shall be irrevocable until the expiration of the time for Contract Execution by the Department set forth in Section .
except as provided in Sections .
and .
regarding withdrawal of Bids .
B .
Bidder Representations By signing and Delivering a Bid the Bidder represents that the Bidder has performed the examinations required by Section .
Examinations of Documents Site and Other Information the Bidder has given the Department written notice of all ambiguities etc .
discovered by the Bidder as required by Section ..
Bidders Duty to Notify Department if Ambiguities Discovered and the Bidder has sufficient knowledge of the Bid Documents Geotechnical Information the site and other conditions to properly price schedule plan and perform the Work .
C. Certifications By signing and Delivering a Bid on federally funded or partially federally funded Contract the Bidder certifies as provided in all federal certifications set forth in the Bid Book including those set forth in Section thereof .
By signing and Delivering a Bid the Bidder further certifies as provided in Section .. F Certification of Continuing EEO Efforts. . Withdrawal of Bids Before the Time Specified for Bid Opening A Bidder may withdraw a Bid after Delivery provided the request for such withdrawal is made in writing or in person before the time set for Bid Opening in the Notice to Contractors .
The Bidder may revise and resubmit a Bid so withdrawn before the time specified for Bid Opening. . Bid Opening Bids will be opened and publicly read at the time and place specified in the Notice to Contractors or any applicable Bid Amendments .
The Department will normally read publicly only the total Bid Price of each Bid .
Unit and lump sum prices are available for inspection by the Bidders immediately after the Bid Opening process .
The public reading of a Bid does not constitute a determination by the Department of whether the Bid is responsive or of whether the Bidder is responsible though the Department may refuse to read Bids that are obviously nonresponsive .
Accordingly the Department may reject a Bid as nonresponsive andor determine a Bidder is not responsible or ineligible to Bid even if that Bidders Bid is read at Bid Opening. . Withdrawal of Bids in Multiple Bid Context Bids may not be withdrawn after the time of Bid Opening except under the limited circumstance set forth in this Section ..
If a Bidder has submitted Bids on multiple Projects that have the same Bid Opening time and if after the reading of Bids the Bidder has submitted the apparent low Bid on one Project then the Bidder may withdraw any Bids on other Projects for which no Bids have yet been read .
Such a request for withdrawal must be made in person or in writing .
Bids withdrawn will not be considered .
The Bidder assumes sole responsibility for the risk that the Bidders apparent low Bid is rejected as nonresponsive or that the Bidder is determined to be not responsible. . Bid Responsiveness .. Noncurable Bid Defects The Department WILL REJECT Bids as non responsive if ANY ONE of the following occurs .
A .
The Bid and Bid Guaranty are not Delivered to the precise location and by the precise time set forth in the Notice to Contractors or any applicable Bid Amendment .
B .
The Bidder is not eligible to Bid as set forth in Section .
Eligibility to Bid .
C. The Bid is not signed by a duly authorized representative of the Bidder .
D. A Bid Guaranty Conforming to Section .
Bid Guaranty is not submitted .
E. The unit price and bid amount is not provided or a lump sum price is not provided or is illegible as determined by the Department .
F. The Bidder fails to indicate the Bidders choice where the Bid Documents clearly require a choice .
G. The Bid contains any conditional or alternate Bidding language including the right to accept or reject an Award of the Contract .
H. The Bidder submits more than one Bid for the same Contract or the Bidder and any Related Entity each submit a Bid for the same Contract .
I .
The Department has substantial evidence of collusion by the Bidder .
J .
The Bidder fails to comply with any provision in the Bid Documents that expressly indicates that such noncompliance will cause Bid rejection .
K. When A plus B bidding is specified the bid does not contain the number of Calendar Days bid to complete the work L. The Bid is not submitted on the most current forms provided by the Department or identical copies thereof .
The Bidder will have no opportunity to cure the above Noncurable Bid Defects .
.. Curable Bid Defects Unless the Department waives a curable Bid defect the Bidder must cure within the time stated in the written notice by the Department but not less than hours all other Bid Defects not listed in Section .. Noncurable Bid Defects that are identified by the Department .
Failure to cure such Defects within said time may result in forfeiture of the Bidders Bid Guaranty .
Upon such failure the Department may take any action in the best interests of the Department including those set forth in Section .
Failure to Fulfill Award Conditions .
Such curable Bid Defects include but are not limited to the following .
A .
The Bidder only signs one of the Contract Agreement Offer Award forms .
B .
Missing total sum of the items provided in the Schedule of Items .
C. The prices or signatures on the Bid or Bid Guaranty are not in ink or other non erasable substance .
D. Failure to acknowledge Receipt and consideration of all Bid Amendments .
E. All other Defects that do not create a significant question as to the Bidders total Bid amount or the Bidders ability to complete the Work within the Contract Time or by the Contract Completion Date as determined by the Department .
Materially unbalanced Bids may create a significant question as to the Bidders ability or will to complete the Work within the Contract Time in accordance with the requirements of the Contract see Section .. Unbalanced Bids .
Contractors prequalified for the general category stated in the Notice to Contractors may be determined nonresponsive by the Department based on recent or new data provided since the last determination of prequalification for that Contractor .
SECTION AWARD AND CONTRACTING Scope of Section This Section includes requirements related to the final determination of Bid responsiveness and Award and execution of the Contract . .
Analysis of Bids .. Unit Prices Govern After Bid Opening the Department will review the mathematics of all apparently responsive Bids .
In the event of a discrepancy between A unit and lump prices and B extensions andor the total Bid Price the unit and lumps sum prices shall govern and the total Bid Price will be adjusted accordingly .
.. Unbalanced Bids A. Definitions An Unbalanced Bid is a Bid that is Mathematically Unbalanced and that may also be Materially Unbalanced .
Mathematically Unbalanced means a Bid containing lump sum or Unit Prices which do not reflect reasonable direct costs plus a reasonable proportionate share of the Bidders anticipated profit overhead costs and other indirect costs .
Materially Unbalanced means a Mathematically Unbalanced Bid which generates a reasonable doubt that said Bid will represent the lowest ultimate cost to the Department .
B .
Comparison and Possible Bid Rejection The Department will compare the price of items contained in the Bid of the Apparent Successful Bidder with the estimate prepared by the Department .
If the Bid is Mathematically Unbalanced the Department may in its discretion notify the Apparent Successful Bidder and request an explanation .
There shall be no negotiation or changes in prices .
If the Bidder fails to provide a reasonable explanation and if the Department finds the Bid is Materially Unbalanced the Department may reject the Bid as nonresponsive and may take any action that is in the best interests of the Department including those set forth in Section .
Failure to Fulfill Award Conditions .
.. Waiver of Defects and Technicalities Right to Reject Bids The Department reserves the right to reject any or all Bids and to advertise for new Bids if doing so is in the best interest of the Department .
The Department reserves the right to waive curable defects and other technicalities without notice to any party .
Refer to section .. for Curable Bid Defects. . Return of Bid Guaranty Bid Bonds will not be returned unless so requested .
Bid Guaranties other than bonds will be returned within Days following Bid Opening except that the Bid Guaranties from two lowest responsive Bids from responsible Bidders will be retained until Contract Execution or rejection of all Bids. . PostBid Qualification .. PreQualification Requirement for Award If the Notice to Contractors lists a PreQualification requirement the Apparent Successful Bidder must successfully complete the prequalification process as a condition of Award .
Notice and Information Gathering After Bid Opening and as a condition for Award of a Contract the Department may require an Apparent Successful Bidder to demonstrate to the Departments satisfaction that the Bidder is responsible and qualified to perform the Work .
If such qualification is required the Department will provide the Bidder with written notice to that effect .
Such notice will include a brief description of the reasons why such qualifications is required and may require the Bidder to provide any information requested in the Contractors Prequalification Application form adopted by the Department .
If requested by the Bidder the Department shall provide an opportunity for the Bidder to present evidence of qualifications at a reasonable time and place .
.. Notice of Determination After the Bidders presentation of evidence of qualifications if required the Department will notify the Bidder of its determination in writing .
If a determination of Not Qualified is rendered the Departments Chief Engineer will send the notice which will set forth the specific reasons therefore to the extent practical .
Such reasons include the following .
A. Defaults or terminations on past or current Contracts .
B .
Failure to pay or settle all bills for labor Materials or services on past or current Contracts .
C. Failure to provide Closeout Documentation on past or current Contracts .
D. Failure to fulfill warranty obligations on past or current Contracts .
E. Failure to comply with directives of the Department on past or current Contracts .
F. Below Standard performance as determined from the Departments Contractors Performance Rating process .
G. Inability of the Contractor to obtain or retain performance or Payment Bonds meeting MDOT requirements .
H. Failure to accept an Award of a Contract made by the Department to the Contractor .
I .
Making materially false deceptive or misleading Statements or omissions whether or not under oath regarding a claim on prior Contracts or on the Contractors Prequalification Application .
J .
Failure to provide information requested by the Department pursuant to this Section .. K. Any of the reasons contained in Section .
of the Rules Regarding Debarment of Contractors Maine Department of Transportation Register Chapter October .
L. Debarment or suspension by any federal State or local governmental procurement agency or the Contractors Agreement to refrain from Bidding as part of the settlement with any such agencies .
M. Other serious misconduct that the Department reasonably determines will substantially and adversely affect the cost quality or timeliness of Work or the safety of Workers or the public .
.. Appeal To appeal a Not Qualified determination the Bidder must Deliver a written Request for Appeal of Qualification Determination to the Commissioner within hours of Receipt of such determination .
The Commissioner or the Commissioners designee will grant such Requests for Appeal unless the Department reasonably determines that Delay of Award pending appeal is likely to cause substantial harm to the interests of the Department .
If the Request for Appeal is denied the determination of Not Qualified is upheld and the Award process will proceed without the unqualified Bidder .
If the Request for Appeal is granted the Bidder and the Chief Engineer must Deliver to the Commissioner or the Commissioners designee any information or arguments that the parties want considered within Days of Receipt of a Not Qualified determination .
Within Days of Receipt of such information and arguments the Commissioner or the Commissioners designee will notify the Bidder in writing as to whether A the determination of Not Qualified is upheld modified or reversed or B the Commissioner or the Commissioners designee elects to submit the issue to binding or nonbinding alternative Dispute resolution .
After a final determination of Not Qualified the Bidders Bid Guaranty will be returned and the Bidder will be ineligible for Award of future Department Contracts until the Bidder is prequalified pursuant to the Departments Prequalification Procedure. . Notice of Intent to Award The Department has Days following Bid Opening to Deliver a written Notice of Intent to Award and request a payment bond performance bond insurance bond special certifications and other information from the Apparent Low Bidder .
If a notice of Intent to Award is not sent within days of receipt of the Bid Opening the Apparent Successful Bidder may withdraw its Bid without forfeiture of its Bid Guaranty or Bidding eligibility .
If the Department and the Apparent Successful Bidder agree an extension beyond the days of the Bid and Bid prices may occur and the Bid remains viable .
For a related provision see Section .
Award Conditions. . Award Conditions The Apparent Successful Bidder must provide andor perform all of the items listed in this Section .
within Days of Receipt of the Notice of Intent to Award .
Unless indicated otherwise all items must be Delivered to the Departments Contracts Engineer .
..
Performance and Payment Bonds Performance and Payment Bonds complying with Section .. Bonds .
.. Insurance Certificates Certificates of Insurance complying with Section .
Insurance .
.. NonResident Contractor Requirements A .
Definition A NonResident Contractor is defined as a Contractor that is A any person who is not a Resident of the State of Maine or B any firm corporation limited liability company partnership joint venture sole proprietorship or other entity which A is not licensed to do business within the State of Maine or B does not have a principal place of business within the State of Maine .
B .
Requirements If a NonResident Contractor the Apparent Successful Bidder must file with the Department a copy of a written appointment of an attorney admitted to practice in the State of Maine having a place of business within the State .
The appointment must A set forth the attorneys business and personal addresses and business telephone and fax numbers B name said attorney to be the true and lawful attorney of the NonResident Contractor C set forth that the Contractor agrees that any lawful process which is served on said attorney shall have the same legal force and validity as if served on the Contractor D set forth that the appointment shall continue in force as long as any potential liability in any way related to the Work or the Contract remains or until the Department receives written notice of a change of appointment Conforming to this paragraph E provide that service of such process may be made by leaving a copy of the process in the hands or in the office of the Resident attorney and that such service will be effective upon the NonResident Contractor as if service were made in accordance with Rule of the Maine Rule of Civil Procedure and F provide that the Contractor expressly waives any and all defenses regarding service of process under Rule of said Civil Rules or otherwise .
The appointment shall be filed in the office of the Maine Secretary of State .
..
Execution of Contract By Bidder The properly completed and signed Contract Agreement Offer Award form provided with the Bid constitutes the Bidders offer .
Once the Department has received the bonds insurance and any other preaward items required the Department will sign the Contract Agreement Offer Award form and execute the Contract .
The point of Contract execution is when the Contractor receives the written Notice of Award .
.. Bid Escrow If required by Special Provision the Apparent Successful Bidder must provide a legible copy of Bid Escrow Documentation and a related Affidavit Conforming to said Special Provision .
Failure to provide Conforming Bid Escrow Documentation or the Affidavit constitutes a refusal to enter into the Contract and will result in the Bidders forfeiture of its Bid Guaranty .
.. Other Conditions The Apparent Successful Bidder must comply with all other conditions set forth or referenced in the Notice of Intent to Award. . Failure to Fulfill Award Conditions Failure of the Apparent Successful Bidder to fulfill all conditions of Award within the time provided or to otherwise accept Award will result in forfeiture of the Award to the Apparent Successful Bidder and the forfeiture of the Bid Guaranty .
Such Bidder will be prohibited from submitting a Bid for the Work in the event that the Work is readvertised .
Further the Department may refuse to accept any Bid from the Bidder on any Project for a period of two years from the date of such refusal .
The Department may then take any action that the Department determines is in the best interest of the Department including Awarding the Contract to the responsible Bidder with the next lowest responsive Bid rejecting all Bids andor readvertising the Work. . Forfeiture of Award The Department reserves the right to stop the Award of any Contract at any time before the Contract Execution without liability if doing so is in the best interest of the Department .
Any costs incurred by the Bidder before Contract Execution shall be the sole responsibility of the Bidder. . Award of Contract by Department Once the Contractor has met the requirements of the Notice of Intent to Award letter the Department has days to execute the Contract and notify the Contractor of the award with a written Notice of Award .
If a Notice of Award is not sent within days the Apparent Successful Bidder may withdraw its Bid without forfeiture of its Bid Guaranty or Bidding eligibility .
For a related provision see Section .
Commencement of Contract Time. . Computation and Extension of Time In the event that a time period provided in this Section concludes on a Holiday Saturday or Sunday said time period shall be extended to the next Business Day .
The Department and Apparent Successful Bidder may extend the time for the Award process fulfillment of Award Conditions or execution of the Contract by mutual Agreement .
Unless specifically and mutually agreed to in writing such extensions shall not extend the Contract Time or the Contract Completion Date .
SECTION GENERAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES Scope of Section This Section sets forth certain rights and responsibilities of the Department and the Contractor that are generally applicable to all Contracts .
This Section is not all inclusive and additional rights and responsibilities are set forth elsewhere in the Contract. . General ..
Basic Roles of the Parties The Contractor has the authority and responsibility to perform all Work in Conformity with the Contract .
The Department has the authority and responsibility to assure that the Contractor does so .
.. Joint Covenants of Good Faith and Fairness This Contract imposes an obligation of good faith and fair dealing on both parties in the execution performance interpretation and enforcement of the Contract .
With a positive commitment to honesty and integrity the Contractor and the Department agree to function within all applicable laws statutes regulations and Contract provisions avoid hindering each others performance fulfill Contract all obligations diligently and cooperate in achievement of the terms of the Contract .
Nothing in this subsection nullifies or supersedes the express provisions of the Contract and the Standard Specifications . .
Departments General Authority and Responsibilities ..
Furnishing of RightofWay The Department will secure all necessary rights to real property within the Project Limits shown on the RightofWay Plans that are provided with the Bid Documents .
For related provisions see Sections ..
Furnishing of Other Property Rights and .. Special Detours .
..
Furnishing of Permits Except as provided otherwise in the Contract the Department will furnish Permits required to perform the Work within the Project Limits .
For a related provision see Sections .
Definition of Permits ..
Furnishing of Other Property Rights Licenses and Permits and ..
Permit Requirements .
.. Authority of the Resident After Contract Execution the Resident has the authority to take all actions needed to assure that the Contractor is performing the Work in Conformity with the Contract .
Except as provided elsewhere in the Contract the Resident will decide all questions regarding the quality and acceptability of Materials furnished Work performed suspension of Work and the interpretation of the Contract .
The Resident has the authority to reject Unacceptable or Unauthorized Work and refuse to approve Progress and Final Payments until the Unacceptable or Unauthorized Work is corrected .
For related provisions see Sections .
Nonconforming Work and .
Contract Modification .
.. Authority of Residents and Inspectors Residents inspectors and other Departmental employees or representatives working for the Department have the authority to make initial determinations regarding the Conformity of the Work .
Unless authorized by the Program Manager Residents or inspectors are not authorized to alter or waive the provisions of the Contract or to issue instructions contrary to the Contract .
They may not act as a supervisor for the Contractor .
..
Right to Inspect Work The Department has the authority to inspect all Materials and every detail of the Work .
For a related provision see Section ..
Inspection of Work .
..
Right to Suspend Work The Department has the right to suspend any or all Work at any time for any reason .
For related provisions see Sections ..
Maintenance During Suspension of Work and .
Suspension of Work .
.. Damage to Project Caused By Uncontrollable Events All repairs that are required to the Project or temporary Structures because of property damage that is directly caused by an Uncontrollable Event may entitle the Contractor to an Equitable Adjustment if the Contractor complies with the notification documentation and procedural requirements set forth in the Contract .
Delays resulting from an Uncontrollable Event will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
For related provisions see Sections .
Definition of Uncontrollable Event .. Responsibility for Damage to Work .
Extra Work .
Adjustments for Delay .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time and .
Contract Modification .
.. No Personal Liability The Departments employees and other representatives act solely as representatives of the Department when conducting and exercising authority granted to them under the Contract .
Such persons have no liability either personally or as Department employees . .
Contractors General Authority and Responsibilities .. General Duty to Cooperate The Contractor shall cooperate with the Departmental personnel Utility Companies railroad personnel marine traffic personnel regulating agencies with jurisdiction other Contractors municipalities and the public in every reasonable way possible .
For a related provision see Section .
Communication and Coordination .
..
Furnishing of Other Property Rights Licenses and Permits The Contractor shall acquire at its sole expense all property rights outside the Project Limits needed for construction staging yarding construction waste disposal or other Projectrelated purpose .
The Contractor shall also acquire at its sole expense all licenses and Permits necessary to perform the Work that are not furnished by the Department .
For related provisions see Sections ..
Furnishing of RightofWay ..
Furnishing of Permits .. Responsibility for Property of Others and .. B Permit Requirements All Other Permits .
.. Duty to Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered The Contractor shall not take advantage of any Ambiguity error omission conflict or discrepancy contained in the Contract .
If the Contractor discovers any such ambiguity etc .
for which the Contractor may seek adjustments to compensation time or other Contract requirements the Contractor shall provide a written notice within hours and before performing any Work related to the ambiguity etc .
as provided in Section ..
Early Negotiation .
Failure to provide such notice in compliance with the Contract shall constitute a waiver of all claims related to the ambiguity etc .
.. Workers and Equipment The Contractor shall at all times provide all Superintendents forepersons laborers inspectors Subcontractors subconsultants Equipment Materials and Incidentals needed to perform the Work in Conformance with the Contractors Schedule of Work and within the Contract Time .
Any person employed by the Contractor or by any Subcontractor or any officer or representative or agent of the Subcontractor who in the opinion of the Resident is intemperate or disorderly shall be removed immediately by the Contractor or Subcontractor employing such person .
The employee shall not be employed again in any portion of the Work without prior approval from the Resident .
Should the Contractor fail to remove such person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the Work the Resident may suspend the Work by written notice until such orders are complied with .
During all hours of onsite activity the Contractor shall provide an onsite competent Englishspeaking Superintendent experienced in the type of Work being performed .
The Superintendent shall be capable of reading and understanding the Plans and Specifications providing and receiving communications and scheduling and coordinating the Work .
The Superintendent shall have full authority to manage the Work in accordance with the Contract .
Such superintendence must be provided regardless of the amount of Work being done by the Subcontractor .
All persons employed by or through the Contractor except for registered trainees shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform the Work properly .
The Department may require that the Contractor discharge any such person who the Department determines jeopardizes safety of any person or the Project without cost or liability to the Department .
If the Department determines that such persons performance jeopardizes the intent of the Contract otherwise the Department may but is not required to notify the Contractor of such a determination .
Such notice or lack thereof does not affect the Contractors duties regarding Workers .
Upon Receipt of such notice the Contractor shall take any action it determines necessary to fulfill its obligations under the Contract .
For related provisions see Sections ..
Discharge of Subcontractors .
Intent of the Contract and .. Joint Duty Regarding Safety .
.. Duties Regarding Inspection of Work A .
Safe Access The Contractor shall provide the Department with safe access to all portions of the Work in Conformity with all applicable OSHA requirements .
The Contractor shall furnish the Department with all information and assistance required to make a detailed inspection .
For a related provision see Section ..
Right to Inspect Work .
B .
Inspection By Others If any other governmental entity Utility Company or railroad is to pay for a portion of the Work or is otherwise authorized to inspect Work then the Contractor must provide their representatives with safe access that Conforms to this Section .. Project Records Upon request by the Department the Contractor or any other person Working for the Contractor possessing Project Records must provide the Department with copies of Project Records at all reasonable times without cost or liability to the Department .
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise Project Records are the property of the Department .
The Contractor must retain Project Records for at least three years after Final Acceptance or for any applicable warrantee period whichever is longer .
For related provisions see Sections .
Definition of Project Records and ..
Contractors Obligation to Keep Records .
.. Laws To Be Observed The Contractor shall keep itself informed of and comply with all applicable laws rules regulations orders and decrees Law affecting the Work including all environmental wage labor equal opportunity safety patent copyright or trademark laws .
The Contractor shall indemnify the Department and hold the Department harmless against any and all claims or liabilities arising from or based upon the violation or alleged violation of any such Law caused directly or indirectly by or through the Contractor .
..
Wage Rates and Labor Laws A .
Federal Wage Rates and Labor Laws Federal wage rates apply unless expressly stated otherwise by Special Provision .
The classification of construction type and related wage rates by the U.S. Department of Labor will be provided by Special Provision .
If not provided the Contractor must contact the Department before Bidding to determine the applicable wage rates in accordance with Section ..
Bidders Duty to Notify Department if Ambiguities Discovered .
The Contractor must pay according to said rates and must otherwise comply with all applicable federal and State labor laws rules and regulations .
Persons registered with the Department as trainees must be paid at least at the prevailing wage for laborer and upon completion of their program trainees shall by paid the prevailing wage for the skill and classification trained .
B .
State Wage Rates and Labor Laws Maine State wage rates apply only if provided expressly by Special Provision .
If so provided the classification of construction type and related wage rates established by the Maine Department of Labor will be set forth by Special Provision .
If not so set forth the Contractor shall contact the Department before Bidding to determine the applicable wage rates in accordance with Section ..
Bidders Duty to Notify Department if Ambiguities Discovered .
The Contractor shall pay according to said rates and shall otherwise comply with all applicable federal and State labor laws rules and regulations .
Title MRSA set forth various requirements about preference to Maine workers that apply to State funded Contracts .
However if a Contract is Federally funded or partially Federally funded Federal law governs and Title MRSA does not apply .
For a related provision see CFR .. ..
Patents and Copyrights The Contractor must provide proof of legal Agreement with the patentee or Owner if necessary for use of any of the following designs processes devices trademarks Materials and copyrights .
The Contractor indemnifies and holds harmless the Department and any affected third party or political subdivision from all claims of infringement that arise from use of any patented or copyrighted item listed above .
.. Responsibility for Damage to Work Except as provided in Section .. Damage to Project Caused By Uncontrollable Events the Contractor shall bear all risk of loss relating to the Work until Final Acceptance regardless of cause including completed Work temporary Structures and all other items or Materials not yet incorporated into the Work .
For a related provision see Section .. Builders Risk Insurance .
The Contractor shall at its sole expense rebuild repair restore or replace such damaged Work or otherwise make good any losses that arise from such damage rebuilding etc ..
If the Contractor fails to Promptly commence and continue such rebuilding etc .
the Department may upon hours advance written notice commence rebuilding etc .
of the damaged property without liability to the Department with its own forces or with Contracted forces and all costs will be deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
For the Contractors responsibilities for the Work after Final Acceptance see Section .
Warranty Provisions .
.. Responsibility for Property of Others The Contractor and its Subcontractors shall not enter private property outside the Project Limits without first obtaining permission from the Owners .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property of any kind resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct of the Contractor and its Subcontractors .
The preceding sentence includes damage to vehicles passing through the Work area .
The Contractor shall at its sole expense rebuild repair restore or replace such damaged property and otherwise make good any losses that arise from such damage .
If the Contractor fails to completely remedy the damage in a timely manner the Department may upon hours advance written notice rebuild repair restore or replace the damaged property without liability to the Department with its own forces or with contracted forces .
All costs will be deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
.. Forest Protection and Laws The Contractor shall obey all laws and regulations that govern Work within or adjacent to State or National Forests keep the Project site orderly and clean obtain all required Permits prevent and assist with the suppression of forest fires and cooperate with authorized forestry officials .
Pursuant to State law the sale of harvested forest products must be reported to the Maine Forest Service at the end of each year .
The Contractor is hereby designated as the Departments agent for reporting of any such harvesting .
.. Materials and Items Found On the Project With the Departments approval the Contractor may use suitable excavated Material in the Work and be paid for both the excavation and the placement of such Materials at the corresponding Contract Unit Prices .
Except for Material used for riprap stone ditch protection and loam the Contractor shall replace such excavated Material with other approved Material and properly compact it at no cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall obtain written permission from the Department before performing any excavation outside the Project Limits .
Unless expressly provided otherwise the Contractor shall remove and assume Ownership of all incidental Structures and Materials to be removed such as guardrail Drainage pipe Culverts curbing Bridges and other manufactured Materials .
Utility Facilities traffic control devices and lights together with all supporting Structures are excluded from the provisions of this Section The cost of removal of such Structures and Materials is Incidental to the Contract unless expressly provided otherwise .
..
Interpretation and Interpolation The Contractor is responsible for all interpretations and interpolations made from information provided in the Bid Documents and Contract including data and test results related to location survey hydrology hydraulics soils ledge quality existing Structures Environmental Information and Geotechnical Information .
For related provisions see Sections .
Examination of Documents Site and Other Information ..
Bidders Duty To Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered .. Duty to Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered and .
Construction Surveying. . Communication and Coordination .. Partnering A .
Definition Purpose and Applicability Partnering is a process of voluntary structured communication between the Department the Contractor its principal Subcontractors and suppliers and other Project stakeholders for the purpose of improving efficiency and minimizing Disputes .
Partnering including the establishment of a partnership charter does not in any way waive alter or otherwise affect any provision of the Contract .
For a related provision see Section ..
Relationship to Partnering .
Participation in Partnering is voluntary either party may elect to not participate in Partnering for any reason .
The associated costs of Partnering will be agreed to mutually and shared equally .
B .
Initial Partnering Workshop If the Contractor and the Department elect to participate in Partnering representatives of both parties will arrange a facilitated initial Partnering Workshop which should be held before the start of onsite construction .
The Project Manager andor the Resident and the Superintendent will determine Workshop attendees the facilitator agenda duration and location .
Key Project level supervisory personnel corporateState level management personnel and key Project personnel of the Contractors principal Subcontractors and suppliers should attend .
Project design Engineers FHWA local government representatives environmental regulators emergency service personnel Utility Companies impacted business andor landowners and other stakeholders may also be invited to attend .
The product of the initial Partnering Workshop will be a partnership charter .
This charter will include mutually agreed upon Project goals and communication escalation procedures .
C. FollowUp Workshops The Contractor and the Department may agree to hold follow up Partnering Workshops periodically throughout the duration of the Contract .
.. Preconstruction Conference After the Contract has been executed and before the start of onsite construction by the Contractor the Project Manager andor the Resident will schedule a preconstruction conference that must be attended by the Superintendent .
Others may be invited to attend including Subcontractors FHWA local government representatives environmental regulators public relations firms emergency service personnel Utility Companies municipal officials impacted business representatives andor landowners or other Project stakeholders .
The agenda of the preconstruction conference may include the following .
A .
Bid Amendments B .
Project Specific Permit Requirements C. Special Provisions D. Review of Plans and Notes on Plans E. PreConstruction Submittals Bonds .. .. Insurance Certificates .. . Safety Program Information ..
Emergency Contact List .. Traffic Control Plan if required Certification of Installation of Initial Traffic Controls if required Schedule of Work ..
Projected Payment Schedule ..
Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Plan Certification of Installation of Initial Erosion Controls Subcontractors List and Certifications .. Quality Control Plan .
OntheJob Training letter of Intent Site Specific Safety Plan ..
Working Drawings Submittal Schedule Survey Layout Plan F. Utility Coordination .. G. Bridge Restriction Notification if required .. H. Wage Rates ..
I. DBE Requirements Reporting .. E J .
Communications Outstanding Contractor request for information RFIs if any ..
Anticipated issues Disputes or claims if any ..
The Project Manager or the Resident will prepare minutes of the preconstruction conference and distribute them to all attendees .
Any requests to revise the minutes must be made to the preparer within Days of Receipt .
These minutes will constitute the final record of the meeting .
For related provisions see Sections .. A Preconstruction Utility Conference Implementation of Traffic Control Plan Preconstruction Field Review if required ..
Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Preconstruction Field Review and .
Quality Control .
.. Progress Meetings Except as provided otherwise in this Section .. Progress Meetings shall be held at regular intervals but at least monthly throughout the duration of the Contract .
The Resident and the Superintendent will cochair Progress Meetings .
All personnel of the Department and the Contractor who have significant information relevant to agenda items shall attend .
Others may be invited to attend including Subcontractors FHWA municipal officials environmental regulators emergency service personnel Utility Companies impacted landowners impacted business representatives public relations firms or other Project stakeholders .
The CoChairs shall agree upon the Agenda for each Progress Meeting which may include A Progress of Project since the last Progress Meeting B Expected activities before the next Progress Meeting C Contractors Schedule of Work D Progress Payments E Field observations F Project control logs G Anticipated Traffic Delays or Related Issues H Working Drawing Submittals I Updates to PreConstruction Submittals if any J Contract Modifications RFIs correspondence if any K Material deliveries L Safety Issues M Utilities N Issues Disputes claims and resolutions if any The Resident will prepare minutes of these meetings and distribute them to all attendees .
Any requests to revise the minutes must be made to the Resident within Days of Receipt .
These minutes will constitute the final record of the Progress Meeting .
In lieu of a Progress Meeting the Resident and the Superintendent may exchange written communication letter fax or email before or on the scheduled Progress Meeting date that indicates there is no need for the meeting because the Work is on schedule compensation is current communication is ongoing and there are no significant outstanding or anticipated issues Disputes or claims .
The Superintendents written communication shall also contain a description of A progress of the Project since the last Progress Meeting or communication in lieu thereof and B expected activities before the next scheduled Progress Meeting .
.. Requests for Information Either the Department or the Contractor may request that the other party provide information that the requesting party needs to fulfill its Contract obligations by Delivering a written Request for Information RFI .
The Department may require that RFIs be on forms and media approved by the Department .
The request must A be of reasonable scope B explain why such information is necessary to fulfill Contract obligations and C provide a requested response time which must be reasonable in relation to its scope at least hours .
The party receiving an RFI shall use its best effort to respond to the RFI within the time requested .
The response shall be in writing .
The status of outstanding RFIs shall be discussed at each Progress Meeting .
..
Early Negotiation A .
Notice Required When the Contractor becomes aware of facts or circumstances that may cause the Contractor to seek additional compensation time or any other change in Contract requirements Issue then the Contractor shall notify the Resident within hours and before commencing any part of the Work relating to the Issue .
The notice must describe the basic nature and extent of the Issue .
Such notice may be verbal only if confirmed in writing in one of the two following ways A if a Progress Meeting is held within Days of the date that the Issue became known such Notice may be confirmed with an entry in the Progress Meeting minutes .
Such entry must describe the basic nature and extent of the Issue .
B Otherwise the Contractor shall confirm a verbal notice by Delivering to the Resident within Days of the date the Issue arose a written Notice that describes the basic nature and extent of the Issue .
The written notice or confirmation will be known as a Notice of Issue for Consideration .
The Contractor will not be entitled to any additional compensation time or any other change to Contract requirements without a timely Notice of Issue for Consideration .
B .
Negotiation When the Resident receives the Notice of an Issue for Consideration Conforming to Section .. A Notice Required the Resident and the Contractor will negotiate to attempt to resolve the Issue .
Any resolution will be noted in the Progress Meeting minutes or confirmed otherwise in writing by the Department .
Any changes to the Contract that affect compensation time quality or other Contract requirements shall be by written Contract Modification as provided by Section .
Contract Modifications .
For related provisions see Sections .
Adjustments for Delay and .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time .
C. Additional Consideration If negotiation fails to resolve the Issue within Days of the date the Resident receives the Notice of Issue for Consideration and if the Contractor desires additional consideration by the Department then the Contractor must comply with Section .
Detailed Notice of Dispute and all other requirements of Section Resolution of Disputes .
.. Utility Coordination A. Preconstruction Utility Conference A preconstruction utility meeting will be held to coordinate the Work of the Contractor and the Work of affected Utility Companies .
Usually this meeting will be held on the same day as and immediately before the preconstruction conference provided by Section .. Preconstruction Conference but in any event will be held before the start of onsite construction by the Contractor that affects Utility Facilities .
The Departments utility coordinator for the Project the Project Manager the Resident the Contractors Superintendent and a representative of each affected Utility Company will attend .
The Departments Utility Coordinator will prepare minutes of the pre construction utility meeting and distribute them to all attendees .
Any requests to revise the minutes must be made to the Departments Utility Coordinator within Days of distribution .
These minutes will constitute the final record of the meeting .
For a related provision see Section .. Preconstruction Conferences .
B .
Utilities Within RightofWay Except as provided otherwise in the Contract including subsection E Temporary Relocations below all Utility Facilities of all Utility Companies within the RightofWay will be relocated and adjusted as provided in the Contract by and at the expense of the affected Utility Company provided however that the Contractor is responsible for scheduling its Work in accordance with the time allowed for utility relocation as provided in the Contract .
Utility relocation Work may not proceed without authorization from the Department .
C. Contractors Responsibilities Utility Coordination The Contractor has primary responsibility for coordinating their work with utilities after contract award .
The Contractor shall communicate directly with the utilities regarding any utility work necessary to maintain the Contractors schedule and prevent project construction delays .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident of any issues .
The contractor shall plan and conduct their work accordingly .
The Contractor must exercise every reasonable precaution to prevent damage to Utility Facilities or interruption to utility services known to or discovered by the Contractor whether or not shown on the Plans .
Such precautions must include notice to Utility Companies before undertaking Work that could damage Utility Facilities .
The Contractor must provide each Utility Company with notice at least three Business Days before the date a Utility Company will have to support any pole .
The Contractor must take all reasonable precautions to determine the presence of underground Utility Facilities before commencing any excavation Work and must provide all affected Utility Companies with at least hour prior notice of the proposed excavation .
The Contractor must comply with MRSA A entitled Protection of Underground Facilities Maines Dig Safe statute and also contact the nonmember underground facility operators in the Maine Public Utilities Commissions OKTO DIG directory .
The Contractor must maintain initial markings spray paint stakes etc .
made by the authorized representative of a Utility Company to indicate the location of underground Utility Facilities and otherwise comply with MRSA A .
The Contractor must cooperate with Utility Companies in their relocation or operations so that these operations proceed in a logical sequence minimize duplication of Work and avoid unnecessary interruptions to utility service .
If utility services are interrupted as a result of the Contractors Work the Contractor must Promptly notify the appropriate Utility Company and must cooperate fully in the restoration of service .
If service is interrupted repair Work will be continuous until the service is restored .
No Work can be undertaken around fire hydrants until the local fire authority has approved provisions for continued services .
The Contractor must schedule its Work so as to provide for all Utility Company Work and to complete the Work within the Contract Time .
The estimated number of workdays required by each Utility Company to perform its relocation Work contained in the Contract is provided by the Utility Companies and are estimates only .
Such Utility Facility relocation times assume normal Working times Monday through Friday hours per day and are dependent upon normal weather normal Working conditions and freedom from emergencies .
The Department is not responsible for the accuracy of these estimates .
If a Utility Company fails to perform its Work within the time frames set forth in the Contract or in the minutes of the preconstruction utility conference and such failure impacts the Contractors Critical Path the Contractor may request a suspension of Work pursuant to Section .. and such Delay will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
Any clearing and tree removal that is a part of the Contract and that must be done in areas where Utility Companies are involved must be completed by the Contractor before the Utility Company can relocate its Utility Facilities .
Any clearing cutting of single trees or limbing required for the temporary or permanent Utility Facility location must be approved by the Department .
The Contractor must provide the Department with notice of at least Days before removing or trimming any trees or other vegetation .
If blasting occurs on the Project the Contractor must provide each Utility Company having Utility Facilities that could be damaged by the blast with at least hour prior notice that includes the anticipated time of the initial blast .
If the Contractor actually observes a Utility Company Working within the Project Limits in a manner that a obviously violates the MUTCD the Contractors Traffic Control Plan or an applicable OSHA requirement or commonly accepted safety practices and b represents a clear and immediate risk of significant bodily injury to any person within the Project Limits then the Contractor must notify the Resident and the Utility Company immediately .
The Contractor agrees to indemnify defend and hold harmless the Department from and against any and all claims or causes of action arising from any act or omission of the Contractor the Subcontractors or their respective agents representatives or employees for failure to comply with this Section D. Temporary Relocations The Contractor may request temporary changes of location of Utility Facilities for the Contractors convenience .
The Contractor must satisfy the Department that the proposed temporary change will not interfere with the Work the Work of Utility Companies or the Work of other Contractors and will not impede the free and safe flow of traffic .
If acceptable to the Department the Contractor may make its own request to the Utility Company or other party affected by such temporary changes .
The expense and risk of temporary changes will be borne solely by the Contractor no changes to compensation or time will be made .
E. Unforeseeable Utility Relocations The Department may order utility adjustments in accordance with Section .
Differing Site Conditions .
F. Cost The cost of all Work related to utility coordination is Incidental to the Contract .
.. Cooperation With Other Contractors The Department reserves the right to Contract for perform or allow other Work to be performed within or near the Project Limits .
The Contractor must take all reasonable steps to avoid interfering or hindering such other Work .
The Contractor must cooperate with Contractors or others performing such other Work as directed by the Department .
If the basic nature and scope of such other Work is provided or referenced in the Bid Documents or is otherwise known or foreseeable to the Contractor then the Contractor assumes all risks and liability associated with such other Work and shall indemnify and hold harmless the Department from all claims related to such other Work that arise from the Contractors acts or omissions .
..
Coordination with Railroads The Contractor shall A perform Work within a railroad RightofWay without interfering with trains or railroad company traffic and B coordinate all Work crews and the Contractors Schedule of Work to accommodate the railroad company Work .
If the Bid Documents clearly show that Materials must be hauled across railroad tracks the Department will make preliminary arrangements with the railroad to permit such hauling .
The Contractor shall at its expense negotiate and enter into any other Agreements with the railroad .
Special Provision will provide any additional conditions or requirements regarding railroad coordination .
..
Coordination with Marine Traffic The Contractor shall not interfere with free and safe navigation of navigable waters except as provided by permit issued by the US Coast Guard and other applicable regulatory agencies .
All Work must comply with all US Coast Guard permit conditions and all applicable Federal regulations affecting navigation .
When the basic nature and scope of marine traffic requirements is provided or referenced in the Bid Documents or is otherwise known or foreseeable to the Contractor then the Contractor assumes all risks and liability associated with said requirements and the Contractor shall indemnify and hold harmless the Department from all claims related to the maintenance or obstruction of marine traffic that arise from the Contractors acts or omissions .
..
Coordination of Road ClosureBridge ClosureBridge Width Restriction Notification When a road closure bridge closure or width restriction is allowed by the Contract prior to a closure or a width restriction to a single lane less than ft. the Contractor shall notify effected public officials agencies other entities and the public of the date on which the closurewidth restriction will begin and the anticipated duration of the closurerestriction as indicated below .
The closure shall be announced on a minimum of two portablechangeable message signs placed in approved locations beginning at least days prior to the closure .
A public notice shall also be published in a local newspaper ten days prior to the closure .
Advance warning signs shall be placed so the traveling public is aware of the restrictions in place .
They shall be placed at enough distance from the restriction so vehicular traffic can be rerouted to an alternate route .
The advance warning signs shall include at least the following requirements RouteBridge impacted pictorial width restrictions dates and times and shall be submitted for approval with the traffic control plan The Contractor shall notify the following public officials agencies and organizations ten days prior to and then again the day before of the date of the beginning of the closurerestriction and the anticipated length of the closurerestriction .
When the bridge is reopenedunrestricted to traffic the following list will again be notified .
The Contractor shall provide the Department with documentation that the listed public officials agencies and organizations received the notification at least days prior to the closurerestriction or with proof that the notification was mailed days prior to the closurerestriction .
Town Officials Manager or First Selectperson County Commissioners If Unorganized Townships County Sheriffs Department Fire Department Police Department State Police Rescue Service School Department Post Office Chamber of Commerce Any Large Employers Mobile Home Movers Manufacturers and Dealers Department of Motor Vehicle Commercial Vehicle Center Maine DOT Maintenance Region Office All newspaper notices radio announcements and any notifications will be subject to the approval of the Resident and all costs will be considered incidental to the Contract. . Subcontracting .. Limits on Subcontracting The Contractor shall perform at least of the value of the Work with its own Work force excluding any specialty items as designated in the contract documents by the Department .
The Contractor shall not carry the Workers of another recognized Contractor or firm on its payroll or a Subcontractors payroll .
The Contractor shall not use any Subcontractors that are debarred from Bidding by the Federal Government or any agency of the State of Maine .
..
Contractors Duties Regarding Subcontractors Subcontractors are solely the responsibility of the Contractor .
The Contractor is responsible for assuring that its Subcontractors have sufficient skill and experience to perform the Work properly and for coordinating and managing its Subcontractors to achieve the intent of the Contract .
The Contractor agrees to indemnify defend and hold harmless the Department from and against all claims and causes of action arising out of any act or omission of Subcontractors their agents representatives and employees .
The Contractor agrees to indemnify the Department and hold the Department harmless from any claims asserted by its Subcontractors including any claims to recover losses allegedly suffered by a Subcontractor .
Subcontracting does not alter or diminish the Contractors obligations under the Contract .
For a related provision see Section .
Intent of the Contract .
..
Documentation Regarding Subcontracting Before any Work is performed by a Subcontractor the Contractor shall provide the Department a Subcontract approval package .
A list of all Subcontractors that the Contractor anticipates will be providing Work within the Project Limits The Contractor shall continuously update the Subcontractor information and provide it to the Department throughout the duration of the Project .
If requested by the Department the Contractor shall provide the Department with copies of any subcontract or other document that establishes the relationship of the Contractor and any Subcontractors .
..
Discharge of Subcontractors The Department upon written notice to the Contractor may require that the Contractor discharge any Subcontractor without cost or liability to the Department .
If the Department determines that a Subcontractors performance jeopardizes the intent of the Contract otherwise the Department may but is not required to notify the Contractor of such a determination .
Such notice or lack thereof does not affect the Contractors duties regarding Subcontractors .
Upon Receipt of such notice the Contractor shall take any action it determines is necessary to fulfill its obligations under the Contract .
For related provisions see Sections .. Workers and Equipment ..
Contractors Duties Regarding Subcontractors .
Intent of the Contract and .
Health and Safety .
..
Prompt Payment of Subcontractors A .
Pay When Paid The Contractor shall pay Subcontractors in full for all Work satisfactorily performed and Invoiced by the Subcontractor no later than Days from the date the Contractor receives payment from the Department for such Subcontractors Work .
Contractor will insure that its Subcontractors pay all SubSubcontractors including suppliers and material men no later than days from the date that they receive payment from the Contractor .
B. Retainage The Contractor shall return to the Subcontractor all retainage withheld from the Subcontractor within Days after the date the Subcontractors Work is satisfactorily completed .
If there is a Delay in such return of retainage the Subcontractor may pursue all rights it may have under the claims procedure referenced in Section .. Subcontractor Claims for Payment .
.. Subcontractor Claims for Payment The Contractor agrees to notify all Subcontractors of the claim filing procedure of Payment and Performance bonds required by The Department may use retainage and other remaining project funds to pay outstanding claims for Accepted Work .
.. Flow Down All subcontracts of the Contractor and all lower tier subcontracts shall contain or reference all applicable provisions of the Contract including all safety wage Prompt payment labor environmental and equal opportunity provisions .
The Contractor indemnifies and hold harmless the Department against any and all claims or liabilities arising from the failure to include such flow down provisions and agrees that any such claims and liabilities may be paid by the Department using retainage on other Project funds .
.. No Third Party Beneficiaries The Contractor and the Department agree that this Contract is not intended to create any thirdparty beneficiaries or to authorize anyone not a party to the Contract to maintain an action under Contract provisions .
.. Warranty and Maintenance Bonds Warranty and Maintenance Bonds may be required of the Contractor or the subcontractor for specified items that the Department deems appropriate .
Specific requirements will be given via Special Provision .
These bonds may be for specified items in the Contract Schedule of Items .
The Bond must name the TreasurerState of Maine as an oblige .
The Contractor shall provide a copy of said bond to the Department before the performance of any affected onsite Work .
Should the subcontractor be required by special provision to provide a Warranty or Maintenance Bond the Contractor hereby authorizes the Department to directly contact Landscape Subcontractor andor its Surety in the event of a failure of the bonded item to perform as specified .
SECTION GENERAL SCOPE OF WORK Scope of Section This Section contains Work requirements that are generally within the scope of all Projects .
These include provisions related to health and safety traffic control maintenance of Work hauling of Materials and Equipment construction surveying Working Drawings the environment historic and archeological considerations equal opportunity and civil rights and other federal requirements .
This Section is not allinclusive .
The scope of these items is often described more specifically and fully elsewhere in the Contract and in other specific items that appear elsewhere .
This Contract is federally funded unless expressly provided otherwise in the Bid Documents .
As a federally funded Contract it includes all federal requirements set forth in the Bid Book . .
Intent of the Contract The intent of the Contract is to provide for the construction and Completion of a functionally complete Project in Conformity with the Contract .
The Contractor shall furnish all Work to achieve this intent including all Work that may be reasonably inferred to be required from the Contract or from prevailing industry or trade custom whether or not specifically called for. . Health and Safety .. Safety Responsibility The Contractor has the overall authority and responsibility to maintain safety of their employees and of all other persons in the work area or on the worksite .
The Contractor shall provide all safeguards safety devices and protective Equipment and take all other action that is necessary to continuously and effectively protect the safety and health of all persons from hazards related to the Work .
Such safeguards include providing a sufficient number of security guards .
.. Health and Safety Plan A copy of the Contractors Health and Safety Plan must be on file with the Contracts Section of the Department as a condition of Prequalification to be awarded a Construction Contract .
A copy of the Safety Plan will be provided to the Departments Contracts Section in an electronic media format prior to Contract award .
The Contractor shall designate which portions such submissions it considers confidential business information .
If such program is revised during the Contract Time the Contractor shall provide the updated program to the Department .
The Contractor shall comply with its safety program and this Section .
Health and Safety .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all claims or damages arising from failure to so comply and indemnifies and holds harmless the Department from all claims and damages arising from such noncompliance .
.. Project Specific Emergency Planning Unless the Contract provides for closure of an existing facility the Contractor shall ensure that essential police fire rescue and ambulance services have reasonable and timely access to and through the Project Limits .
The Contractor shall contact all emergency service providers in the area discuss potential impacts on emergency operations including water supply for fire suppression and minimize any negative impacts .
Fire hydrants within or adjacent to the Project Limits shall be kept accessible to fire apparatus at all times unless the fire department agrees otherwise in writing .
For a related provision see Section .. Forest Protection and Laws .
If the nature of the Work involves deep trenching confined spaces toxic chemicals or any other unusual hazards that could require specialized rescue the Contractor shall inform and cooperate with the appropriate fire department rescue service or EMS .
The Contractor shall provide the Resident with and post and maintain in conspicuous places within the Project Limits a list containing A emergency response numbers with the names and telephone numbers including cellular phone and pager numbers if applicable of local ambulance police fire rescue and hospitals B emergency response numbers for hazardous Materials spills as required by Section .. f Spill Prevention C the Contractors personnel with phone numbers who may be reached in case of emergency and D the Departments personnel with phone numbers who may be reached in case of emergency .
..
Unsafe Conditions The Contractor will immediately eliminate all unsafe conditions brought to the Contractors attention by the Department Resident or any other Department staff .
If the Contractor or the Department actually observes any persons performing Work in a manner that A the observing party actually knows is not in compliance with the MUTCD the Contractors TCP an applicable OSHA requirement or commonly accepted safety practices and B creates a clear and immediate risk of significant bodily injury to any person then the observing party shall immediately notify such persons Working in an unsafe manner and the other party to the Contract .
The Contractor and the Department agree to cooperate in eliminating all such unsafe conditions .
For related provisions see Sections .. Workers and Equipment .. Utility Coordination .
Traffic Control and Management and .
Maintenance of Work .
..
Compliance with Health and Safety Laws The Contractor has the authority and responsibility to ensure compliance with all applicable federal State and local laws governing safety health and sanitation including all applicable laws and regulations of OSHA .
The Contractor shall comply with these laws and regulations and ensure compliance by its subcontractors .
The Contractor is responsible for correcting any health and safety violations .
For related provisions see Sections .. Joint Duty Regarding Safety .
Traffic Control and Management and .
Maintenance of Work .
..
Convenience of the Public At all times the Contractor shall perform the Work to minimize obstructions to pedestrian vehicular railroad and marine traffic .
All temporary and permanent pedestrian access ways must comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act ADA .
Footways gutters sewers inlets and portions of the Highway adjacent to the Work must not be obstructed unless allowed by the Contract .
If the Contractor receives notice from the Department that the Contractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this Section .
Health and Safety the Contractor shall remedy such noncompliance immediately .
If the Contractor fails to do so the Department may remedy such noncompliance by any means and deduct the cost of the remedy from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
.. Use of Explosives A .
Standards When using explosives the Contractor shall use the utmost care to protect life and property .
Explosives must be transported stored and used in compliance with this Contract in compliance with all applicable federal State and local laws rules and regulations and in accordance with all applicable provisions of the latest version of the Blasters Handbook published by the International Society of Explosives Engineers ISEE of Cleveland Ohio .
In any case the Contractor shall comply with the recommendations contained in Chapter Blasting Safety of said Blasters Handbook unless a qualified person conducting the blasting operations for the Contractor certifies to the Department in writing that certain provisions of said Chapter are not necessary to protect life and property .
B. Blasting Zone Signage and Flaggers The Contractor shall define a blasting zone .
When using electric detonators the blasting zone must allow safe distances from radio transmitters based upon their power output frequency .
The blasting zone must include all areas within which people could be injured or property could be damaged by the blast .
The Contractor shall mark Highways conspicuously at the perimeter of the blasting zone with signs in accordance with MUTCD .
If applicable the Contractor shall place signage along railroads and appropriate notice shall be provided to marine traffic .
The Contractor shall provide a sufficient number of flaggers stationed outside the blasting zone to stop all approaching traffic during blasting operations .
C. Other Requirements The Contractor shall provide to the Department general liability insurance coverage covering use of explosives in accordance with Section .. Commercial General Liability .
Immediately after the blast the Contractor shall remove any debris that is obstructing Highway pedestrian railroad or marine traffic flow .
For related provisions see Sections .. C Blasting Notice .. Responsibility for Property of Others and .
Indemnification .
See related Spec . . Traffic Control and Management The Contractor shall provide continuous and effective traffic control in compliance with Section Maintenance of Traffic .
..
Notices Required The Contractor shall plan paving operations so that the Resident will have sufficient advance notification to provide the necessary inspection and testing .
Sufficient notification will be considered hours .
In the event that paving is suspended the hour notification shall be required again before restarting the paving operations unless otherwise agreed by the Resident .
A verbal warning will be given before starting the offense process for paving notification .
The Contractor shall plan granular material operations so that the Resident will have sufficient advance notification to provide a proctor for the material to be placed .
Sufficient notification will be considered days .
Changes in source will also require this notification .
Failure to provide the above notifications will result in the following actions First offense written warning Second and subsequent liquidated damages will be charged for one calendar day .
Maintenance of Work ..
Maintenance During Construction The Contractor shall maintain the Project and all related Work in a safe and satisfactory condition until Final Acceptance .
Such maintenance requires continuous and effective Work conducted daily .
Trenches Where existing pavement carries traffic and is removed the pavement shall be replaced daily with a temporary pavement consisting of a minimum of three inches of acceptable hot or cold bituminous mixture .
Cold bituminous mixture shall contain aggregates asphalt cutbacks liquefiers and wetting agents .
No separate payment will be made for furnishing placing maintaining and removing temporary pavement and all cost of such work will be considered incidental to the contract .
Before placing any permanent pavement over backfilled trenches the edge of the adjoining existing pavement shall be cut even and vertical and coated with tack coat to form a tight joint between the new and the existing pavements .
The permanent pavement depth and type HMA or PCC will match the existing roadway structure .
No separate payment will be made for cutting and tack coating the joint .
If the Contractor fails to meet the conditions of Section .. the Department will notify the Contractor of such failure .
The Contractor shall remedy such failure within hours after receiving such notice .
If the Contractor fails to do so this may be considered a traffic control violation in accordance with Section and the Department may remedy the situation with its own or Contracted forces without liability to the Department and all costs will be deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
When the Contract involves placing material on or use of previously constructed subgrade base course pavement or structure the Contractor shall maintain such previously constructed Work in a safe and satisfactory condition until Final Acceptance .
Except as expressly provided otherwise in the Contract the cost of complying with this Section .. is Incidental to the Contract .
.. Use of Granular Materials The Department may authorize and pay for granular Materials that are capable of supporting traffic and necessary to maintain the specified traffic Lane widths upon the following conditions .
A .
The Contractor must prepare the area where the granular Materials are to be used by eliminating objectionable Material and providing adequate temporary Drainage before the granular Material is placed .
B .
Quantities of granular Materials will be determined by the most appropriate method of measurement that applies at the time the Material is placed and that is in accordance with the Specifications for the particular type of granular Material authorized for use .
For a related provision see Section .
Measurement of Quantities for Payment .
C. Payment for granular Material will be made at the Unit Price for the Material authorized for use .
D. Payment as Common Excavation will be made when Material for maintenance of traffic is removed .
..
Maintenance During Winter Construction Except as provided in the following paragraph when the Contractor performs Work during winter weather conditions the Contractor shall plow snow from the portions of a Project that carry vehicular or pedestrian traffic including all Bridges and Sidewalks so as to allow the free and safe flow of such traffic .
The State or local governmental agency that would otherwise be responsible for winter maintenance will sand and salt such portions of a Project .
On such portions of a Project that A have been untouched or left by the Contractor in a suitable condition to carry traffic as determined by the Department and B are unaffected by the construction operations the State or local governmental agency responsible for winter maintenance will plow sand and salt .
..
Maintenance During Suspension of Work A .
Work Responsibilities Prior to suspension the Contractor must make the Project suitable for the free and safe flow of traffic as determined by the Department including covering or removal of signs .
To provide space for snow removal all areas to be used by traffic must be clear for the entire usable Roadway including Shoulders or curbtocurb including Sidewalks .
During an approved suspension the Department will maintain the temporary Roads and Project sections by plowing snow controlling ice and patching or retreating the surface .
During suspension the Contractor must take precautions necessary to prevent damage to the Work and to allow the Department to provide such maintenance such precautions include providing Drainage and erecting any necessary Structures signs or other facilities maintain all temporary Structures and traffic control devices and continuously maintain in an acceptable growing condition all living plant Material including newly established seedings and soddings furnished under the Contract and take precautions to protect vegetative growth from damage .
After suspension the Contractor must clean up all evidence of the snow and ice control at its expense including removing excess sand and debris from the Roadway and replacing all base or subbase Material that was lost as a result of maintenance activity .
If a Work suspension is not approved the Contractor will remain responsible for maintaining the Project including plowing snow controlling ice and patching or retreating the surface .
B .
Cost Responsibility All costs related to suspending and resuming Work related to approved suspensions will be considered incidental to the contract .
For related provisions see Sections ..
Right to Suspend Work and .
Suspension of Work .
.. Special Detours When the Contract contains a Pay Item for Special Detours in order for an existing Bridge or Minor Span to be replaced with a new structure the Department will maintain the existing structure and the portions of the approaches that lie outside the Special Detour until either the Special Detour is opened to traffic or the Contractor begins any work on the existing structure including but not limited to repairs modifications demolition or removal .
Once the Special Detour is opened to traffic or the Contractor begins any work on the existing structure whichever occurs first the Contractor shall be solely responsible for all maintenance of the existing structure and the portions of the approaches that lie outside the Special Detour .
This specification is not intended to supersede Standard Specification Section .. Responsibility for Property of Others. . Hauling of Materials and Equipment .. General Requirements Except as provided otherwise and limited in this Contract the Contractor may use any public Road or Bridge for the hauling of Materials and Equipment in legally registered vehicles that are carrying legal loads and operating otherwise in accordance with all applicable State or federal laws .
If the Contractor violates such laws or the terms of this Contract relating to hauling the Contractor shall at its expense repair damage to any Road or Bridge that the Department determines was caused by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the governmental entity that maintains the Road or Bridge .
The Contractor must abate any dust nuisances caused by such hauling .
For a related provision see Section Dust Control and Section Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control .
..
Bond for Use of Municipal Roads If the Contractor wants to use Roads maintained by a municipality for hauling the municipality may require the Contractor to purchase a bond for each mile of traveled length .
The face value for such bond shall not exceed mile .
The cost of said bond shall be Incidental to the Contract .
.. Posted Roads or Bridges The Contractor must comply with all restrictions set forth pursuant to A MRSA including springtime posting of load restrictions .
An overlimit movement permit pursuant to A MRSA will not relieve the Contractor of its obligation to repair damage to such posted Roads or Bridges .
For a related provision see Section ..
Furnishing of Other Property Rights Licenses and Permits .
..
Narrow Roads The Contractor shall not haul on Roads having a bituminous surface width of less than feet unless there is no practical alternative .
.. Overlimit Loads A .
Within Project Limits Within the Project Limits the Contractor shall not haul over the base courses surface course or accepted subgrades with loads that exceed legal limits except for Equipment used in grading operations including the preparation of the subgrade .
B .
Outside Project Limits Outside the Project Limits the Contractor must comply with A MRSA Overlimit Movement Permits before moving vehicles or hauling loads in excess of legal limits .
The Contractor is responsible for all damage caused by the movement of loads in excess of legal limits whether under permit or not .
..
Restrictions on Movement and Storage of Heavy Loads and Equipment on Bridges The Contractor shall comply with legal load restrictions and with special restrictions required by the Contract when hauling or storing materials including demolition debris and moving or storing equipment on Bridges within the Project Limits that are under construction or completed but not yet open to traffic .
The Contractor shall not operate equipment mounted on crawler tracks or steeltired wheels on or across concrete or bituminous surfaces unless otherwise approved by the Resident .
The Contract requirements may impose special restrictions on speed load distribution surface protection or other precautions .
When construction operations require crossing an existing Bridge with otherwise prohibited equipment or loads the Contractor shall use Department approved methods of load distribution or bridging at no additional cost to the Department .
The Contractor will not be relieved of liability of damages resulting from the operation and movement of construction equipment because of issuance of a special permit or by adherence to any other restrictions imposed .
Unless otherwise allowed by the Contract or approved by the Department the Contractor shall temporarily store construction materials including demolition debris or park equipment on a Bridge deck during construction in accordance with the following limits which have been established to reflect typical design live loads A .
Stockpiles shall not weigh more than pounds per square feet B .
Individual stockpiles of materials including pallets of products reinforcing steel bundles and aggregate stockpiles shall not weigh more than pounds per square feet or C. No single vehicle or piece of equipment shall weigh more than pounds and no combination of vehicles materials and other equipment shall weigh more than pounds per span for span lengths greater than feet .
The Contractor may submit alternate loadings with calculations stamped by a licensed Professional Engineer within Days prior to placement of the loads. . Construction Surveying .. Department Provided Services The Department will provide the Contractor with the descriptions and coordinates of a sufficient number of vertical and horizontal control points set by the Department throughout the Project for full construction Projects and other Projects where survey control is necessary .
For Projects of feet in length or less the Department will provide a minimum of three points .
For Projects between and feet in length the Department will provide a minimum of five points .
For Projects in excess of feet in length the Department will provide at a minimum one set of two points at each end of the Project plus one additional set of two points for each mile of Project length .
For nonfull construction Projects and other Projects where survey control is not necessary the Department will not set any control points and therefore will not provide descriptions and coordinates of any control points .
Upon request the Department will provide its Survey Manual to the Contractor or their survey Subcontractor .
..
Contractor Provided Services Using the survey information and points provided by the Department described in Subsection .. Department Provided Services the Contractor shall provide all additional survey layout necessary to complete the Work .
This may include but not be limited to reestablishing all points provided by the Department establishing additional control points running axis lines providing layout and maintenance of all other lines grades or points and survey quality control to ensure conformance with the Contract .
The Contractor is also responsible for providing construction centerline or close reference points for all Utility Facilities relocations and adjustments as necessary to complete the Work .
When the Work is to connect with existing Structures the Contractor shall verify all dimensions before proceeding with the Work .
The Contractor shall employ or retain competent engineering and or surveying personnel to fulfill these responsibilities .
The Contractor must notify the Department of any errors or inconsistencies regarding the data and layout provided by the Department as provided by Section .. Duty to Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered .
Survey Quality Control and Construction Layout The Contractor is responsible for all construction survey quality control .
Construction survey quality control is generally defined as first performing initial field survey layout of the Work and second performing an independent check of the initial layout using independent survey data to assure the accuracy of the initial layout additional iterations of checks may be required if significant discrepancies are discovered in this process .
Construction survey layout quality control also requires written documentation of the layout process such that the process can be followed and repeated if necessary by an independent survey crew .
Electronic Design Data and Digital Terrain Model DTM If provided by the Department at the request of the Contractor any electronic project design data will not be deemed a part of the contract and is supplied as a courtesy by the Department .
The Contractor shall not take advantage of any ambiguity or error contained in said data and upon discovery of any ambiguity or error shall notify the Department before proceeding .
The Contractor may convert any electronic data provided by the Department into a format required by the Contractors system and equipment at the Contractors expense .
Any Digital Terrain Model DTM to be used for construction shall be submitted to the Department in InRoads DTM or LandXML format at least days prior to the preconstruction meeting any other format shall be preapproved by the Department prior to submittal .
No changes shall be made to the electronic model after submittal without prior written consent by the Project Resident .
The Department will review and provide comments to the Contractor within days of receipt of the DTM submittal Survey Work Plan The Contractor shall provide a Survey Work Plan to the Department prior to or at the preconstruction meeting .
The Survey Work Plan shall include A .
Make and model of equipment and software used for project layout .
B .
Make and model of equipment and software used for machine guidance and control .
C. Manufacturerstated specifications for vertical and horizontal accuracy attainable by the equipment .
D. Equipment calibration procedures and date of last calibration .
E. Narrative of methodology used to establish any additional horizontal or vertical project control points .
Field notes for new vertical control shall be submitted to the Department .
F. Site Calibration Localization and control verification procedures including a timetable and tolerances .
A Site Calibration report shall be submitted to the Department including the values of calculated residuals of each point used in the calibration .
G. Type and locations of base stations to be used including methodology for establishing onsite base broadcast positions and localization procedures used for offsite bases .
H. Describe methodology used to overcome Real Time Kinematic RTK signal losses in a portion or portions of the project and methodology to ensure signals for both inspection operation areas and construction operation areas i.e .
multiple bases operating simultaneously I .
Describe procedures used to integrate vertical refinement equipment i.e .
laser including the process of determining and verifying transmitter setup location and communicating any necessary adjustments to the machine control equipment .
J .
Names and qualifications of the Contractors designated onsite surveyors or engineers responsible for performing the project layout .
K. Design software and version used to develop the Digital Terrain Model DTM .
The Department will review and provide comments to the Contractor within days of receipt of the Survey Work Plan .
Department Verification The Contractor shall furnish a Global Navigation Satellite System GNSS or Global Positioning System GPS Rover andor Robotic Total Station RTS equipment to the Department with the same capabilities as those used by the Contractor .
This equipment shall be compatible with the systems used by the Contractor and be provided to the Project Resident prior to commencing Work using electronic layout methods .
This equipment shall stay in the possession of the Department for the duration of the project and shall be returned in good condition to the Contractor upon final acceptance of the field work .
Any augmented features such as laser refinement used by the Contractor shall be included in the features available on the equipment provided to the Department .
The Contractor shall provide manufacturercertified training on the use of the GNSS GPS andor RTS equipment and the Contractors systems to Department project personnel prior to beginning any Work .
This training is for the purpose of providing Department project personnel with an understanding of the equipment software and electronic data being used by the Contractor .
Field Layout Specifications All Work accomplished through electronic layout methods andor machine control must meet the same accuracy requirements as the conventional grading construction standards detailed in the Standard Specifications .
The contractor shall not use GNSS GPS or RTS equipment for a construction activity that requires a greater precision than the machines capability as per the manufacturers recommendation .
Basis of Payment No payment shall be made by the Department for the Contractors elected use of electronic methods of project location layout and control .
Any delays arising from the operation of GNSS GPS or RTS layout or machine control systems will not result in adjustment to the bid price or quantity of any construction items or be justification for granting any type of contract extension .
Any costs incurred through incorrect use of GNSS GPS or RTS layout or machine control systems or rework necessary through their use are the sole responsibility of the Contractor .
Training of Department project personnel in the use of GNSS GPS or RTS will be paid on a reimbursable basis based on submitted invoices without Contractor markup .
.. Survey Quality Assurance It is the Departments prerogative to perform construction survey quality assurance .
Construction survey quality assurance is generally defined as an independent check of the Contractors construction survey quality control .
The construction survey quality assurance process may involve physically checking the Contractors construction survey layout using independent survey data or may simply involve reviewing the construction survey quality control written documentation .
If the Department elects to physically check the Contractors survey layout the Contractors designated surveyor may be required to be present .
The Department will provide a minimum notice of hours to the Contractor whenever possible if the Contractors designated surveyors presence is required .
Any errors discovered through the quality assurance process shall be corrected by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Department .
.. Boundary Markers The Contractor shall preserve and protect from damage all monuments or other points that mark the boundaries of the RightofWay or abutting parcels that are outside the area that must be disturbed to perform the Work .
The Contractor indemnifies and holds harmless the Department from all claims to reestablish the former location of all such monuments or points including claims arising from MRSA A .
For a related provision see Section .. Responsibility for Property of Others . .
Working Drawings .. General The Contractor shall provide all necessary Working Drawings to the Department for review .
The Contractor shall not allow final assembly or fabrication of structural units before the Department completes its review of the applicable Working Drawings and comments on them .
The Contract price shall include the cost of furnishing and revising all Working Drawings .
The Departments review of and comment on Working Drawings may be limited to basic Contract requirements relating to design compliance and Material types .
Such review shall not relieve the Contractor of responsibility under the Contract including the overall correctness of Working Drawings including Engineering and mathematical computations shop fits and field connections .
.. Review Times The Contractors Schedule of Work shall allow the Department the following review and comment times prior to the start of production .
For a related provision see Section .
Scheduling of Work .
First Submission Days or day per drawing whichever is greater .
Second Submission Days or day per drawing whichever is greater .
Each subsequent submission Days or day per drawing whichever is greater .
The above review times shall double for submittals that includes design computations .
The Department may combine separate submissions of analytically common elements of Work and require the per drawing review times set forth above when it determines that the Contractor has divided Working Drawings into separate submissions for the purpose of avoiding said per drawing review times .
Delay caused by exceeding the time periods listed above will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
..
Cost of Review The Department will review the first and second submission at no cost to the Contractor .
For subsequent submissions the Department will charge the Contractor a rate of per personhour of review .
Such costs will be deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
.. Submittal Requirements The Contractor shall indicate the order of preference for review and return of Working Drawings and organize all Drawings in the order of their importance .
The Contractor shall submit sets of Drawings or electronic copy to the Resident .
All submittals shall use the same system of units as that used in the Departments Plans .
.. Review Standards and Procedures If the first submission does not meet accepted industry standards for Working Drawings or Engineering design Drawings and Specifications as determined by the Department the entire submission will be returned without review and will be recorded as the first submission .
When resubmitted the review time requirements shall be those applicable to a first submission .
One set of reviewed Working Drawings will be marked with comments and returned to the Contractor .
The Contractor shall then revise its Working Drawings accordingly .
Except as provided otherwise in the Contract the Contractor shall furnish the Department with reproducible copies of the final Working Drawings before construction of the elements depicted in the Working Drawings. . Environmental Requirements ..
Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control The Contractor shall provide continuous and effective soil erosion and water pollution control in compliance with Section Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control .
..
Permit Requirements A .
Permits Granted To Department Permits are to be included in or incorporated by reference into the Bid Documents .
If Permits are not so included and the Contractor is aware the Work will impact a regulated resource such as water bodies or wetland the Contractor shall notify the Department before Bidding .
For a related provision see Section ..
Bidders Duty to Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered .
The Contractor is responsible for complying with all Permit conditions .
If the Contractor desires to modify or seek interpretation of any permit granted to the Department it must coordinate any such requests through the Department .
B .
All Other Permits Except as expressly provided otherwise in the Contract the Contractor at its expense shall procure all other environmental or land use Permits licenses or other permissions that are necessary or appropriate to perform the Work .
At the time of application the Contractor shall provide the Department with notice of all applications for such Permits licenses or other permissions and upon request a copy of all such applications .
For a related provision see Section ..
Furnishing of Other Property Rights Licenses and Permits .
.. Wetland and Waterbody Impacts A .
General Prohibition Except as specifically allowed by the Contract there shall be no permanent or temporary impacts to water bodies or wetlands identified on the Plans or otherwise known to the Contractor .
For a related provision see Section .. Water Pollution Control Requirements .
B. Wetlands Outside Project Limits If the Contractor desires to conduct an activity that can disturb the soil in an area that is outside the Project Limits but is contiguous or in close proximity to such Limits the area first must be examined and analyzed by a qualified wetlands specialist in order to determine whether wetlands exist and if so to delineate them .
The Contractor must notify the Department of all such examinations and analyses and the results thereof .
Wetlands so delineated must not be impacted unless properly permitted .
Any fill Material generated from this Project shall not be placed stored or disposed of in a wetland at an offsite location unless the Contractor provides the Department with written evidence that all Permits necessary for such use have been obtained .
Such evidence must be signed by the Owner of such site and otherwise acceptable to the Department .
C. Temporary Structures Temporary or permanent impacts to wetlands are prohibited without proper permitting or modification to existing Permits .
Temporary Structures in a waterbody must comply with any Contract provisions regarding Instream Work .
..
Hazardous Materials If the Contractor encounters any condition that indicates the presence of uncontrolled petroleum or hazardous Materials the Contractor shall immediately stop Work notify the Department treat any such conditions with extreme caution and secure the area of potential hazard to minimize health risks to Workers and the public and to prevent additional releases of contaminants into the environment .
Such conditions include the presence of barrels tanks unexpected odors discoloration of soil or water an oily sheen on soil or water excessively hot earth smoke or any other condition indicating uncontrolled petroleum or hazardous Materials .
The Contractor shall continue Work in other areas of the Project unless otherwise directed by the Department .
The Contractor shall utilize approved vendors and comply with all federal State and local laws concerning the handling storage treatment and disposal of uncontrolled petroleum or hazardous Material .
If the condition meets the definition of a Differing Site Condition under Section .. the Contractor may be eligible for an Equitable Adjustment .
.. Dredge Spoils Dredge Materials Unless otherwise provided in the Contract dredge spoils may not be used as fill within the Project Limits .
Any use or disposal of dredge spoils must be in accordance with all applicable federal and State laws .
..
Pit or Quarry Requirements A .
General Pits or quarries that are sources of Material for the Project including loam fields shall meet the requirements of this Section The Contractor must procure an Agreement from the Owners of such sources stating that the Owners will comply with these requirements .
If requested by the Department the Contractor will provide the Department with a copy of such Agreement .
The Contractor shall provide the Resident with the center of the source GPS coordinate pairs latitude and longitude in decimal degrees DD.DDDDDD name and town in which the source is located .
B. Excavation Requirements Surface Material stripped from the pit shall be stored to allow for restoration of the pit .
The Contractor shall not excavate from pit faces that are vertical or have an overhang .
The Contractor must stop excavating within a horizontal to vertical slope feet inside of a property line of a deposit even though the Material within the pit may have a steeper angle of repose .
The exception may be when an additional Agreement is reached with an adjacent property Owner to allow the extension of a pit onto the adjacent property Owners land .
The Contractor must insure that hazards such as steep pit faces and ponds are protected by flattening slopes or by erecting suitable fencing .
C. Rehabilitation If the pit is licensed by MDEP or LURC the Contractor shall follow the rehabilitation provisions of said license .
In the absence of such license requirements pits including loam fields shall be rehabilitated as provided below and in Section Rehabilitation of Pits .
Newly opened pits and loam fields from which any Material has been removed for the Project shall be completely rehabilitated as defined below .
Areas of extensions of existing pits from which common borrow granular borrow gravel borrow rock borrow or loam have been removed for the Project shall be completely rehabilitated .
Areas of extensions of existing pits that have become depleted as defined below by the removal of other gravel sand Aggregate items or loam for the Project shall be completely rehabilitated .
Areas of extensions of pits which have not become depleted by the removal of other gravel sand Aggregate items or loam shall be rehabilitated to the extent of grading the slopes to horizontal to vertical or flatter .
For the purposes of this Section .. the following definitions apply Completely Rehabilitated means grading all areas disturbed as a result of the MDOT Project and treating of the ground surface in accordance with Section Rehabilitation of Pits .
Depleted means when the only remaining Material is within feet of a property line on a horizontal to a vertical slope or when the character of the Material so radically changes that it can no longer be used as originally anticipated .
.. Environmental Noncompliance Remedies and Costs The Contractor shall be in noncompliance if it or Subcontractors at any tier fail to comply with the terms of this Contract or pursuant to Section .. Laws To Be Observed any applicable environmental or land use law or regulation including Project specific permit conditions .
If the Contractor is in noncompliance the Department may at its discretion A .
Withhold all Progress Payments or any portion thereof during the period the Contractor is in noncompliance B .
Remedy such noncompliance using State forces or another Contractor and deduct all costs incurred by the Department from Progress Payments .
Such costs include direct costs Project Engineering costs and Contractor costs from amounts otherwise due the Contractor andor C. Suspend the Work for cause and without cost or liability to the Department .
Said suspension shall continue until the Contractor has addressed all noncompliance issues as directed by the Department .
The Contractor shall be responsible for any fines and penalties assessed by environmental or land use regulatory agencies due to such noncompliance .
Such penalties may be withheld from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
For related provisions see Sections .
Right to Withhold Payments and ..
Amounts Due the Department . .
Historic and Archaeological Considerations Unless otherwise provided in the contract the Contractor is approved to construct the project in accordance with the contract plans .
This in accordance with Section of the National Historic Preservation Act U.S.C .
f the Regulation CFR Part and the Section Maine Programmatic Agreement .
Changes during construction that vary from the project contract plans must be approved by the Department .
These changes could have adverse effects to Historic Resources as well as jeopardize federal funding .
If the Contractor or any subcontractor discovers any object of potential historic archaeological or other historic interest all work that could disturb the object will immediately cease and will not resume until investigation of the object and related deposits have been completed and if necessary recovered .
The Contractor will notify the MaineDOT immediately .
The first indications of deposits may be burial grounds or campsites of Native Americans that reveal the bones of the dead and implements .
Also the exposure of marine fossils or shells found mainly in clay deposits as well as exposure of dumps in landfill areas abandoned campfire sites and building foundations .
Any delay of the Contractors operations resulting from the above will be analyzed in accordance with MaineDOT Standard Specification Section .
Adjustment for Delay except that in no event will such delay be a compensable delay .
The Contractor is notified of a Maine Statute MRSA which states that artifacts specimens and material which are public property by virtue of having been found on in or beneath State controlled lands and places ownership of the same in the State of Maine . .
Equal Opportunity and Civil Rights Disadvantaged Business Enterprises Program The Maine Department of Transportation MaineDOT has established a Disadvantaged Business Enterprise DBE program in accordance with regulations of the United States Department of Transportation USDOT CFR Part .
The MaineDOT receives federal financial assistance from USDOT and as a condition of receiving this assistance the Department has signed an assurance that it will comply with CFR Part .The MaineDOT is responsible for determining the eligibility of and certifying DBE firms in Maine .
A DBE is defined as a forprofit business that is owned and controlled by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged persons .
For the purpose of this definition .
Socially and economically disadvantaged person means an individual who is a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the United States and who is Black Hispanic Native American Asian Female or a member of another group or an individual found to be disadvantaged by the Small Business Administration pursuant to Section of the Small Business Act . .
Owned and controlled means a business which is a .
A sole proprietorship legitimately owned and controlled by an individual who is a disadvantaged person .
b .
A partnership or limited liability company in which at least of the beneficial ownership interests legitimately are held by a disadvantaged persons .
c. A corporation or other entity in which at least of the voting interest and of the beneficial ownership interests legitimately are held by a disadvantaged persons .
The disadvantaged group owners or stockholders must possess control over management interest in capital and interest in earnings commensurate with the percentage of ownership .
If the disadvantaged group ownership interests are real substantial and continuing and not created solely to meet the requirements of this program a firm is considered a bona fide DBE .
Commercially Useful Function MaineDOT will count expenditures of a DBE contractor toward DBE goals only if the DBE is performing a commercially useful function on that contract .
A DBE performs a commercially useful function when it is responsible for execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing managing and supervising the work involved .
Credit will only be given when the DBE meets all conditions for a CUF .
Credit for labor will be in accordance with the responsibilities outlined in the contract .
To perform a commercially useful function the DBE must also be responsible with respect to materials and supplies used on the Contract for negotiating price determining quality and quantity ordering the materials and installing where applicable and paying for the material itself .
To determine whether a DBE is performing a commercially useful function MaineDOT will evaluate the amount of work subcontracted industry practices whether the amount the firm is to be paid under the Contract is commensurate with the work it is actually performing and DBE credit claimed for its performance of the work and other relevant factors .
Rented equipment used by the DBE must not be rented from the Prime Contractor on a job that the DBE is subcontracted with that Prime Contractor for regular course of business .
A current listing of certified DBEs that may wish to participate in the highway construction program and the scope of work for which they are certified can be found at httpwww.maine.govmdotcivilrightsdbe.htm .
Credit will be given for the value described by a DBE performing as A .
A prime contractor of actual value of work performed by own workforces .
B .
An approved subcontractor of work performed by own workforces .
C. An owneroperator of construction equipment of expenditures committed .
D. A manufacturer of expenditures committed .
The manufacturer must be a firm that operates or maintains a factory or establishment that produces on the premises the materials or supplies obtained by the Contractor .
Brokers and packagers shall not be regarded as manufacturers .
E. A regular dealer of expenditures committed .
A regular dealer is defined as a firm that owns operates or maintains a store warehouse or other establishment in which the materials or supplies required for the performance of the contract are bought kept in stock and regularly sold to the public .
For purposes of this provision a Broker is a DBE that has entered into a legally binding relationship to provide goods or services delivered or performed by a third party .
Brokers and packagers shall not be regarded as regular dealers .
F. A bona fide service provider of reasonable fees or commissions .
Eligible services include professional technical consultant or managerial services and assistance in the procurement of essential personnel facilities equipment materials or supplies required for the performance of the contract .
Eligible services also include agencies providing bonding and insurance specifically required for the performance of the contract .
G. A trucking hauling or delivery operation .
of expenditures committed when trucks are owned operated licensed and insured by the DBE and used on the contract and if applicable includes the cost of the selfsupplied materials and supplies .
of expenditures committed when the DBE leases trucks from another DBE firm including an owneroperator .
of reasonable fees or commissions the DBE receives as a result of a lease arrangement for trucks from a nonDBE including an owneroperator .
H. Any combination of the above .
Raceneutral Goals The Maine DOT is required to set an annual goal approved on a three year basis for DBE participation in Federalaid projects .
In order to fulfill that goal bidders are encouraged to utilize DBE businesses certified by the MaineDOT .
MaineDOT seeks to meet the established DBE goal solely through raceneutral means .
Raceneutral DBE participation occurs when a DBE is awarded a prime contract through customary competitive procurement procedures is awarded a subcontract on a contract that does not carry a DBE contract goal or wins a subcontract from a prime contractor that did not consider its DBE status in making the award .
A DBEsubcontractor Utilization Proposed Form is required to be included in bid documents .
MaineDOT will analyze each project and create a Project Availability Target PAT based on a number of factors including project scope available DBE firms firms certified in particular project work etc .
Each bid will request that the contractor attempt to meet the PAT .
This PAT is developed to assist contractors to better understand what the MaineDOT expectations are for a specific project .
The PAT is NOT a mandate but an assessment of what this particular project can bear for DBE participation .
The Department anticipates that each contractor will make the best effort to reach or exceed this PAT for the project .
Raceconscious Project Goals If it is determined by the Department that the annual DBE goal will not be met through raceneutral means the Department may implement raceconscious contract goals on some projects .
Raceconscious contract goals are goals that are enforceable by the Department and require that the prime contractor use good faith effort to achieve the goal set by the Department for that particular project .
If race conscious means are implemented on a project the Prime must comply with the requirements of CFR .
At the time of the bid opening all Bidders shall submit with their bid a Disadvantaged Business Enterprise DBE Commitment Form provided by the Department .
This form will list the DBE and nonDBE firms that are proposed to be used during the execution of the Work .
The list shall show the name of the firm the itemmaterialtype of work involved and the dollar amount of work to be performed .
The dollar total of each commitment shall be totaled and a percentage determined .
If the project goal is not met acceptable documentation showing all good faith efforts made to obtain participation may be required in order to award the project .
Failure to provide the required listing with the dollar participation total or acceptable documentation of good faith efforts to obtain DBE participation within days after the bid opening date will be considered a lack of responsiveness on the part of the low bidder .
Rejection of the low bid under these circumstances will require the low bidder to surrender the Proposal Guaranty to the Department .
The submission and approval of the above forms does not constitute a formal subcontract .
If for any reason during the progress of the Work the Contractor finds that DBEs included on the list are unable to perform the proposed work the Contractor with written release by the committed DBE or approval of the Department may substitute other DBE firms for those named on the list .
If the Contractor is able to clearly document their inability to find qualified substitute firms to meet the project goal the Contractor may request in writing approval to substitute the DBE with a nonDBE firm .
If at any time during the life of the Contract it is determined that the Contractor is not fulfilling the goal or commitments and is not making a good faith effort to fulfill the DBE requirement the Department may withhold progress payments .
If good faith effort is determined by the Department failure to meet the DBE contract goal will not be a detriment to the bid award .
Fulfillment of the goal percentage shall be determined by dividing the dollars committed to the DBEs by the actual contract dollars .
These requirements are in addition to all other Equal Employment Opportunity requirements on Federalaid contracts .
Certification of DBE attainment on Contracts The MaineDOT must certify that it has conducted postaward monitoring of all contracts to ensure that DBEs had done the work for which credit was claimed .
The certification is for the purpose of ensuring accountability for monitoring which the regulation already requires .
The MaineDOT will certify these contracts through review of CUF forms Elations subcontract payment tracking as well as occasional on site reviews of projects and through the projects final closeout documentation provided by our Contracts Section .
Bidders List Survey Pursuant to CFR .
the MaineDOT is required to create and maintain a bidders list and gather bidder information on our constructionconsultant projects Contractors will maintain information on all subcontract bids submitted by DBE and NonDBE firms and provide that information to the Department .
The Following information is required Firm Name Firm Address Firm status DBE or nonDBE Age of firm years And the annual gross receipts amount as indicated by defined brackets i.e .
to rather than requesting exact figures .
Not only is this information critical in determining the availability of DBE businesses relative to other businesses that do similar work but the Federal Highway Administration requires that we obtain this information .
..
Requirements Applicable to All Contracts Unless expressly provided otherwise in the Bid Documents the provisions contained in this Section .. apply to this Contract .
A. Maine Code of Fair Practices and Affirmative Action The Contractor must comply with the provisions of Maines Code of Fair Practices and Affirmative Action MRSA et seq .
and all regulations promulgated thereunder .
This Code at MRSA reads as follows .
During the performance of this Contract the Contractor agrees as follows The Contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race color religious creed sex national origin ancestry age sexual orientation physical andor mental disability .
Such action shall include but not be limited to the following Employment upgrading demotions transfers recruitment or recruitment advertising layoffs or terminations rates of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship .
The Contractor will in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the Contractor State that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race color sexual orientation religious creed sex national origin ancestry age physical handicap or mental handicap .
The Contractor will send to each labor union or representative of the Workers with which he has a collective or bargaining Agreement or other Contract or understanding whereby he is furnished with labor for the performances of sic his Contract a notice to be provided by the Contracting Department or agency advising the said labor union or Workers representative of the Contractors commitment under this Section and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees and to applicants for employment .
The Contractor will cause the foregoing provisions to be inserted in all Contracts for any Work covered by this Agreement so that such provisions will be binding upon each Subcontractor .
Contractors and subcontractors with contracts in excess of will also pursue in good faith affirmative action programs .
B. Maine Human Rights Act The Contractor must comply with the provisions of Maines Human Rights Act MRSA et seq .
and all regulations promulgated thereunder .
This Act provides among other things that it is unlawful discrimination for any employer to fail or refuse to hire or otherwise discriminate against any applicant for employment because of race or color sex physical or mental disability religion age ancestry or national origin or sexual orientation except when based on a bona fide occupational qualification .
C. EEO Notice to Labor Sources Contractors and Subcontractors that are required by Maines Code of Fair Practices and Affirmative Action or by federal law to notify a labor union or a representative of workers with which the Contractor or the Subcontractor has a collective or bargaining agreement contract or understanding through which labor is furnished must provide notice on the letter shown on this page below .
The letter must be written on the Contractors or Subcontractors letterhead stationery .
A list of Maine Department of Labor Career Center Job Service Centers follows the letterform .
To_____________________________________________________________________ Union employment agency or employees representative ________________________________________________________________________ Address Subject Equal Employment Opportunities on State Project No .
__________________________________________ Federal Aid Project No .
__________________________________________ Location __________________________________________ Description of Work __________________________________________ For Work related to the construction of the above listed Project to be performed under State Contract No .
_____________________________ I have pledged to provide equal employment opportunities without regard to race color religion sex national origin sexual orientation or disability .
This pledge applies to all employees and applicants for employment in connection with Hiring Placement Upgrading Transfer or Demotion Recruitment Advertising or Solicitation for Employment Treatment During Employment Rates of Pay or Other Forms of Compensation Selection for Training Including Apprenticeship Layoff or Termination Inquiries and complaints should be addressed to Presidents Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity Washington D.C .
Signed ____________________________ ____________________________ Title For ____________________________ Contractor ____________________________ ____________________________ Address ____________________________ Dated Maine Department of Labor Career Centers Job Service Centers Augusta Career Center Presque Isle Career Center Enterprise Drive Suite Spruce Street Suite State House Station Presque Isle Maine Augusta ME Toll Free Phone Toll Free Phone Local Local Phone Fax Fax No TTY Users Call Maine Relay TTY Users Call Maine Relay Email presqueisle.careercentermaine.gov Email augusta.careercentermaine.gov Bangor Career Center Skowhegan Career Center Oak Street Suite North Ave Bangor ME Skowhegan ME Toll Free Phone Toll Free Phone Local Phone Local Phone Fax No Fax No TTY Users Call Maine Relay TTY Users Call Maine Relay Email bangor.careercentermaine.gov Emailskowhegan.careercentermaine.gov Calais Career Center Springvale Career Center College Drive Bodwell Court Calais ME Springvale ME Toll Free Phone Toll Free Local Phone Local Fax No Fax TTY Users Call Maine Relay TTY Users Call Maine Relay Email calais.careercentermaine.gov Emailspringvale.careercentermaine.gov Lewiston Career Center Wilton Career Center Mollison Way US Route E Lewiston ME Wilton ME Toll Free Phone Toll Free Phone Local Phone Fax No Fax No TTY Users Call Maine Relay TTY Users Call Maine Relay Email wilton.careercentermaine.gov Email lewiston.careercentermaine.gov D. Prevention of Sexual Harassment It is the policy of the Department that all parties have a right to Work in an environment free from harassment including sexual harassment .
Maine State Law and the Department prohibit any and all forms of sexual harassment in the Workplace on the job site or that which may have an effect on the Work environment .
THEREFORE The Contractor hereby agrees to the following requirements in order to provide and promote a nondiscriminatory Workplace free of sexual harassment. . No Contractor supervisor or employee shall allow repeated objectionable or unwanted verbal or physical advances sexually explicit derogatory Statements or sexually discriminatory remarks which cause discomfort humiliation or are in any way offensive to the recipient or which interfere with the quality of any employees Work environment in any way .
Furthermore no one on any job shall threaten or insinuate either explicitly or implicitly that any employees submission to or rejection of sexual advances will have any effect on that persons employment job assignment training evaluation promotion wages or any other term or condition of employment or future job opportunity .
Contractors under Maine State Law are responsible for ensuring and maintaining a Work environment which is free from sexual harassment. . Any Contractor whose employee sexually harasses another employee shall be subject to disciplinary action .
Contractors who fail to adequately and expeditiously investigate sexual harassment claims will be subject to enforcement proceedings and such sanctions as are authorized by law .
Contractors are required to provide detailed written reports to the Department when so requested which shall describe the investigation and corrective actions taken by Contractors in all instances of sexual harassment allegations .
Contractors shall also be responsible for ensuring that no retaliation reprisal or intimidation be directed against any complainant or other employee who provides information to any person or agency investigating an allegation or complaint of sexual harassment .
E. Certification of Continuing EEO Efforts The Contractor must certify to the best of its knowledge and belief that the Contractor has made and will continue to make a good faith effort to comply with all applicable State requirements on equal employment opportunity nondiscrimination and affirmative action including employment of women minorities and disadvantaged as journeyed trade workers .
Contractors not having achieved companywide trade employment goals of .
for females and .
for minorities will where indicated by Contract and to the maximum extent practical comply with Section OntheJob Training. . Other Federal Requirements Prior to payment by the Department the Contractor shall provide a certification from the producer of steel or iron or any product containing steel or iron as a component stating that all steel or iron furnished or incorporated into the furnished product was manufactured in the United States in accordance with the requirements of the Buy America provisions of CFR .
as amended .
Such certification shall also include a statement that the iron or steel product or component was produced entirely within the United States or a statement that the iron or steel product or component was produced within the United States except for minimal quantities of foreign steel and iron valued at actual value .
All manufacturing processes must take place domestically .
Manufacturing begins with the initial melting and mixing and continues through the coating stage .
Any process which modifies the chemical content the physical size and shape or the final finish is considered a manufacturing process .
These processes include rolling extruding machining bending grinding drilling and coating .
Coating includes epoxy coating galvanizing painting or any other coating that protects or enhances the value of the material .
A Buy America Certification is required from each manufacturer fabricator supplier subcontractor etc .
that meets the manufacturing definition above .
Buy America does not apply to raw materials iron ore and alloys scrap pig iron or processed pelletized and reduced iron ore .
SECTION QUALITY Scope of Section This section contains general provisions related to the Quality of Work including roles standards Materials Quality Control Acceptance Nonconforming Work and warranties .
When specified in the contract the Department will use the quality level analysis in this Section to determine qualitybased pay adjustments . .
Roles Regarding Quality .. Cooperation The Contractor and the Department shall work cooperatively within their respective Quality Assurance QA responsibilities to produce and document a high quality project meeting or exceeding the quality requirements of the contract .
.. Role of the Contractor The Contractor is responsible for all aspects of the quality of construction including labor equipment materials incidentals processes construction methods and QC .
When required by the contract the Contractor shall develop submit for approval implement and adjust if necessary a QCP for the work specified .
.. Role of the Department The Department is responsible for providing a quality design approving the QCP and assuring that the Contractor is following the QCP .
The Department will perform acceptance sampling testing and inspection for any element of the work to ensure compliance with the QCP and contract requirements .
The Department may also perform IA and Verification sampling and testing at any time. . Quality Standards .. Conformity with Contract The Contractor shall comply with all contract requirements in performance of the work .
Any required plans such as QCP the TCP and the SEWPCP as approved by the Department are binding upon the Contractor as contract requirements .
.. Conformity with Other Standards Unless otherwise provided in the contract all work shall conform to the following standards as applicable .
A. MDOT B. AASHTO C. ASTM D. AREMA E. Standard conditions and special conditions contained in any permit F. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD G. American with Disabilities Act ADA .. Industry Standards If there is no applicable standard set forth in this Contract for a particular item of work then the Contractor shall perform that item of work in accordance with industry standards prevailing at the time of bid. . Material Quality .. General Materials and manufactured products incorporated into the work shall be new unless otherwise specified free from defect and in conformity with the contract .
When material is fabricated or treated with another material or where any combination of materials is assembled to form a finished product any or all of which are covered by specifications the Department may reject the finished product if any of the components do not comply with the specifications .
Title to all hot mix asphalt to be furnished by the Contractor shall pass to the State of Maine Department of Transportation immediately before installation .
The preceding sentence shall not in any way affect any right or remedy the Department has relating to the quality of the material installation or workmanship .
.. Quality Requirements Materials shall meet the requirements of the contract at the time they are incorporated into the work .
The Contractor shall sample and test proposed sources of materials using accepted procedures and equipment no more than days prior to use .
Materials shall not be used in the work until passing results are obtained and provided to the Department .
The Contractor shall provide the Resident with a copy of the passing test results including the source of the material as identified in Section The Contractor shall perform QC inspection sampling testing and documentation in accordance with the contract requirements .
For work without specific QC requirements the Contractor shall perform inspection sampling and testing as the Contractor deems necessary to ensure adequate process control and end product quality .
The Contractor shall provide all facilities equipment and material samples required by the Department to conduct Acceptance Verification and IA sampling and testing .
The Contractor shall supply materials and perform work using methods and equipment in a manner which will not degrade the quality of the materials .
Materials with prior approval that become unfit for use or fall outside the specification limits will result in the affected product being declared nonconforming work .
For a related provision see Section .
Non conforming Work .
The cost of the Contractors QC activities and for furnishing facilities testing equipment and samples for the Departments Acceptance and IA activities is incidental to the related Pay Items .
.. Sources A .
General The Contractor shall furnish all materials and products required to complete the work except as otherwise provided in the Contract .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract the Contractor shall use only those products contained on the Departments Qualified Products List available on the MaineDOT internet site if a list is established for that type of product or material .
For any material on the MaineDOT qualified products list that is being considered for incorporation into the Work it shall be the Contractors responsibility to verify that the material is appropriate for the use being considered .
B .
Department Furnished Materials The Contract may specify that the Department will furnish certain materials .
If the Contractor reasonably believes that the Department furnished material is deficient in any way the Contractor shall immediately notify the Department before accepting delivery .
After acceptance of delivery the Contractor is responsible for all risk or loss of Departmentfurnished material .
The cost of inspecting handling and storing Departmentfurnished materials after delivery is incidental to the Contract .
The Department may deduct from amounts otherwise due the Contractor all costs necessary to make good any shortage damage or deficiencies discovered after the Contractor accepts delivery including any demurrage or car hire charges .
..
Storage The Contractor shall store materials to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
If materials fail to meet the requirements of the Contract the materials will be rejected .
The Department may inspect stored materials at any time .
The Contractor shall locate stored materials to facilitate their prompt inspection .
The Department may approve portions of land within the RightofWay for storage purposes and for the placing of the Contractors equipment but the Contractor shall provide any additional land required without cost to the Department .
The Contractor shall not use private property for storage purposes without written permission of the owner with copies of the written permission furnished to the Department upon request .
The Contractor shall restore all storage sites whether within the RightofWay or on private property to original condition at the completion of the project without cost to the Department .
.. Handling The Contractor shall handle all materials in a manner that preserves their quality and fitness for the work .
The Contractor shall transport aggregates in tight vehicles to avoid loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring .
..
Unacceptable Materials The Department may reject materials not conforming to the Specifications at any time and the Contractor shall remove them immediately from the project site unless otherwise instructed by the Department .
The Contractor shall not store or use rejected materials on any Department project .
.. Sampling and Testing Qualified Departmental personnel may take samples for Acceptance Testing .
Work in which material is used without the Departments approval will be at the Contractors sole risk and the work will be considered nonconforming work .
Unless otherwise designated the Departments testing costs will be at the expense of the Department .
Materials being used are subject to inspection testing or rejection at any time .
The Department will furnish copies of test reports to the Contractor upon request .
The Contractor is responsible for the quality of construction and materials incorporated into the work .
The Contractor shall perform all necessary QC inspection sampling and testing in accordance with the approved QCP .
If a QCP is not required the Contractor is still responsible for all QC necessary for a high quality project .
The Contractor shall not rely on the results of the Departments Acceptance Testing being available for process QC .
The Contractor may observe the Departments sampling and testing activities .
If the Contractor observes a deviation from the specified sampling or testing procedures then the Contractor shall describe the deviation to the Department immediately and document the deviation in writing within hours to preserve their ability to dispute the sample .
The Department will randomly sample and test items designated for Acceptance in accordance with the procedure specified for that item .
The Department may also sample and test at any time if the material appears defective or when the Department determines that a change in the process or product has occurred .
Acceptance Tests will govern in all cases for determination of pay factors without regard to QC tests unless otherwise specified in the Contract .
When directed by the Department the Contractor shall sample and test any material which appears inconsistent with similar material being sampled unless such material is voluntarily removed and replaced or corrected by the Contractor .
All sampling shall be in accordance with Department AASHTO or ASTM procedures as specified for the material being sampled. . Quality Control .. General When required by Special Provision the Contractor shall develop submit and implement a Quality Control Plan QCP approved by the Department for those items of work specified that will result in work that meets or exceeds the quality requirements of this Contract .
Regardless of whether a QCP is required Quality Control for all work is the Contractors responsibility .
A. Submittal Within Days of Contract Execution or at least days before any related work is to be performed the Contractor shall submit three copies of its QCP to the Department .
B .
Approval Within Days of Receipt the Department will determine if the QCP is in accordance with the requirements of this Section .
and notify the Contractor that its QCP is approved or return it for any needed revisions .
If returned for revision the Contractor shall resubmit three copies of its revised QCP as provided above within days and the Department will have days from receipt of the revised plan to notify the Contractor whether its QCP is approved or again requires revision .
Additional iterations will occur in a like manner until the Department approves the Contractors QCP .
Failure to submit an approvable QCP shall not be cause for any adjustment to compensation or time .
C. Standard QC Plans For items included in Section Pavements the Contractor may choose to submit a standard QCP which includes any items common to all of their plants and paving operations .
Standard plans shall be submitted to the Quality Assurance Engineer by March .
The standard plan will apply to all projects constructed by the Contractor until a new standard plan is approved the following year .
In addition to the standard plan the Contractor must submit a supplemental QCP for each project which includes any required items and project specific details not covered by the standard plan .
Approval of both standard and project specific QCPs shall be as outlined in paragraph B above with the exception that the initial day review period for standard plans will begin on March .
Upon final approval of the QCP the Contractor shall provide bound copies or an electronic version to the Department .
All Contractor QC personnel shall also be issued their own copy of the approved QCP .
The Contractor shall communicate the applicable contents of the approved QCP to all Contractor and Subcontractor personnel involved in completing the work items covered by the QCP .
The Contractors QCP shall consist of plans procedures responsibilities authority and an organizational structure that demonstrates that an effective level of QC will exist and that the end result products will comply with all Contract requirements .
The Contractor shall provide all necessary QC inspection sampling and testing to implement the QCP .
The QCP shall include an organizational structure and reporting requirements that demonstrate that QC personnel have sufficient independence to allow them to be primarily concerned with quality as opposed to schedule and budget .
The individual administering the QCP shall be a fulltime employee of or a consultant engaged by the Contractor .
The individual shall have full authority to institute any and all actions necessary for the successful implementation of the QCP .
The Department will not sample or test for process control or assist in controlling the Contractors production operations .
The Contractor shall provide QC personnel and testing equipment capable of providing a quality product that meets or exceeds the Contract requirements .
Continued production of nonconforming work for a reduced price as determined by the Department instead of making adjustments to bring work into conformance is not allowed .
.. Quality Control Plan Requirements The QCP shall include at a minimum the following Construction items covered by the QCP as specified in the Contract Sampling location and techniques Tests and test methods Testing frequencies Inspection frequencies Detailed description of production and placement equipment and methods Documentation procedures including Inspection and test records Temperature measurements Accuracy calibration or recalibration checks performed on production or testing equipment The QCP shall identify the Contractors QC personnel including the company official ultimately responsible for the quality of the work .
The Departments QCP approval process may include inspection of testing equipment and a sampling and testing demonstration by the Contractors QC inspectors to assure an acceptable level of performance .
..
Testing Qualified technicians in laboratories approved by the Department shall perform all QC testing covered by the QCP .
Technician qualifications shall be as described in the Contract for the corresponding item of work .
Laboratory facilities shall be clean and all equipment shall be maintained in proper working condition .
The Department shall be permitted unrestricted access to inspect the Contractors laboratory facility .
The Department will advise the Contractor in writing of any noted deficiencies concerning the laboratory facility equipment supplies or testing personnel and procedures .
Deficiencies shall be grounds for the Department to order an immediate stop to incorporating materials into the work until deficiencies are corrected .
Work already in place affected by QC deficiencies is nonconforming work .
The Contractor shall maintain original documentation of all inspections tests including all associated data such as measurements weights dial readings etc .
used in the completion of the test and calculations used to generate reports .
The records shall indicate the nature number and type of deficiencies found the quantities approved and rejected and the nature of corrective actions taken .
The Contractor shall maintain standard testing equipment and qualified personnel as required by the Contract .
The QCP shall include the testing and record keeping requirements for each item as contained in the Contract .
The number preceding each item refers to the item and specification number in the Standard Specifications .
When testing requirements are not specified the Contractor shall perform all testing and record keeping as recommended by the manufacturer vendor or supplier .
If an item is required to be in the QCP but the Contract does not specify testing requirements the Contractor shall propose testing requirements in the QCP .
The Contractor shall maintain Control Charts in a manner and location acceptable to the Department .
At a minimum the Control Charts shall identify the project number the Pay Item number each test parameter the upper and lower control limits applicable to each test parameter and the running average of the last three Contractor test results .
The Contractor shall use the Control Charts as part of a process control system for identifying production and equipment problems and for identifying potential quality reductions before they occur .
Acceptable Control Charts are part of the approved QCP .
After final records review the Contractor will certify in writing to the Department that the project has been constructed and inspected and all materials have been tested in accordance with the Contract .
All Paving certs shall be submitted on the Paving Companys Letterhead .
.. QC Inspector Qualifications When a QCP is required the Contractors QC Inspectors shall hold all certifications from MCTCB or NETTCP that apply to the items included in the QCP .
The Department may require the Contractor to remove Inspectors from the project that are not certified as required or that are otherwise unqualified or unable to fulfill their duties in a good and workmanlike manner .
..
Inspection Requirements The QCP shall cover all construction operations on the site and at offsite production facilities keyed to the proposed construction materials sequence and schedule .
The QCP shall also identify QC personnel including qualifications procedures controls tests records and forms to be used .
The Contractor shall provide a copy of each completed QC report to the Department by PM on the day following each construction activity unless other arrangements are made with the Resident .
Failure to provide this report will constitute noncompliance with the QCP and the Contract .
If an item is required to be in the QCP but QC Inspection requirements are not specified in the Contract the Contractor shall propose inspection and record keeping requirements for such items in the QCP .
.. QCP NonCompliance The Contractor shall comply with the approved QCP and shall take all other steps necessary to assure a high quality project .
Failure by the Contractor to comply with the approved Quality Control Plan will result in the following actions st Incident Written warning .
If the Contractor does not take corrective action upon receipt of written warning the Department will escalate immediately to the nd Incident .
nd Incident Mandatory work suspension until compliance and loss of of the Bid Price of all Pay Items covered by the QCP as described in this Section .
rd Incident Mandatory work suspension until compliance and loss of an additional of the Bid Price of all Pay Items covered by the QCP as described in this Section .
th and subsequent Incidents Mandatory work suspension until compliance and loss of an additional of the Bid Price each occurrence of all Contract Pay Items covered by the QCP as described in this Section .
During all periods of the Contractors failure to follow the approved QCP no positive pay incentives will be calculated or paid if the Department accepts the material .
Disincentives for failure to comply with the approved QCP are additive and the Department will deduct any disincentives due from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
These disincentives are intended to encourage the Contractor to comply with its approved QCP and are not related to the quality of the material provided. . Quality Assurance The Department will conduct Quality Assurance by Review of QC Reports provided by the Contractor .
Monitoring Contractor compliance with the QCP .
Random inspection of production placement and workmanship Randomly accompanying the Contractors inspector during QC InspectionsTesting .
Acceptance Verification and IA sampling and testing of materials or completed work .
The Departments objective is a high quality project through a cooperative effort with the Contractor .
Items which are to be buried covered are of high cost or affect the longterm durability of the work will receive extra attention in the QA effort .
Unacceptable work found by the Departments Inspector will be brought to the attention of the Resident who will determine what corrective action that the Contractor will take .
The Contractor shall schedule the corrective work with the Resident and both the QC and Departments Inspectors will witness the corrective work .
Failure of the Contractor to correct unacceptable work in a timely manner as determined by the Department may result in the withholding of progress payments or suspension of the work or both .
The Contractor will not be eligible for either additional monetary compensation or a time extension should this happen .
If necessary for protection of the work or for public convenience the Department may accomplish corrective work by other means and deduct the cost from any monies due the Contractor .
The Department may review and obtain copies of all QC test reports including original test data inspections reports and control charts at all reasonable times without cost to the Department .
If the Department decides to inspect the materials or operations at the plant then the following conditions shall be met A .
The Department shall have the cooperation and assistance of the Contractor and the producer with whom the Contractor has arranged for materials .
B .
The Department shall have full access at all times to the parts of the plant that concern the manufacture and production of the materials being furnished .
C. If required the Contractor shall arrange for an approved testing laboratory building for the sole use of the Department .
The building shall be located near the plant and conform to the requirements of Section Engineering Facilities .
D. The Contractor shall provide any needed equipment for safe access to plant stockpiles equipment and operations . .
Acceptance The Department is responsible for determining the acceptability of the Work .
Acceptance of the material is based on the visual inspection of the construction monitoring of the Contractors QCP and Acceptance Test results .
Acceptance sampling and testing is the responsibility of the Department unless alternate procedures are specified except for furnishing facilities testing equipment transportation and material samples as required .
Acceptance of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement will be based on Method A B or C Statistical Acceptance or Method D Small Quantity Product Verification as specified .
The method of acceptance for each item is defined in Special Provision Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement .
When items of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement are not so designated Method A will be utilized whenever there are more than tons per Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement item and Method B will be utilized when there are less than or equal to tons per Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement item .
Acceptance of structural concrete will be based on Method A or B Statistical Acceptance or Method C Verification .
Items to be accepted under Method A Method B or Method C are defined in Special Provision Section Structural Concrete Acceptance Methods .
When items of castinplace concrete are not so designated Method B will be used when there are more than cubic yards and Method C will be used when there are cubic yards or less .
The Department may reject material which appears to be defective based on visual inspection .
No payment will be made for the materials rejected by the Department .
Prior to knowledge of the sample location the Contractor may remove and replace defective material at no cost to the Department .
This will not preclude visual rejection of obviously defective material .
The Department will sample test and evaluate new material for acceptance .
A .
Statistical Acceptance methods utilize the Quality Level Analysis and Pay Factor Specifications described in Section .
Quality Level Analysis and in Tables .
A along with specific information contained in the Divisions and Specifications .
This includes Sections Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement Smoothness and Structural Concrete .
Pay Items specified to be sampled and tested under Statistical Acceptance methods will be evaluated for acceptance in accordance with the guidelines specified for that Pay Item .
All Acceptance Test results for a lot as defined in the Specification will be analyzed collectively and statistically by the Quality Level Analysis Standard Deviation Specification Conformance Analysis Method using the procedures listed to determine the total estimated percent of the lot that is within specification limits .
Quality Level Analysis Specification Conformance Analysis is a statistical procedure for estimating the percent compliance with a specification and is affected by shifts in the arithmetic mean x and by the sample standard deviation s. Analysis of test results will be based on an Acceptance Quality Level AQL of .
unless otherwise specified .
AQL may be viewed as the lowest percent within the specification limits of a material that is acceptable as a process average and receive pay .
The Department will exclude test results on material not incorporated in the work from the Quality Level Analysis .
For items evaluated using Quality Level and at the Departments sole discretion a lot with a Quality Level of less than percent within limits will be either removed and replaced with acceptable material at the Contractors expense or accepted and paid for at a Pay Factor determined by the Department .
The Department may also reject material with a Quality Level at or above this level but such material will be removed and replaced by the Contractor at the Departments expense .
B .
Items not designated for Statistical Acceptance will utilize Product Verification testing to validate the quality of the material incorporated into the Project .
The Contractor shall provide the Department with a Certification Letter that indicates that the material supplied complies with the Specifications .
Test results representative of the certified material shall be attached to the letter .
The Department will randomly sample and test the certified material for properties noted in Table of Section Structural Concrete or Table of Section .
Acceptance .
Material will be subject to rejection as noted in Structural Concrete Section .
Quality Assurance Method C Concrete or Hot Mix Asphalt Section .
Quality Assurance Method D. . Quality Level Analysis .. Standard Deviation Method Standard Deviation Method procedures are as follows _____ A .
Determine the arithmetic mean x of the test results _____ x xi n Where summation of xi individual test value n total number of test values B. Compute the sample standard deviation s __ s Square root of xi x n Where summation of xi individual test values _____ x mean test value n total number of test values C. Compute the upper quality index QU _____ USLX QU s Where USL upper specification limit .
D. Compute the lower quality index QL _____ XLSL QL s Where LSL lower specification limit .
E. Determine PU percent within the upper Specification limit which corresponds to a given QU from Table .
A .
Note If a USL is not specified PU will be .
If the mean test value is equal to the USL then PU will be regardless of the computed value of s. F. Determine PL percent within the lower Specification limit which corresponds to a given QL from Table .
A .
If the mean test value is equal to the USL then PU will be regardless of the computed value of s. Note If a LSL is not specified PL will be .
G. Determine the Quality Level total percent within Specification limits .
Quality Level PU PL H. Determine the Pay Factor PF for the lot using the Quality Level from Step G. For items included in Sections Hot Mix Asphalt Method A PF Quality Level . .
Method B PF Quality Level . .
Method C PF Quality Level . . For items included in Section Pavement Smoothness PF Quality Level . . For items included in Section Structural Concrete Method A PF Quality Level . .
Method B PF Quality Level . .
I .
Determine the Composite Pay Factor CPF for each lot .
fPFfPFfJPFJ CPF f Where fJ price adjustment factor listed in the specifications for the applicable property .
PFJ Pay Factor for the applicable property .
f Sum of the f price adjustment factors .
Note Numbers used in the above calculations shall be carried to significant figures and rounded according to AASHTO Standard Recommended Practice R. .. Statistical Outliers This procedure specifies how outlying observations in sample test results will be evaluated for their statistical significance .
The Department will use this procedure for only those items that are specified to be checked for outlying observations .
An outlying observation or outlier is one that appears to deviate markedly from other sample test values in the lot .
When specified the procedure will determine whether any value is a statistical outlier .
If a test result is found to be an outlier the QA Engineer will investigate the outlying value to determine if it should be retained or discarded .
The investigation will include but not be limited to examination of all available test data and inspection reports relating to the questionable test result possible additional testing and discussions with appropriate Contractor and Department personnel .
If the investigation concludes that an assignable cause can not be determined for the outlying value it will be discarded otherwise it will be retained for pay factor determination .
Procedure __ A .
Calculate the sample average x and standard deviations of all the values in the lot .
B .
Find the value t from Table .
B corresponding to the sample size for the lot .
C. Determine D the total allowable deviation from the average by multiplying t by s. D. Establish values for MAX and MIN by the following ______ ______ MAX x D MIN x D E. Any value greater than MAX or less than MIN is an outlier .
The Department will investigate any outlying values before determining the Pay Factor for that lot .
Table .
A Quality Level Analysis by the Standard Deviation Method Upper Quality Index QU or Lower Quality Index QL PU n n n n n n n n Or to to to to to to to to PL n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n x . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Note For negative values of QU or QL PU or PL is equal to minus the table value for PU or PL .
If the value of QU or QL does not correspond exactly to a figure in the table use the next higher figure .
Within limits for positive values Table .
B Values of t n t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . NonConforming Work ..
Substantially Conforming Work If the Department determines the work substantially conforms to the Contract the Department may accept the nonconforming work and may require a credit to the Department to be deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
If the Department and Contractor can not agree to the amount of the credit the work shall be unacceptable work .
..
Unacceptable Work The Contractor shall remove replace or otherwise correct all unacceptable work as directed by the Department at the expense of the Contractor without cost or liability to the Department .
..
Unauthorized Work Prior to Final Acceptance and upon written order by the Department the Contractor shall remove or uncover unauthorized work .
After examination the Contractor shall rebuild the uncovered work to a condition conforming to the Contract at the expense of the Contractor and without cost or liability to the Department .
Any delay arising from unauthorized work shall be an inexcusable delay .
.. Uninspected Work Prior to Final Acceptance and upon written order by the Department the Contractor shall uncover uninspected work .
After examination the Contractor shall rebuild the uncovered work to a condition conforming to the Contract .
If the Department determines that the uninspected work is acceptable the uncovering removing and rebuilding will be paid as extra work and any resulting delay shall be an excusable delay .
If the Department reasonably determines that the uninspected work is unacceptable the uncovering removing and rebuilding shall be at the Contractors expense and any resulting delay shall be an inexcusable delay. . Warranty Provisions .. Warranty By Contractor The Contractor unconditionally warrants and guarantees that the project will be free from warranty defects for one year from the date of Physical Work Complete .
For a related provision see Section If the Department discovers any warranty defects during the warranty period the Contractor agrees to promptly perform all remedial work at no additional cost or liability to the Department .
For a related provision regarding obligations regarding plantings see Section .
Establishment Period .. Warranty Definitions Notwithstanding any other provision of the Contract the following words or phrases have the following definitions for the purposes of the Contractors warranty obligation under this Contract .
Warranty Defects Warranty Defects are conditions that result from material manufacture or workmanship and that are not in conformity with the Contract or with industry standards applicable to the work prevailing at the time of submission of the bid .
Warranty defects do not include A normal wear and tear B conditions caused by occurrences clearly beyond the Contractors control and not attributable to material manufacture or workmanship and C Defects in landscape items that are the subject of Landscape Establishment Period Obligations .
Examples of such excepted occurrences might be fires floods abnormally poor weather for the site of work accidents improper use improper maintenance vandalism or acts of God .
Emergency Emergency means necessary for public safety or convenience as deter mined by the Department .
Promptly Unless an emergency Promptly means in the first construction season after the Contractor has been notified of the defects but always within one year of such notice .
In case of emergency Promptly means within hours .
Remedial Work Remedial Work means all work necessary to make the item in like new condition as reasonably determined by the Department and performed in accordance with the Contract and in a good and skillful manner .
Remedial Work includes all design permitting project management supervision materials and labor including erosion control and traffic control .
.. Remedial Work Procedure and Requirements Within Days of being notified of warranty defects the Contractor shall submit to the Department for approval a Remedial Work Plan including the scope of work conceptual work methods schedule construction phasing and other significant aspects of the work the Work Plan .
Unless otherwise provided by the Department in writing any work commenced prior to Departments approval of the Work Plan will be at the Contractors sole risk .
Before starting any onsite work the Contractor shall deliver to the Department certificates of insurance complying with Section .
Insurance .
If the estimated cost of remedial work exceeds the Contractor shall provide performance and Payment Bonds complying with Section .
Performance and Payment Bonds .
If A the Contractor fails to submit a Remedial Work Plan B the Contractor does not comply otherwise with written instructions from the Department or C a State of emergency exists in which delay would cause serious risk of loss or damage then the Department may perform or Contract for such remedial work and the Contractor will be responsible for all claims costs damages losses and expenses arising out of such work including fees and charges of engineers consultants attorneys dispute resolution professionals and court costs .
Upon a final inspection satisfactory to the Department the Department will issue a written acceptance of the remedial work .
The Contractor warrants and guarantees all remedial work to be free from warranty defects for one year after such acceptance .
.. Other Warranty Provisions The Contractor hereby assigns to the Department the right to enforce all manufacturers warranties or guarantees on all materials equipment or products purchased for the work that exceed the nature or duration of the warranty obligations assumed by the Contractor under this Contract .
The Performance Bond andor Warranty Bond required by Section .. Bonds shall cover all warranty obligations of the Contractor provided by this Contract .
Final Acceptance by the Department does not relieve the Contractor of any warranty obligations provided by this Contract .
The Contractor agrees that the warranty obligations provided by this Contract shall be reported as an outstanding obligation in the event of bankruptcy dissolution or the sale merger or cessation of operations of the Contractor .
SECTION TIME Scope of Section This Section contains general timerelated provisions of the Contract including the Contract Time allowable Work times schedule requirements Liquidated Damages and Project Closeout. . Contract Time and Contract Completion Date All Work must be Complete by the Contract Completion Date and within the Contract Time .
Unless expressly provided otherwise by the Department in writing the Contract Time shall be all time between the Contract Execution and the Completion date specified in the Contract and any authorized extensions. . Commencement of Contract Time and Work Unless provided elsewhere in this Contract or in writing from the Department the Contract Time will commence on the date of Contract Execution .
For related provisions see Sections .
Definitions of Contract Execution and .
Execution of Contract by the Department .
Unless specified otherwise Work may commence upon Contract Execution unless the Contractor has not secured and provided the Performance and Payment Bonds and Insurance Certificates required by Sections .
Award Conditions .
Bonding and .
Insurance .
Any Work performed before the requirements of these sections are met is Unauthorized Work and is at the sole risk of the Contractor .
Pursuant to Section .
Indemnification the Contractor and Surety shall indemnify and hold harmless the Department from any claims arising from Work. . Allowable Work Times .. General Work can be performed at any time except Sundays and Holidays unless expressly specified otherwise in this Contract including any applicable Permit conditions .
If a Holiday occurs on a Sunday the following Monday shall be considered a Holiday .
Sunday or Holiday work must be approved by the Department except that the Contractor may work on Martin Luther King Day Presidents Day Patriots Day the Friday after Thanksgiving and Columbus Day without the Departments approval .
.. Night Work If the Contractor performs Work during periods of darkness the Contractor shall comply with Contract requirements governing night Work .
If the Contractor elects to perform Work during periods of darkness on its own initiative and without direction from the Department then the Contractor shall also comply with all municipal ordinances affecting such Work including noise ordinances .
When pricing and scheduling the Work the Contractor shall not assume that such nondirected night Work will be allowed .
Accordingly the Contractor shall not be entitled to any adjustment to either compensation or time due to its inability to secure any required municipal approvals .
.. Sundays and Holidays The Contractor shall not carry on construction operations on Sundays or Holidays unless A expressly specified otherwise in this Contract B authorized by the Department or C necessary to avoid or eliminate a clear and immediate risk of significant bodily injury to any person .
..
Seasonal Work Restrictions The Contractor shall meet all seasonal restrictions on time of Work contained in the Contract including all Permits. . Scheduling of Work .. General Duty of Contractor The Contractor is solely responsible for the planning and execution of Work in order to complete the Work within the Contract Time .
..
Schedule of Work Required at least days before the preconstruction meeting and before beginning any onsite activities the Contractor shall provide the Department with its Schedule of Work in a Critical Path Method CPM in the form of an activity on node AON diagram .
This CPM schedule will become the basis for claims involving delay .
The Department will waive this CPM requirement for appropriate contracts through a special provision .
The Contractor shall plan the Work including the activity of Subcontractors vendors and suppliers such that all Work will be performed in Substantial Conformity with its Schedule of Work .
The Schedule must include sufficient time for the Department to perform its functions as indicated in this Contract including QA inspection and testing approval of the Contractors TCP SEWPCP and QCP and review of Working Drawings .
At a minimum the Schedule of Work shall show the major Work activities milestones durations submittals and approvals and a timeline .
Milestones to be included in the schedule include A start of Work B beginning and ending of planned Work suspensions C Completion of Physical Work and D Completion .
If the Contractor Plans to Complete the Work before the specified Completion date the Schedule shall so indicate .
Any restrictions that affect the Schedule of Work such as paving restrictions or InStream Work windows must be charted with the related activities to demonstrate that the Schedule of Work complies with the Contract .
The Department will review the Schedule of Work and provide comments to the Contractor within days of receipt of the schedule .
The Contractor will make the requested changes to the schedule and issue the finalized version to the Department ..
Projected Payment Schedule The Contractor shall provide the Department with a Quarterly Projected Payment Schedule that estimates the value of the Work as scheduled including requests for payment of Delivered Materials .
The Projected Payment Schedule must be in accordance with the Contractors Schedule of Work and prices submitted by the Contractors Bid .
The Contractor shall submit the Projected Payment Schedule as a condition of Award .
..
Schedule Revisions The progress of the Work shall be compared against the Schedule of Work at each Progress Meeting .
If the Department determines that the Contractors actual progress is not in Substantial Conformity with the Schedule of Work then the Contractor shall either increase Project resources to get back on schedule or submit a revised Schedule of Work and Projected Payment Schedule to the Department .
.. No Separate Payment Unless expressly provided otherwise the cost for providing a Schedule of Work a Projected Payment Schedule and all revisions and updates is Incidental to the Contract . .
Suspension of Work .. Winter Suspensions A .
Start of Winter Suspension The Contractor may request in writing that the Department approve a Winter Suspension .
If the Department determines that winter weather conditions make it impossible to perform all or specified portions of the Work the Department will approve the Contractors request with respect to such portions and set the start date of the Winter Suspension .
B .
Monitoring and Communications During the Winter Suspension the Contractor is responsible for monitoring weather conditions and requesting approval from the Department to resume Work as soon as possible .
In any case the Contractor shall notify the Project Manager or Resident Days before the end date of the Winter Suspension specified in Section .. C being April th or May st as applicable .
C. End of Winter Suspension Upon request by the Contractor or upon its own initiative the Department may determine the end date of the Winter Suspension and the Contractor is responsible for resuming Work immediately after said end date .
If the end date is not determined by the Department in writing Winter Suspensions shall end on May for Zone and April th for Zone .
For the purposes of the preceding sentence Zone means all areas north of Route from Gilead to Bangor and Route from Bangor to Calais and Zone means all areas south of Zone including Routes and .
D. Impact on Liquidated Damages Liquidated Damages will not be assessed for any portion of a Winter Suspension that occurs after expiration of the Contract Time .
Winter Suspensions will not otherwise affect the assessment of Liquidated Damages .
For a related provision see Section .
Liquidated Damages .
.. Suspensions Due To Uncontrollable Events Upon request of the Contractor or upon its own initiative the Department may suspend the Work due to Uncontrollable Events .
Any Delay related to such a suspension will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
For a related provision see Section .
Definition of Uncontrollable Event .
.. Suspensions for Cause The Department may suspend the Work if the Contractor violates any provision of the Contract that may affect the quality cost timeliness or Conformity of the Work .
Any Delay related to such a suspension will be an Inexcusable Delay .
For a related provision see Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
.. Suspensions for Convenience The Department may suspend the Work for any other reason it determines is in the best interest of the Department .
Any Delay related to such a suspension will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
.. PreSuspension Work If Work is to be suspended for an extended period of time the Contractor shall store all Materials in a manner that does not obstruct the free and safe flow of vehicular pedestrian railroad or marine traffic and that protects the Materials from damage .
The Department may direct the Contractor to install guardrail or other traffic control devices necessary to protect the traveling public .
The Contractor shall take all precautions to prevent damage or deterioration of the Work already performed provide suitable Drainage of the Roadway by opening ditches and Shoulder drains erecting temporary Structures and providing temporary erosion control where necessary .
The cost of such presuspension Work will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
For related provisions see Sections ..
Right to Suspend Work ..
Maintenance During Suspension of Work .
Liquidated Damages and .
Adjustments for Delay . .
Completion Incentives and Disincentives When provided in the Contract financial incentives for early Completion and disincentives for late Completion will be added to or deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
IncentivesDisincentives are separate and distinct from Liquidated Damages and Supplemental Liquidated Damages . .
Liquidated Damages .. General The Department and the Contractor acknowledge that time is an essential element of the contract and that delay in completing the work beyond the designated completion date will result in damages including but not limited to damages to the State of Maine due to public inconvenience obstruction to traffic interference with business as well as increased engineering inspection and administrative costs to the Department .
The Department and the Contractor acknowledge the difficulty of making a precise determination of such damages and as a result they have agreed to a sum of money in the amount stipulated in the contract that will be charged against the Contractor for each calendar day that the work remains uncompleted after the expiration of the designated completion date not as a penalty but as Liquidated and Supplemental Liquidated Damages .
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Contract the Contractor or in case of default its Surety shall owe the Department the per diem amount specified in Section ..
Schedule of Liquidated Damages as well as any per diem amount of Supplemental Liquidated Damages as specified in the Supplement Specifications for each Calendar Day that any portion of the Work remains incomplete after the Contract Time has expired .
Should the Contractor or its Surety fail to complete the work by the Completion date a deduction of the amount stipulated in the Contract as Liquidated and Supplemental Liquidated Damages will be made for each and every calendar day that such contract remains uncompleted .
This amount will be deducted from any money due the Contractor or its Surety under the Contract and the Contractor and its Surety will be liable for any Liquidated and Supplemental Liquidated Damages in excess of the amount due .
The Contractor acknowledges that the specified amounts per diem of Liquidated and Supplemental Liquidated Damages in the Standard Specifications and Supplemental Specifications respectively if applicable are reasonable and agrees to stipulate to their reasonableness in any suit for the collection of or involving the assessment of said damages .
The damages referred to herein are intended to be and are cumulative and will be in addition to every other remedy now or hereafter enforceable at law in equity by statute or under the contract .
Permitting the Contractor to continue and finish the work or any part thereof after the expiration of the completion date shall in no way operate as a waiver on the part of the Department of its rights to assess and recover Liquidated and Supplemental Liquidated Damages or any other rights under the Contract .
For related provisions see Sections .
Contract Time .. D Winter Suspensions Impact on Liquidated Damages and .
Adjustments for Delay .
..
Schedule of Liquidated Damages The specific per diem rates for Liquidated Damages are set forth below .
By executing the Contract the Contractor acknowledges that such an amount is not a penalty and that the daily amount set forth in the Contract is a reasonable per diem forecast of damages incurred by the Department due to the Contractors failure to Complete the Work within the Contract Time .
Original Contract Amount Per Diem Amount of Liquidated Damages From To and Calendar More Than Including Day and more .
Supplemental Liquidated Damages Supplemental Liquidated Damages if any will be specified by Special Provision and are separate and distinct from Liquidated Damages .
Supplemental Liquidated Damages will be deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor. . Project Closeout ..
Final Cleanup and Finishing To prepare for Final Acceptance the Contractor shall clean the Project and all ground lawns streams Structures and other areas adjacent to the Project of all rubbish excess Material temporary Structures and Equipment .
The ground shall be backfilled with Material that is generally the same as the surrounding Material graded to drain properly and finished such that the surface matches the surrounding surface examples loam and seed compacted gravel pavement .
The Contractor must leave all areas impacted by the Work in a condition that is reasonably acceptable to the Department .
.. Notice Inspection Punch List The Contractor will notify the Department in writing that it considers the Project complete .
As soon as practicable thereafter the Department will inspect the Work .
If incomplete or unsatisfactory Work is noted the Department will prepare a written list of all items that must be completed or corrected before the Physical Work is Complete Punch List .
The Contractor shall immediately take such measures as are necessary to complete all Punch List items .
..
Notices Final Inspections Physical Work Completion The Contractor shall notify the Department in writing that all Punch List items have been completed andor corrected and that the Contractor considers the Project Complete .
As soon as practicable thereafter the Department will make another inspection of the Work .
The Department and the Contractor will attend this inspection jointly .
If incomplete or unsatisfactory Work is noted the Department will prepare a revised Punch List which may include items not on previous Punch Lists and the Contractor shall immediately take such measures as are necessary to complete the revised Punch List items .
Additional iterations will occur in a like manner until the Department finds that the Physical Work is Complete and in Conformity with the Contract If the Contractor has not already done so the Contractor will Promptly remove all temporary traffic control devices .
.. Closeout Documentation The Department will notify the Contractor in writing that the Physical Work is Complete and in Conformity with the Contract and that the Project will be Finally Accepted when Memo Buy America Certification Materials Certification and DBE Signoff and any other documentation as requested in the Physical Work Complete letter are received from the Contractor .
The Contractor shall deliver the Closeout documentation as requested in the Physical Work Complete letter to the Department within Days of the date of the notification that the Physical Work is Complete .
Liquidated Damages will cease upon the physical completion of the Work .
For a related provision see Section .
Definition of Closeout Documentation .
..
Final Acceptance Within Days of Final Acceptance by the Department the Department will advise the Contractor in writing of the Final Quantities and any damages to be assessed for the Project .
The Contractor shall resolve any Project issues that remain and provide the All Bills Paid and Request for Final Payment Letters to the Department within Days .
The Department will make Final Payment including the release of all remaining retainage and release any escrowed bid documents within Days of receipt of the above letters which complete the Closeout Documentation .
For a related provision see Section .
Final Quantity Voucher .
If the Contractor fails to resolve issues and deliver Closeout Documentation within the Days provided in Section .. the Department may provide a final notice informing the Contractor in writing that unless the Contractor Delivers all Closeout Documentation within Days of the date of Receipt of final notice the Contractor shall be in Default under the Contract .
The Contractor shall become ineligible to Bid on any Department Contracts .
The Department may then pursue all remedies provided by the Contract or by law including withholding Final Payment .
For a related provision see Section ..
Eligibility to Bid Basic Requirements .
.. No Waiver of Legal Rights Final Acceptance does not preclude the Department from correcting any measure estimate or certificate made .
The Department may recover from the Contractor or its Surety or both overpayments made due to failure to fulfill Contract obligations .
A waiver on the part of the Department of any breach of any part of the Contract is not a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
The Contractor retains liability for latent Defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud and warranty obligations .
SECTION PAYMENT Scope of Section This Section contains general provisions related to payment including measurement of quantities progress payment retainage the right to withhold payment and other paymentrelated terms . .
Measurement of Quantities for Payment .. Use of Plan Quantities Payment for all items labeled in the Bid Documents as Plan Quantity will be based upon the estimated quantity for the work described in the Bid Documents .
The Contractor shall accept such payment as full and complete compensation for that item without physical measurement .
Quantities included in the plan quantity amount but not accomplished will be calculated by the Department using standard estimating procedures and deducted from the plan quantity .
Areas not included in the plan quantity amount but completed will be measured and added to the plan quantity .
Upon mutual written Agreement by the Department and the Contractor through a Contract Modification the estimated quantity of any item of Work may be used as the final quantity for that item without physical measurement .
.. General Measurement Provisions The Department will use the U.S .
Customary system for all measurements unless the Contract utilizes the International System of Units SI .
Measurement of Bid Items shall include all resources necessary to complete the Pay Item of Work under the Contract .
The Department will measure items for payment in accordance with the Method of Measurement provisions of the applicable Specification .
For all items of Work other than those paid for by lump sum the Department shall determine the quantities accepted as the basis for Final Payment after the Physical Work is Completed .
..
Provisions Relating to Certain Measurements Unless expressly provided otherwise the Department and the Contractor shall use the following general measurement provisions .
Lump Sum or Each Lump Sum payment is total reimbursement for all resources necessary to complete the item of Work .
Quantities provided for items measured and paid by Lump Sum are estimated quantities and are provided for informational purposes only .
There will be no additional payment made by the Department or reduction in payment to the Contractor if the actual final quantities for items measured and paid by Lump Sum are different than the quantities estimated by the Department .
The only exception to this is when an item is eliminated in which case Standard Specification Section .
Elimination of Items would take precedence .
Each is payment per complete unit .
Length Length is defined as linear measurement parallel to the item base or foundation .
A station is feet .
Area Area refers to the length as defined above multiplied by the width which is defined as the linear measurement perpendicular to the item base or foundation .
When calculating area for payment use horizontal longitudinal and plan neat transverse measurements for surface area computations .
Make no deductions for individual fixtures having an area of square yard or less .
For purposes of the preceding sentence fixtures means small subareas that do not receive materials or on which no Work is performed .
Volume Measure Structures using plan neat or approved Contract Modification dimensions .
Use the average end area method to compute excavation volumes .
Use hauling vehicles approved by the Department when transporting Materials measured by volume .
Measure materials at the point of delivery .
Ensure the body shape allows contents to be accurately measured .
Load and level vehicles to the lesser of their water level or legal capacity .
Obtain the Departments approval to convert Materials specified for measure by mass to volume .
Use specified conversion factors .
Measure water to the nearest gallon with calibrated tanks distributors certified scale weights or water meters .
Measure bituminous materials by the gallon or ton .
Use net certified scale weights or certified rail car volumes .
Correct for bituminous Material lost wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the Work .
Correct net certified bituminous Material weights or volumes for loss or foaming when shipped by truck or transport .
Measure timber by the board foot .
Base measurement on nominal widths and thicknesses and individual maximum lengths .
Mass One ton is pounds .
Use certified scales to determine mass weight .
Accept certified car weights for Material shipped by rail except for Material to be subsequently processed in mixing plants .
Obtain certified haul truck tares as specified .
Each Haul Truck shall display a legible identification mark .
Measure cement by the pound or ton .
Accept nominal mass or dimensions for standard manufactured items unless otherwise specified .
Accept industryestablished manufacturing tolerances unless otherwise specified .
Measure Aggregate mass in the saturated surface dry condition .
The Contractor shall furnish and maintain weigh systems tested and certified by the State or use certified permanently installed commercial scales .
The Contractor shall provide certifications after each setup and before use or as requested by the Department .
The weigh system shall be scaled after certification and display a certification stamp .
Only mechanical or electronic scales shall be used .
The beams dials platforms and other scale Equipment shall be arranged for safe and convenient viewing by the operator and inspector .
Scales shall be tested for accuracy before use at a new site .
Platform scales shall be level and with rigid bulkheads at each end .
The Department will adjust quantities of Materials received on scales found to be outside of specified tolerances using a correction based on the last documented test within specified tolerances .
All materials which are measured or proportioned by weight shall be weighed on approved weighing systems .
When a delivery slip is required for payment of Materials measured by weight weighing except for automatic ticket printer systems shall be performed on approved platform truck scales by a Licensed Public Weighmaster furnished by the Contractor in accordance with the following requirements .
A Licensed Public Weighmaster A Licensed Public Weighmaster shall be any person satisfying the requirements of the State Sealer of Weights and Measures and granted a license as a Public Weighmaster .
Each Licensed Public Weighmaster shall provide himher with an impression seal as required by the State Sealer and shall impress this seal upon delivery slips issued by himher .
When completed by a Licensed Public Weighmaster delivery slips shall be considered as the Weight Certificates required by the Maine Weights and Measures Law MRSA Title .
The Weighmaster shall perform all duties required of himher by law and the specifications .
B Weighing Trucks Tare weights of trucks hauling stone bituminous mixes and similar items shall be determined twice daily once during the forenoon and once during the afternoon .
The tare weight thus found shall be used to determine the net load until the next tare weighing of the empty truck .
Tare weights of trucks hauling liquid and bituminous cement materials or other items not generally on a repeat basis shall be determined immediately before being loaded and the weight thus found shall be used for that load only .
The tare weight of a truck shall be defined as the weight of the empty vehicle including the driver but with no passengers .
C Platform Truck Weighing Systems An approved platform truck scale meeting the following requirements shall be provided installed and maintained when required by the Contractor or be available to himher at an approved nearby location The weighing system shall conform to the specifications tolerances and regulations for commercial weighing devices of the National Institute of Standards and Technology and shall be accurate within maximum tolerances of plus or minus pounds for every pounds of load .
No auxiliary indicators in combination with the beams or dial of the weighing system shall be used to increase the maximum allowable load above percent of the manufacturers rated capacity as stated in the National Institute of Standards and Technology Handbook S The platform of the weighing system shall be sufficient size to accommodate the entire vehicle or combination of vehicles .
If a combination of vehicles must be divided into separate units in order to be weighed each unit shall be entirely disconnected before weighing and a separate weight certificate delivery slip or ticket shall be issued for each separate unit .
The value of the minimum graduation on the indicator of the scale shall not be greater than pounds .
All weighing shall be read and recorded to the nearest pounds or onehundredth ton .
The weighing system shall be set on concrete or other approved foundation .
The recording mechanism of the scale shall be suitably housed or protected from weather .
The Contractor shall have the weighing system inspected and approved by the State Sealer of Weights and Measures or by a Repairman registered and approved by the State Sealer within a period of months preceding the date of any weighing and again after each change of location .
D Check Weighing for Platform Truck Weighing System Check weighing shall be made on the weights and on the weighing in scales during production in the following manner At least twice during days of production in the presence of a State Inspector a loaded truck which has been weighed and issued a weigh slip shall be turned and a new weighing made of the truck and load with the truck heading in reverse direction and at the opposite end of the weighing system platform from the first weighing .
The new weight will be recorded .
If the variation from the first weight is .
percent or less the fact will be so noted in the project records .
However if the variation exceeds .
percent the scales may not be used until rechecked and resealed by the State Sealer of Weights and Measures .
At least twice during days of production a loaded truck which has moved off the weighing system will be intercepted directed back to the scales and reweighed under supervision of a State Inspector .
At least twice during days of production in the presence of a State Inspector a truck which has been emptied will be directed to the weighing system before being loaded at a time other than the normal tare weighing and weighed again for a check on the tare weight .
Check weighing will be on a plant basis and although a plant may produce material for more than one project or Contract check weighing will not be required for each project or Contract .
Although at least twice during days of production additional checks will be made occasionally at the discretion of the Engineer .
Claims by the Contractor for delays or inconvenience due to check weighing will not be considered .
E Reciprocal Agreements Weighing of materials on weighing systems located outside the State of Maine will be permitted for materials produced or stored outside the State when requested by the Contractor and approved .
Outofstate weighing in order to be approved must be performed by a Licensed Public Weighmaster or a person of equal authority in the State concerned on scales accepted in the State concerned and meeting the requirements of this Section .
F Delivery Slips Serially prenumbered delivery slips of acceptable size and format for stating the following minimum information shall be furnished by the Contractor in as many copies as may be necessary .
One copy shall be retained by the Resident or Inspector upon accepting delivery of the material .
Vehicle identification Date loaded Work identification number location Identification of material a Item number b Source location of supplier c Type and grade d Tank number from which loaded if liquid Quality information as necessary for bituminous liquids a Specific gravity at F b Serial number of the Certificate of Analysis as furnished according to Division General Statement c The Certificate Statement as required in Division General Statement d The Viscosity of the material if asphalt cement in poises at F and in centistokes at F if other bituminous liquid the specified viscosity according to the type and grade shown in Section Quantity information as necessary gross tare and net weights volume of load if not material requiring weighing net gallons at F if bituminous liquids Signatures legible initials acceptable of Weighmaster if weight measured material Contractors representative if volume measured material and Resident Cover Slips .
If materials are shipped by rail the car weight may be accepted provided that only the actual weight of material is paid for .
However car weights will not be acceptable for materials to be passed through mixing plants .
Trucks used to haul material being paid for by weight shall be weighed empty daily at such times as directed .
Each truck shall bear a legible identification mark .
Rail shipments of bituminous liquid shall be measured directly by volume .
Correction shall be made when liquid bituminous material has been lost from the car wasted or otherwise not incorporated in the work .
Other shipments of bituminous liquids will be measured by the gallon or ton .
Volumes will be measured at F or will be corrected to the volume at F using the tables in ASTM D. When bituminous liquids are shipped by truck or transport net certified weights or volume subject to correction for loss or foaming may be used for computing quantities .
Net certified weight shall be determined upon loading for all bituminous liquids when shipped by truck or transport .
The net weight of each load shall be converted to net gallons at F by a conversion factor expressed in pounds per gallon .
G Time Measure Equipment by hours in accordance with Section Equipment Rental. . Progress Payments .. Generation of Progress Payment Estimates The Department will estimate the amount of Work performed at least monthly and make payment based upon such estimates .
Estimates may be paid once every two weeks if in the opinion of the Resident the amount of Work performed is sufficient to warrant such payment .
No such estimates or payment will be made if in the judgment of the Resident the Work is not proceeding in accordance with the provisions of the Contract or when the total value of the Work performed since the last estimate amounts to less than .
The Contractor agrees to waive all claims related to the timing and amount of such estimates .
If the Contract requires the Contractor will submit an application for progress payment with a detailed written explanation of the payments requested on forms and media approved by the Department to the Resident for approval .
The Resident may request that the Contractor submit backup documentation including copies of receipts invoices and itemized payments to Subcontractors .
.. Payment The Department will make payment within Days if the Contractor agrees to accept electronic transfer of payments in a manner approved by the Department except as otherwise provided in the Contract .
In other cases the Department will make payment within days except as otherwise provided in the Contract .
These payment obligations shall not apply in the event of unforeseeable circumstances such as insufficient legislative appropriations information systems failure and other Uncontrollable Events .
All payments made are subject to correction in subsequent Progress Payments and the Final Payment .
For related provisions see Sections .
Final Payment and .. No Inflation Adjustments Interest .
.. Mobilization Payments Mobilization includes the mobilization and demobilization of all resources as many times as necessary during the Work .
Upon approval of all preconstruction submittals required for approval by this Contract including those listed in Section .. Preconstruction Conference the Contractor will receive payment of of the Lump Sum price for Mobilization not to exceed of the Bid less the amount bid for Mobilization .
After the Department determines that the Work is complete the Contractor will receive the other of the Lump Sum price for Mobilization not to exceed of the Bid less the amount bid for Mobilization .
Any remaining Mobilization will be paid upon Final Acceptance. . Retainage The Department will pay of each approved Progress Payment until the Work is approximately complete .
Thereafter the Department will deduct of the amount of each Progress Payment as retainage In the event that the Department believes that the retainage will be insufficient to cover the Contractors obligations under this Contract the Department may withhold a greater percentage of the money to cover Contractor obligations .
The Department may hold temporarily or permanently retainage as needed to assure timely Completion of the Work and payment of all Subcontractors and Suppliers in Conformity with the Contract .
The Department may also disburse retainage to Subcontractors as set forth in Section .. Subcontractor Claims for Payment .
The Contractor may withdraw retainage by depositing certain securities with the Treasurer of State as provided by MRSA A .
Upon Final Acceptance the Contractor may request that the Department reduce retainage .
The Department may grant or deny such request as it deems desirable and prudent .
Otherwise retainage will be held until the receipt of all Closeout Documentation .
Payment for Materials Obtained and Stored Acting upon a request from the Contractor and accompanied by bills or receipted bills the Department will pay for all or part of the value of acceptable nonperishable Materials that are to be incorporated in the Work including Materials that are to be incorporated into the Work not delivered on the Work site and stored at places acceptable to the Department .
Examples of such Materials include steel piles stone masonry curbing timber and lumber metal Culverts stone and sand gravel and other Materials .
The Department will not make payment on living or perishable Materials until acceptably planted in their final locations .
If payment for Materials is made to the Contractor based on bills only then the Contractor must provide receipted bills to the Department for these Materials within days of the date the Contractor receives payment for the Materials .
Failure of the Contractor to provide receipted bills for these Materials within days of the dated the Contractor receives payment will result in the paid amount being withheld from the subsequent progress payment or payments until such time the receipted bills are received by the Department .
Materials paid for by the Department are the property of the Department but the risk of loss shall remain with the Contractor .
Payment for Materials does not constitute Acceptance of the Material .
If Materials for which the Department has paid are later found to be unacceptable then the Department may withhold amounts reflecting such unacceptable Materials from payments otherwise due the Contractor .
In the event of Default the Department may use or cause to be used all paidfor Materials in any manner that is in the best interest of the Department .
.. Price Adjustment for Hot Mix Asphalt For all contracts with hot mix asphalt in excess of tons total a price adjustment for performance graded binder will be made for the following pay items Item .
Mot Mix Asphalt Special Areas Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt mm Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt mm Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt mm Polymer Modified Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt mm Asphalt Rich Base Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt mm Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Polymer Modified Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Polymer Modified Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm sidewalks drives incidentals Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Polymer Modified Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Asphalt Rich Base Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Surface Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt Shim Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt Shim Polymer Modified Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt Shim Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Shim Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Shim Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm base and intermediate course Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm base and intermediate course Polymer Modified Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Asphalt Rich Base and intermediate course Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm base and intermediate course Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Surface Item .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Surface Item .
Hot Mix Asphalt Asphalt Rubber GapGraded Item .
Colored Hot Mix Asphalt .mm Surface Item .
Colored Hot Mix Asphalt .mm Islands sidewalks incidentals Item .
Maintenance Surface Treatment Price adjustments will be based on the variance in costs for the performance graded binder component of hot mix asphalt .
They will be determined as follows The quantity of hot mix asphalt for each pay item will be multiplied by the performance graded binder percentages given in the table below times the difference in price between the base price and the period price of asphalt cement .
Adjustments will be made upward or downward as prices increase or decrease .
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Item ..
Hot Mix Asphalt The quantity of hot mix asphalt will be determined from the quantity shown on the progress estimate for each pay period .
Base Price The base price of performance graded binder to be used is the price per standard ton current with the bid opening date .
This price is determined by using the average New England Selling Price Excluding the Connecticut market area as listed in the Asphalt Weekly Monitor .
Period Price The period price of performance graded binder will be determined by the Department by using the average New England Selling Price Excluding the Connecticut market area listed in the Asphalt Weekly Monitor current with the paving date .
The maximum Period Price for paving after the adjusted Contract Completion Date will be the Period Price on the adjusted Contract Completion Date . .
Right to Withhold Payments The Department may withhold payments claimed by the Contractor on account of A .
Defective Work B .
Damages for Nonconforming Work C. Failure to provide the Department the opportunity to inspect the Work D. Damage to a third party E. Claims filed or reasonable evidence indicating probable filing of claims F. Failure of the Contractor to make payments to Subcontractors or for Materials or labor or failure of Subcontractors to make payments to SubSubcontractors or for Materials or labor G. Substantial evidence that the Project can not be completed for the unpaid balance H. Substantial evidence that the amount due the Department will exceed the unpaid balance I .
Regulatory noncompliance or enforcement J .
Failure to submit Closeout Documentation K. All other causes that the Department reasonably determines negatively affect the States interest. . Taxes Fees Allowances and Notices The Contractor shall pay all taxes charges fees and allowances and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the Work .
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Contract all such taxes charges fees and allowances are Incidental to the Contract .
Most items are exempt from Maine sales tax .
The Contractor shall Bid in accordance with the Maine statutory exemption from sales tax located at MRSA subsections and . .
Damages for NonConforming Work If the Contractor performs Nonconforming Work that causes the Department to incur costs including environmental costs or penalties failure of the Federal Highway Administration to participate in certain costs for reasons due to the Contractors performance Departmental staff time related to the nonConformity penalties or other damages of any nature whatsoever damages then the Contractor shall be liable to the Department for such Damages .
The Department at its option and without liability may deduct such Damages from amounts otherwise due the Contractor andor postpone disbursement of Progress Payments until the nonConformity is corrected . .
Final Quantity Voucher The Department will prepare a final quantity voucher reflecting final quantities of the items of Work performed .
The Department may require the Contractor to provide information necessary to substantiate Pay Items including Statements itemizing Force Account Work. . General Payment Provisions .. Full Compensation Payments to the Contractor shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor Equipment Materials services and Incidentals used to perform all Work under the Contract in a complete and acceptable manner and for all risk loss damage or expense of any kind arising from the nature or prosecution of the Work .
.. No Inflation Adjustments Interest No payments due the Contractor will be adjusted for inflation .
No interest shall be due and payable on any payment due the Contractor except that the Department will pay statutory interest on uncontested Final Payments for any period of time that extends beyond Days of the date of Receipt of all Conforming Closeout Documentation .
The preceding exception expressly does not include payments regarding pending Issues a Dispute or claim .
..
Amounts Due the Department Unless expressly provided otherwise in this Contract in cases where the Department may deduct sums from amounts otherwise due the Contractor and where the sums to be deducted are more than the funds otherwise due the Contractor the Contractor shall remit all amounts due the Department within Days of receiving an Invoice from the Department .
After such Days the Contractor shall be in Default of this Contract and shall not be entitled to any additional cure period .
Statutory interest shall accrue after Days of Receipt of the Invoice .
SECTION CHANGES Scope of Section This Section contains general provisions related to changes in quantities scope time and payment. . Changes in Quantities .. Changes Permitted The Department may increase or decrease Pay Item quantities from the estimated quantities shown in the Bid Documents and such increase or decrease shall not be considered Extra Work .
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this Contract the Contractor shall be paid for actual quantities in place and Accepted at the Unit Prices contained in the Contractors Bid .
The Contractor accepts such payment as full and complete compensation .
There will be no adjustment to Contract Time due to an increase or decrease in quantities compared to those estimated except as addressed through Contract Modifications .
..
Substantial Changes to Major Items If quantities of Major Items vary from the estimated quantities contained in the Bid Documents by more than then the Department may increase or decrease the Unit Price of such item using the extra work process .
For related provisions see Section .
Extra Work and Section .
Contract Modification .
If an adjustment to the Unit Price is made it will apply only to that portion of the actual quantity that is less than of the estimated quantity or more than of the estimated quantity . .
Elimination of Items Upon written notification to the Contractor the Department may entirely eliminate items of Work for any reason .
Upon notification the Department is entitled to a credit .
For Minor Items the credit shall be the Contractors Bid price for the eliminated items .
For Major Items the amount of the credit shall be the Contractors Bid price for the eliminated items less A direct costs actually incurred by the Contractor after Award including mobilization shipping and restocking expenses that the Contractor can not recoup on other Projects as reasonably determined by the Department and B for overhead and profit .
The Department may withhold said credit from amounts otherwise due the Contractor . .
Extra Work The Department reserves the right to revise the Contract by adding Extra Work .
Such revisions neither invalidate the Contract nor release the Surety .
The Contractor andor its Surety agree to perform all such Extra Work .
The Department will compensate for Extra Work by written Contract Modification in accordance with Section .. General and Section ..
Basis of Payment .
Any Delay related to Extra Work will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
For a related provision see Section .
Contract Modification . .
Differing Site Conditions ..
Definition Differing Site Conditions are subsurface or latent physical conditions that at the time of Bid submittal were A Materially different from conditions indicated in the Bid Documents B Not discoverable from a reasonable site investigation prior to Bid C Materially different from conditions ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in Work like that specified by the Contract by Contractors experienced in such Work and D Actually unknown to the party seeking relief due to such conditions which in the case of the Contractor includes its Subcontractors .
.. Risk of Other Conditions All costs Work Delays or other damages related to or arising from site conditions that are not Differing Site Conditions are the sole risk and responsibility of the Contractor .
.. Notice and Procedural Requirements If the Contractor discovers what it considers Differing Site Conditions that may cause adjustments to compensation time or other Contract requirements the Contractor shall provide Notice of Issue for Consideration within hours of discovery and before doing any Work relating to such conditions as provided in Section ..
Early Negotiation .
The Contractor shall then comply with all other requirements of Section ..
Early Negotiation and Section Resolution of Disputes .
The Contractor will not be entitled to any change to compensation time or Work requirements without proper notice as specified herein .
Failure to provide such notice or to otherwise comply with this Section .
will constitute a waiver of all claims related to such conditions .
If the Department discovers what it considers Differing Site Conditions that may cause adjustments to compensation time or other Contract requirements then the Department will provide the Contractor with notice within hours of discovery .
If the Contractor disagrees with the Departments finding of Differing Site Conditions or the related adjustments then the Contractor shall provide Notice of Issue for Consideration within hours and comply with the requirements of Section ..
Early Negotiation and Section Resolution of Disputes .
.. Investigation Adjustment Upon notification by the Contractor or upon the Departments own initiative the Department will investigate the conditions .
If the Department determines that Differing Site Conditions exist and that the Differing Site Conditions have caused an increase in the cost or time required for the performance of the Work then the Contractor is entitled to an Equitable Adjustment for the additional costs in accordance with Section .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time Basis of Payment that are caused directly by the Differing Site Conditions .
If the Department determines that Differing Site Conditions exist and that the Differing Site Conditions have caused a decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of the Work then the Department is entitled to a credit in the amount of savings to compensable items in accordance with Section .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time that are caused directly by the Differing Site Conditions .
Delays caused by Differing Site Conditions will be considered in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay . .
Adjustments for Delay .. Definitions Types of Delays Delays are defined as follows and may be divided into more than one type depending upon cause .
A. Excusable Delay Except as expressly provided otherwise by this Contract an Excusable Delay is a Delay to the Critical Path that is directly and solely caused by a weather related Uncontrollable Event of such an unusually severe nature that a Federal Emergency Disaster is declared .
The Contractor will only be entitled to an Equitable Adjustment if the Project falls within the geographic boundaries prescribed under the disaster declaration .
or a flooding event at the effected location of the Project that results in a Q headwater elevation or greater but less than a Q headwater elevation .
Theoretical headwater elevations will be determined by the Department actual headwater elevations will be determined by the Contractor and verified by the Department .
B. Compensable Delay A Compensable Delay is a Delay to the Critical Path that is directly and solely caused by a weather related Uncontrollable Event of such an unusually severe nature that a Federal Emergency Disaster is declared .
The Contractor will only be entitled to an Equitable Adjustment if the Project falls within the geographic boundaries prescribed under the disaster declaration and receives projectspecific emergency funds and the Contractor can show proof that the Work was delayed by this weather event an Uncontrollable Event caused by a Utility Company for which the Utility Company reimburses the Department an Uncontrollable Event caused by other third party not Subcontractors Working on Projectrelated Work within the Project Limits if and only if the such other third party offers the Department reimbursement for such Delay or acts by the Department that are in violation of applicable laws or the Contract or a flooding event at the effected location of the Project that results in a Q headwater elevation or greater .
Theoretical Q headwater elevations will be determined by the Department actual headwater elevations will be determined by the Contractor and verified by the Department .
C. Inexcusable Delay Inexcusable Delays are all Delays that are not Excusable Delays or Compensable Delays .
For a related provision see Section .
Definition of Uncontrollable Event .
.. Entitlement to Adjustments A .
Types of Adjustments Provided the Contractor meets the requirements of Section .. B below and complies with the notification documentation and procedural requirements set forth in the Contract the Contractor is entitled to certain adjustments to the Contract depending upon the type of Delay . .
If an Excusable Delay the Contractor is entitled to an extension of time but no additional compensation . .
If a Compensable Delay the Contractor is entitled to an extension of time and an Equitable Adjustment as set forth in Section .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time . .
If an Inexcusable Delay the Contractor is entitled to neither an extension of time nor additional compensation .
For related provisions see Sections .. Damage to Project Caused By Uncontrollable Events and .. Responsibility for the Damage to Work .
B .
Requirements for Entitlement To be entitled to any adjustments for an Excusable Delay or a Compensable Delay the Contractor must demonstrate all of the following . .
The Contractor consistently utilized its Schedule of Work to schedule coordinate and manage the Work as evidenced by documentation created as the Work progressed including Progress Meeting minutes .
The Delay impacted the Critical Path of the Schedule of Work and .
There are no concurrent Inexcusable Delays .
C. Concurrent Delays The Contractor is not entitled to a time extension for the period of time when Excusable and Inexcusable Delays are concurrent .
The Contractor also is not entitled to either time extension or an Equitable Adjustment for the period of time when Compensable and Inexcusable Delays are concurrent .
In the event Compensable and Excusable Delays are concurrent the Contractor is only entitled to time extension not an Equitable Adjustment for the period of time such Delays are concurrent .
..
Early Completion Date Delay Claims For the purposes of this Section .. a Contractors Early Completion Date means a Project Completion date shown on the Contractors initial Schedule of Work submitted in accordance with Section ..
Schedule of Work Required that is earlier than the Contracts specified Completion date .
The Department will not be liable for any claims or expenses related to the period of time between the Contractors Early Completion Date and the Contracts specified Completion date unless the Contractor demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that A all requirements of Section .. B Requirements for Entitlement are met and B that the Contractors Early Completion Date was reasonable at the time of Bid in light of the surrounding facts and circumstances including the Contractors available resources and the requirements of the Work .
.. Notice and Procedural Requirements If the Contractor becomes aware of facts or circumstances that may cause a Delay for which the Contractor may seek adjustments to compensation time or other Contract requirements the Contractor must notify the Resident of such Issue within hours and before doing any Work relating to such facts or circumstances as provided in Section ..
Early Negotiation .
Except as otherwise provided in this Section .
the Contractor shall then comply with all other requirements of Part Resolution of Disputes .
The Contractor will not be entitled to any change to compensation time or Work requirements without proper and timely notice .
Failure to provide such notice constitutes a waiver of all claims related to such conditions .
.. Documenting the Delay and Request for Adjustments A .
Weekly Reports During Delay To be entitled to any adjustments for Delay the Contractor must keep records as provided in Section ..
Contractors Obligation to Keep Records .
Further the Contractor must submit weekly written reports containing the following information . .
Number of Days of impact to the Critical Path. . A summary of all operations that have been Delayed or will be Delayed on the impact of the Contractors Critical Path. . A narrative describing how the cause of the Delay meets the definition of Excusable Delay or Compensable Delay contained in Section .. A or B. . Itemization of all extra costs being incurred including A how the extra costs relate to the Delay B the identification of all nonsalaried Project employees for whom costs are being compiled and c a summary of time charges for Equipment identified by the manufacturers number for which costs are being compiled .
B .
Request and Report After Completion Within Days of Completion of the phase of Work that the Contractor claims has been Delayed the Contractor shall submit a written report to the Department that contains the following information. . A description of the operations that were Delayed and the documentation and narrative of how the cause for the Delay meets the definition of Excusable Delay or Compensable Delay contained in Sections .. A or B including all reports prepared for the Contractor by consultants if used .
An asbuilt chart showing when Work operations were actually performed .
A graphic depiction of how the operations were Delayed and the impact on the Critical Path and .
An itembyitem request for additional time and compensation for items allowed under Section .. Force Account Work including measurement and explanation .
The Department may require that all costs shown in the report be certified by an accountant and that the Contractor provide all other information described in Section ..
Detailed Notice of Dispute .
.. Decision by Program Manager Within Days of receiving all information described in Section .. B Request and Report After Completion the Program Manager will Deliver a written decision on the request made to the Contractor .
Failure to provide a decision within said day period shall be considered a denial of the Contractors request unless the parties mutually agree to an extension of time for such decision .
.. Additional Consideration By Department If the Contractor wants additional consideration the Contractor shall Deliver a Notice of Unresolved Dispute to the Departments appropriate Bureau Director within Days of Receipt of the Program Managers decision .
Such Notice shall comply with Section .. Notice of Unresolved Dispute .
The parties must then comply with all other Dispute resolution provisions of this Contract beginning with Section .
Negotiation By Management. . Value Engineering .. Overview General Requirements A Value Engineering Change Proposal VECP is a proposal made by the Contractor after Contract Execution that is intended to produce cost savings without impairing essential characteristics of the Project including function serviceability safety durability maintainability and aesthetics all as determined by the Department .
A VECP shall contain proven features that have been used under similar conditions .
A proposal is not a VECP if equivalent options are already provided in the Contract .
A VECP must be approved by the Department .
Unless otherwise agreed in writing the Contractor and the Department will equally share the Net Savings generated by the VECP as provided in Section .. C Contract Modification Amount of Payment .
Unless mutually agreed otherwise the VECP approval process will occur in three steps A Conceptual VECP submission and review B Detailed VECP submission and evaluation and if approved C Contract Modification including the amount of payment due to the Contractor and credit due to the Department .
When the nature and scope of a VECP warrants the parties may agree to truncate the VECP approval process .
..
Conceptual VECP A. Submittal To propose a VECP the Contractor must submit a written Conceptual VECP to the Resident .
The Conceptual VECP is not a formal and complete submittal based upon detailed technical analysis but instead relays a conceptual idea based upon the Contractors knowledge and experience .
The Conceptual VECP should include the following information .
General Description A narrative that describes the proposed change in concept and includes the basic differences between the existing Contract and the proposed change . .
Advantages and Disadvantages A listing and brief description of the comparative advantages and disadvantages of the VECP including effects on function serviceability safety durability maintainability aesthetics and any other factors significantly altered by the VECP. . Estimate of Net Savings An estimate of the Net Savings as defined in Section .. C Contract Modification Amount of Payment. . Savings and Schedule Impacts An estimate of the time necessary for the Contractor to submit a Detailed VECP .
Such estimate must specify the date by which the Department must approve the VECP to obtain the maximum cost reduction and the latest date by which the Department must approve the VECP for the Contractor to avoid significant impacts on the estimated Net Savings or the Contractors Schedule of Work .
If the Department determines that the time for response is insufficient for review the Contractor will be so notified .
B .
Conceptual Review and Response The Department will use its best efforts to review a Conforming Conceptual VECP and respond to the Contractor within Days of Receipt .
The Department may at its sole discretion invite the Contractor to submit a Detailed VECP reject the Conceptual VECP for reasons that will be described briefly or request additional information .
The Department may also in its sole discretion agree to partially reimburse the Contractor for the costs to develop and submit a Detailed VECP .
..
Detailed VECP A. Submittal If the Department invites the Contractor to submit a Detailed VECP it shall contain the following information that is sufficient in detail to clearly define and explain the proposed changes .
Updated and more complete information regarding items included in the Conceptual VECP including the general description of the VECP advantages and disadvantages use or testing performed elsewhere a detailed computation of the estimated Net Savings generated in accordance with Section .. C Contract Modification Amount of Payment actual VECP development costs to date and estimated savings and schedule impacts including approval dates required .
If the Department determines that the time for response is insufficient for review the Contractor will be notified promptly. . A complete set of Plans and Specifications showing the proposed revisions relative to the original Contract features and requirements .
All VECPs that require engineering design computations or analysis shall be prepared under the responsible charge of and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
B .
Evaluation .
Additional Information The Department may request any additional information that it determines is necessary to properly evaluate the VECP .
Where design changes are proposed such additional information may include results of field investigations and surveys design computations specifications and field change sheets .
The Contractor will promptly provide any such requested information . .
Cost Verification The Department may require the Contractor to provide additional information to verify the Contractors cost analyses .
C. Response The Department will evaluate a Conforming Detailed VECP and provide the Contractor with a written response within Days of Receipt of all of the information it has determined is necessary to properly evaluate the VECP .
Such response will include a brief description of the Departments reasons for its decision .
The Department at its sole discretion will either approve the Detailed VECP approve it with conditions or reject it .
The Department may base its decision on any reason that is in the best interest of the Department including unacceptable impact on the function serviceability safety durability maintainability or aesthetics of the Project insufficient testing or use of the VECP concepts elsewhere insufficient justification of cost savings unacceptable schedule impacts insufficient review time or differing engineering judgment .
The Contractor may request that the Department reconsider certain portions of the decision .
If requested the Department will reconsider its decision and then issue a final decision which is not subject to review or appeal .
D. Termination of VECP Process If the Department rejects the VECP or the Contractor does not desire to proceed with the VECP as approved by the Department the VECP process will terminate and the Department will reimburse the Contractor for percent of all VECP development costs incurred by the Contractor to date .
.. Contract Modification Amount of Payment If the VECP is approved or if it is approved with conditions and the Contractor wants to proceed a Contract Modification will be executed by the parties .
In addition to the requirements of Section .
Contract Modifications the VECP will set forth the net savings generated by the VECP which shall be split equally between the Contractor and the Department per the following formula NS EGS CDC DVEC Where NS Net Savings generated by the VECP as determined by the Department .
EGS Estimated Gross Savings which is the difference between the cost of performing the Work as originally specified in the Contract and the cost of performing the Work as revised by the VECP at agreed upon or lump sum prices .
CDC Contractors Development Costs related to the preparation of the Detailed VECP including costs of the Contractors design subconsultants and Subcontractors .
The Department shall reimburse the Contractor for these costs .
DVEC Departments VE Costs related to review approval and implementation of the VECP including design costs field inspection and the value of any Department provided property .
Once the Contract Modification is executed the Contractor may be paid for its actual Development Costs .
The Contractors share of the Net Savings shall not be disbursed until the work is complete and the actual Net Savings is known .
The Contract Modification shall also set forth any adjustments to Contract Time related to the Work as revised by the VECP if any .
..
Subsequent Payment Adjustments Upon Completion of the portion of the Work revised by the VECP the Department on its own initiative or upon request by the Contractor may review the actual net savings realized by the VECP .
The Contractor will be afforded an opportunity to review and comment on such a review .
If the actual net savings was greater than set forth in the Contract Modification the increased savings will be shared equally by the parties .
If the net savings was less than set forth in the Contract Modification the reduction in savings will be borne equally by the parties .
.. General Conditions Regarding VECPs A. VECPs will remain the property of the Contractor provided that the Department will have the unrestricted right to use any approved VECP or any VECP in which the Department has reimbursed the Contractor for any portion of the development costs on other MDOT Projects without notice cost or liability to the Contractor .
B .
Only the Contractor may submit VECPs .
The Contractor shall review be responsible for and submit all proposals initiated by the Contractors Subcontractors .
C. The Contractor shall not anticipate Departmental approval of a VECP when Bidding or otherwise before approval of a Detailed VECP .
The Contractor is responsible for all Delays caused by the VECP that were not negotiated in the Contract Modification .
D. If a VECP is rejected the Contractor shall perform the Work in accordance with the Contract .
E. Except as otherwise provided in this Section .
the Contractor shall have no claim against the Department for additional compensation or time resulting from the Delayed review or rejection of a VECP including but not limited to development costs loss of anticipated profits and increased Material or labor costs .
F. Cost sharing applies only to the Contract for which the VECP was submitted .
G. Because the Department has no obligation to change the terms of the original Contract all VECP decisions by the Department are final and are not subject to the Dispute resolution provisions provided in this Contract or otherwise available at law. . Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time .. General Equitable Adjustment means an adjustment to compensation due to a change in the nature or scope of Work as defined in this Section .
This Section .
applies to all changes to the nature or scope of the Work excepting A changes in quantities which are governed by Section .
B elimination of items of Work which is governed by Section .
and C payment for Value Engineering Change Proposals which is governed by Section .. ..
Basis of Payment Adjustments will be established by mutual Agreement based upon Unit or Lump Sum Prices which include labor materials equipment markup overhead profit and time .
These agreed upon Unit or Lump Sum prices will be full compensation and no additional overhead profit markups or fees are allowed .
If Agreement can not be reached the Contractor shall accept payment on a Force Account basis as provided in Section .. Force Account Work as full and complete compensation for all Work relating to the Equitable Adjustment .
..
Reserved .. NonCompensable Items The Contractor is not entitled to compensation or reimbursement for any of the following items A .
Lost profits or lost opportunity costs B .
Labor inefficiencies C. Consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of Bidding opportunities and insolvency D. Indirect costs or expenses of any nature E. Dispute resolution costs of any nature including attorneys fees claims consultant fees expert witness fees claims preparation expenses and costs related to DRB proceedings mediation arbitration or litigation and F. Interest .
.. Force Account Work Compensation for Force Account Work will be computed according to this Section .
A .
Labor The Contractor will receive the actual hourly wages paid to Workers actually engaged in the changed Work and the foreman in direct charge of the changed Work as determined from certified payrolls plus percent of the sum thereof for all fringe benefits payroll taxes overhead and profit .
B .
Materials For Materials incorporated in the permanent Work the Contractor will receive the Actual Cost of Materials including freight and Delivery charges but excluding any sale or use tax plus a single percent markup .
For all Materials not incorporated in the permanent Work the Contractor will receive the difference of actual value of such Material at the time of its use less the fair salvage value of Material when released plus percent of said difference .
There shall be no markup on markups .
C. Equipment For all authorized usage of poweroperated machinery trucks or other Equipment the Contractor will receive the rental rates for the actual time to the nearest  hour that such Equipment is in operation on the Work .
Time spent moving Equipment within the Project Limits and any approved idle time may be measured for payment when authorized .
Time spent servicing maintaining and changing attachments will not be paid for .
The rental rates shall include the cost of all fuel oil lubrication supplies necessary attachments repairs and maintenance of any kind depreciation storage insurance small tools and all other Incidentals .
The maximum Hourly Equipment rental rates R will be determined using the most current Blue Book rates and the following formula R A x B x E C D Where A Blue Book monthly rate divided by B Blue Book regional adjustment factor for Maine C Blue Book estimated operating costs per hour D Operators hourly payroll rate plus percent E Factor from the Rate Adjustment Table for the year the machine was made When the Contractors Equipment is ordered to be available for Force Account Work but is idle for reasons not the fault of the Contractor standby time will be paid at of the hourly Equipment rental rate excluding all operating costs .
For each piece of Equipment the Contractor shall provide the following information the manufacturers name Equipment type year of manufacture model number type of fuel used horsepower rating attachments required together with its size or capacity and any further information necessary to ascertain the proper rate .
The Contractor shall also provide a photocopy of the appropriate pages from the Blue Book that were used to arrive at the rates and prepare a chart that fully shows all the details of the Equipment costs .
Unless otherwise specified manufacturers ratings and manufacturerapproved modifications will be used to classify Equipment for the determination of applicable rental rates .
A unit of at least the minimum rating recommended by the manufacturer shall power equipment that has no direct power unit .
If the Department specifies Equipment not listed in the above publication the Department will establish a suitable rate for such Equipment .
If requested by the Department the Contractor will produce cost data to assist the Department in the establishment of such rental rate including all records that are relevant to the Actual Costs including rental Receipts acquisition costs financing documents lease Agreements and maintenance and operational cost records .
Equipment leased by the Contractor for Force Account Work and actually used on the Project will be paid for at the actual invoice amount plus markup for administrative costs .
D. Superintendence No part of the salary or expense of anyone connected with the Contractor above the grade of foreman or having general supervision of the Work will be included in the labor items as specified above except when the Contractors entire onsite Workforce is occupied with Force Account Work in which case the salaries of the Superintendent may be included in the labor item specified above when the nature of the Work is such that their services are required as determined by the Department .
E. Documentation Requirements All Statements shall be accompanied and supported by Receipted Invoices for all Materials used and transportation charges .
If Materials used on the Force Account Work are not specifically purchased for such Work but are taken from the Contractors stock then instead of Invoices the Statements shall contain or be accompanied by an affidavit of the Contractor certifying that such Materials were taken from stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation claimed represent the Actual Cost to the Contractor excluding storage costs .
No payment will be made for Work performed on a Force Account basis until the Contractor has furnished duplicate itemized Statements of the cost of such Force Account Work detailed to the following Name classification date daily hours total hours rate and amount for each foreman and laborer .
Designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and amount for each unit of Equipment .
Quantities of Materials prices and amounts .
Transportation charges on Materials .
F. Subcontractor Quoted Work When accomplishing Force Account Work that utilizes Subcontractors the Contractor will be allowed a maximum markup of for profit and overhead on the Subcontractors portion of the Force Account Work .
If the Department does not accept the Subcontractor quote then the Subcontractor work will be subject to the Force Account provisions with a markup for profit overhead. . Contract Modification Excepting changes to quantities as provided in Section .. Changes Permitted all changes to the Contract that affect compensation time or quality must be made by written Contract Modification .
The Contract Modification will describe the underlying issue that resulted in the Contract Modification and will specify adjustments to compensation time or other Work requirements as applicable .
If adjustments to compensation or time are not shown on the face of the Contract Modification then there are no such adjustments .
All Contract Modifications must be signed by the Project Manager or Resident .
By signing a Contract Modification the Contractor agrees to all the terms thereof and waives any and all claims for additional compensation time or other Work requirement adjustments relating to the issue that is the subject of the Contract Modification .
All Contract Modifications are to be noted in Progress Meeting minutes .
SECTION INDEMNIFICATION BONDING AND INSURANCE Scope of Section This Section contains general requirements for indemnification bonding and insurance by the Contractor. . Indemnification The Contractor agrees to indemnify defend and hold harmless the Department and its officers directors employees agents and consultants from and against all claims actions torts costs losses and damages for bodily injury including sickness disease or death and property damage arising out of or relating to this Contract or the performance of Work by the Contractor its Subcontractors subconsultants Engineers suppliers any individuals or entities directly or indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any of them may be liable excepting only claims directly and solely caused by the negligence of the Department .
Damages covered include but are not limited to all Dispute resolution costs including court costs attorneys fees and the fees of Engineers and consultants arbitrators and other professionals related to Dispute defense and preparation .
This indemnification obligation shall not be limited in any way by any limitation on the amount or type of damages compensation or benefits payable by or for the Contractor or any Subcontractor subconsultant Engineer supplier or other individual or entity under Workers Compensation acts disability benefit acts or other employee benefit acts . .
Bonding .. Bonds The Contractor shall provide signed valid and enforceable Performance and Payment Bonds complying with the Contract .
The Department may also require Warranty and Maintenance Bonds for specific items using a Contract specific special provision .
For a related provision see Section .
Award Conditions .
The Contractor shall procure bonds from a company organized and operating in the United States licensed or approved to do business in the State of Maine by the State of Maine Department of Business Regulation Bureau of Insurance and listed on the latest Federal Department of the Treasury listing for Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies .
The bonds shall each be in the full Contract amount payable to the Treasurer State of Maine and on the Departments forms on exact copies thereof or on forms that do not contain any significant variations from the Departments forms as solely determined by the Department .
By issuing a bond the Surety agrees to be bound by all terms of the Contract including those related to payment time of performance quality warranties and the Departments self help remedy provided in Section .
Default to the same extent as if all terms of the Contract are contained in the bonds .
Regarding claims related to any obligations covered by these bonds the Surety shall provide within Days of Receipt of written notice thereof full payment of the entire claim or written notice of all bases upon which it is denying or contesting payment .
Failure of the Surety to provide such notice within the day period constitutes the Suretys waiver of any right to deny or contest payment and the Suretys acknowledgment that the claim is valid and undisputed .
If the Surety becomes financially insolvent or stops operating in the United States the Contractor shall file new bonds complying with this Section within Days of the date the Contractor is notified of such change .
For a related provision see Section .. Other Warranty Provisions .
..
Bond for Use of Municipal Roads A bond for use of municipal Roads may be required as provided in Section .
Hauling of Materials and Equipment .
..
Bonding for Landscape Maintenance Period The Contractor shall provide a signed valid and enforceable Landscape Warranty Bond when specified in Special Provision .
The Landscape Warranty Bond shall be presented to the Resident at the time of Physical Work Complete .
Payment for the Landscape Warranty Bond shall be incidental to the Landscape Items .
The bond shall be in the full amount for all Pay Items for work pursuant to Sec Landscape payable to the Treasurer State of Maine and on the Departments forms on exact copies thereof or on forms that do not contain any significant variations from the Departments forms as solely determined by the Department .
The Contractor shall pay all premiums and take all other actions necessary to keep said bond in effect for the duration of the Landscape Establishment Period described in Special Provision .
Maintenance Period .
If the Surety becomes financially insolvent ceases to be licensed or approved to do business in the State of Maine or stops operating in the United States the Contractor shall file new bonds complying with this Section within Days of the date the Contractor is notified or becomes aware of such change .
All Bonds shall be procured from a company organized and operating in the United States licensed or approved to do business in the State of Maine by the State of Maine Department of Business Regulation Bureau of Insurance and listed on the latest Federal Department of the Treasury listing for Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as Acceptable Reinsuring Companies .
By issuing a bond the Surety agrees to be bound by all terms of the Contract including those related to payment time for performance quality warranties and the Departments self help remedy provided in Section .
Default to the same extent as if all terms of the Contract are contained in the bonds .
Regarding claims related to any obligations covered by the bond the Surety shall provide within Days of Receipt of written notice thereof full payment of the entire claim or written notice of all bases upon which it is denying or contesting payment .
Failure of the Surety to provide such notice within the day period constitutes the Suretys waiver of any right to deny or contest payment and the Suretys acknowledgment that the claim is valid and undisputed. . Insurance The Contractor shall provide signed valid and enforceable certificates of insurance complying with this Section .
All insurance must be procured from insurance companies licensed or approved to do business in the State of Maine by the State of Maine Department of Business Regulation Bureau of Insurance .
The Contractor shall pay all premiums and take all other actions necessary to keep required insurances in effect for the duration of the Contract obligations excluding warranty obligations .
.. Workers Compensation For all operations performed by the Contractor and any Subcontractor the Contractor and each Subcontractor shall carry Workers Compensation Insurance or shall qualify as a selfinsurer with the State of Maine Workers Compensation Board in accordance with the requirements of the laws of the State of Maine .
If maritime exposures exist coverage shall include United States Long Shore and Harbor Workers coverage .
.. Commercial General Liability With respect to all operations performed by the Contractor and any Subcontractors the Contractor and any Subcontractors shall carry commercial general liability insurance in an amount not less than .
per occurrence and .
in the Aggregate .
The coverage must include products completed operations and Contractual liability coverages and Insurance Services Office ISO form CG or equivalent .
The Contractual liability insurance shall cover the Contractors obligations to indemnify the Department as provided in this Contract including Section .
Indemnification .
The coverage shall also include protection against damage claims due to use of explosives collapse and underground coverage if the Work involves such exposures .
When the work to be performed entails the use of barges tug boats work boats supply boats etc .
Protection and Indemnity coverage shall be provided at the limits called for under Commercial General Liability insurance .
..
Automobile Liability The Contractor shall carry Automobile Liability Insurance covering the operation of all motor vehicles including any that are rented leased borrowed or otherwise used in connection with the Project .
The minimum limit of liability under this Section shall be .
per occurrence .
.. Professional Liability Contractors and Subcontractors who engage in design Work preliminary Engineering Work and environmental consulting Work for the Department shall maintain a Professional Liability policy for errors and omissions that provides a minimum liability of per claim and annual aggregate .
Design Work includes the design of temporary Structures and all other Work that requires design computations .
This policy shall cover Wrongful Acts meaning negligent acts errors or omissions by the Contractor or any entity for whom the Contractor is legally liable arising out of the performance of or failure to perform professional services .
The Department reserves the right to adjust liability coverage on a projectby project basis as it deems appropriate .
.. Owners and Contractors Protective Liability If required by Special Provision the Contractor shall carry an Owners and Contractors Protective OCP Policy covering all operations performed by the Contractor and any Subcontractor in an amount not less than .
per occurrence and .
in the Aggregate naming the Department as the sole insured party under the policy .
.. Builders Risk Unless required by Special Provision the Department does not require the Contractor to carry Builders Risk Insurance .
However the Contractor is advised of its risks for damage to the Work as provided in Section .. Responsibility for Damage to the Work .
The Contractor is responsible for managing and insuring these risks as it deems appropriate .
.. Pollution Liability If required by Special Provision the Contractor shall carry Pollution Liability insurance to cover the risk of sudden or accidental discharge of pollutants during the prosecution of the Work .
The limits of liability for this coverage shall be in the amount of .
per occurrence and .
in the Aggregate .
Regardless of whether such insurance is carried by the Contractor the Contractor is responsible for managing these risks as it deems appropriate .
.. Railroad Protective Liability When working adjacent to a railroad the Contractor and Subcontractors shall carry Railroad Protective Liability Insurance as required by the Railroad .
..
Administrative General Provisions A .
Additional Insured Each policy with the exception of Workers Compensation and Professional Liability insurance shall list the Department of Transportation as an additional insured .
B .
Defense of Claims Each insurance policy shall include a provision requiring the carrier to investigate defend indemnify and hold harmless all named insureds against any and all claims for death bodily injury or property damage even if groundless .
C. Primary Insurance The insurance coverage provided by the Contractor shall be primary insurance with respect to the State its officers agents and employees .
Any insurance or selfinsurance maintained by the State for its officers agents and employees is in excess of the Agents insurance and shall not contribute with it .
D. Reporting Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policies shall not affect coverage provided to the State its officers agents and employees .
E. Separate Application The insurance provided by the Contractor shall apply separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought except with respect to the limits of the insurers liability .
Nothing in this document constitutes a waiver of any defense immunity or limitation of liability that may be available to the Department or its officers agents or employees under the Maine Tort Claims Act Title M.R.S.A .
st. seq .
and shall not constitute a waiver of other privileges or immunities that may be available to the Department .
SECTION RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES Scope of Section This Section contains provisions for resolving Disputes early efficiently fairly and as close to the Project level as possible .
For related provision see Section .
Communication and Coordination. . General .. Definitions Dispute is defined in Section .
Definitions .
Issue is defined in Section ..
Early Negotiation .
Additionally an Issue as used in Sections .
through .
below is a matter that may give rise to a Dispute .
..
Escalation Process To resolve Issues or Disputes the Contractor and the Department may mutually agree in writing at any time to any form of Dispute resolution including mediation facilitated negotiation neutral case evaluation arbitration or litigation .
In the absence of such written Agreement the parties must pursue resolution of Issues or Disputes that arise after Contract Execution as follows A first through negotiation at the Project level as provided in Sections ..
Early Negotiation and .
Project Level Negotiation B next through negotiation by management as provided in Section .
Negotiation by Management and C next through the Commissioner as set forth in Section .
Appeal to Commissioner .
If the Dispute remains unresolved after final agency action by the Commissioner then and only then may a party seek judicial review of a Dispute as provided in Section .
Judicial Review .
..
Relationship to Partnering Partnering including the establishment of a partnership charter does not in any way waive alter or otherwise affect any provision of the Contract including those requiring notice and all other provisions governing the resolution of Issues or Disputes .
For a related provision see Section .. Partnering .
..
Mandatory Notice The Contractor shall comply with all notice provisions of this Contract relating to Issues or Disputes including those contained in Sections .. Duty to Notify If Ambiguities Discovered .. A Early Negotiation Notice Required ..
Differing Site Conditions Notice and Procedural Requirements ..
Adjustments for Delay Notice and Procedural Requirements and Resolution of Disputes .
In order to promote the purposes of this Section all notice provisions are mandatory and are to be strictly construed .
Failure to provide Conforming notice constitutes waiver by the Contractor of any and all claims to additional compensation time or modification of Contract requirements related to the Issue or Dispute .
.. Work to Proceed Despite Issue or Dispute Regardless of the status or disposition of any Issue or Dispute the Contractor and the Department must perform their Contractual responsibilities Promptly and diligently .
Unless expressly directed otherwise by the Department the Contractor shall proceed without Delay to perform the Work or to Conform to the decision or Order of the Department .
..
Contractors Obligation to Keep Records Throughout the course of any Issue or Dispute the Contractor shall keep daily records including supporting documentation of extra costs and time related to the Issue or Dispute .
Such records shall include all nonsalaried labor Material costs Equipment expenses and location for all operations that are affected by the Issue or Dispute .
The Contractor will not be entitled to any change to compensation time or Work requirements without such records .
The Contractor shall permit the Department daily access to and shall provide copies of these and any other records needed for evaluating the Dispute .
The Contractor shall retain those records for the duration of the Dispute and as provided in Section .. Project Records .
.. Dispute Resolution Time Extensions All deadlines provided in this Section may be extended only by mutual written consent signed by both parties .
.. Commissioner Communications Before Appeal Because the Commissioner may hear an Appeal and render final agency action under Section .
Appeal to Commissioner the following persons shall not communicate with the Commissioner regarding the substance of a Dispute except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate A the Contractor or any agent for the Contractor and B Department staff counsel or consultants who are directly participating in Dispute resolution processes in an advocate capacity .
The preceding sentence does not prohibit the Commissioner from communicating with or having the aid or advice of all other Department staff counsel or consultants .
.. Contract Modification Required All changes to the Contract that regard Issues or Disputes and that affect compensation time quality or other Contract requirements must be made by written Contract Modification as provided by Section .
Contract Modification. . Project Level Negotiation ..
Early Negotiation The parties must first comply with all requirements of Section ..
Early Negotiation .
..
Detailed Notice of Dispute If Early Negotiation fails to resolve the Issue within Days of the date of Receipt of the written Notice of Issue for Consideration Conforming to Section .. A Early Negotiation and if the Contractor desires additional consideration by the Department then the Contractor must Deliver a written Detailed Notice of Dispute to the Program Manager within Days of the expiration of said day period .
At a minimum the Detailed Notice of Dispute shall include all of the following information in sufficient detail to allow reasoned analysis as determined by the Program Manager A .
A description of the background of Dispute including the dates the Issue or Dispute first arose and the date the Contractor provided the Project Manager or Resident with the Notice of Issue for Consideration Conforming to Section .. A Early Negotiation B .
All Contract provisions that are relevant to the Dispute C. All facts relevant to the Dispute including all nonContract Documents and all non documentary facts including identification of all persons with knowledge of relevant facts and a synopsis of their testimony D. The Contractors position as to why the Contract and facts demonstrate that the Contractor is entitled to additional compensation andor time E. The estimated dollar cost if any of the Disputed Work and how the estimate was determined F. If the Contractor is asserting an Excusable or Compensable Delay occurred an analysis of the progress schedule showing the impact on the Critical Path and G. A specific request for additional compensation or time or other change to provisions of the Contract .
.. Decision by Program Manager Within Days of receiving a Detailed Notice of Dispute Conforming to Section ..
Detailed Notice of Dispute the Program Manager will Deliver a written decision to the Contractor on the specific request made . .
Negotiation by Management .. Notice of Unresolved Dispute If the Contractor desires additional consideration the Contractor shall Deliver a written Notice of Unresolved Dispute to the Departments appropriate Bureau Director hereafter Director in this Section Resolution of Disputes within Days of receiving the Program Managers decision provided for in Section .. Decision by Program Manager .
At a minimum the Notice of Unresolved Dispute must include the following information in sufficient detail to allow reasoned analysis as determined by the Director or the directors designees A all documentation submitted to the Resident for Projectlevel negotiation B all decisions rendered by the Program Manager or equivalent Bureau level manager and C all additional information the Contractor desires the Department to consider .
.. Additional Documentation Within Days of the receiving a Notice of Unresolved Dispute Conforming to Section .. the Director or the Directors designees may require the Contractor to provide Additional Documentation .
If required the Contractor shall completely and accurately supply all requested information in writing within Days of receiving said request .
Failure to provide all Additional Documentation constitutes a waiver of all claims for additional compensation or time .
Additional Documentation may include the following .
A .
The dates on which facts arose which gave rise to the Issue or Dispute .
B .
The dates the Department Received the Notice of Issue for Consideration Conforming to Section .. A Early Negotiations Notice Required and the Detailed Notice of Dispute Conforming to Section C. A list of all Contract provisions that is relevant to the Dispute and a Statement of which specific Contract provisions the Contractor believes controls the outcome of the Dispute .
D. A narrative setting forth the Contractors position regarding additional compensation and time if any including all supporting facts including dates locations and items of Work affected by the Dispute and how the Contract provisions set forth in subparagraph C support the Contractors position .
E. A list of and copies of all documents that are relevant to the Dispute organized chronologically .
With respect to each document the list must include its date the authors including address and telephone numbers and the recipients .
F. A list of all persons that is involved in or knowledgeable of the Dispute including addresses and telephone numbers of such persons .
If such person has knowledge of oral Statements upon which the Contractor is relying the list must also include the substance of the oral Statements the dates they were made and all people present at the time the Statement was made .
G. If an extension of time is sought .
The specific Days or dates for which it is sought including an explanation of impact on the Critical Path .
The specific reasons the Contractor believes a time extension should be granted .
The specific provisions of the Contract under which it is sought .
H. If additional compensation is sought the exact amount sought and a breakdown of that amount into the categories provided by Section .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time .
I .
An oath consisting of the following language ON OATH and under the penalty of law for perjury or falsification the undersigned Name of person signing oath and title hereby certifies that the amounts claimed by the Contractor for additional compensation and time as applicable set forth in the Notice of Unresolved Dispute and this additional documentation are a true and complete Statement of the Actual Costs incurred and time sought and are fully documented and supported in accordance with the Contract .
J .
Date of signature sworn signature and acknowledgment by notary .
The Director or the Directors designee may also retrieve and review the Bid Escrow Documentation if any if the Contract required submission of Bid Escrow .
.. Decision by Director Within Days of receiving a Notice of Unresolved Dispute Conforming to Section .. Notice of Unresolved Dispute or if requested all Additional Documentation whichever is later the Director or the Directors designees will Deliver a written decision .
The decision will affirm reverse revise or amend the decision of the Program Manager. . Appeal to Commissioner .. Filing of Appeal If the Contractor elects the Contractor may file an Appeal of the Directors Decision .
Such Appeal must be filed within days of the Contractors Receipt of the Directors Decision .
At a minimum the Appeal must contain A .
All Materials submitted to the Director and all decisions by the Director B .
The specific findings of the Director that the appealing party claims are contrary to law andor fact C. Any other pertinent new documentary evidence D. Any written arguments the appealing party wishes the Commissioner to consider and E. The specific relief sought .
Unless directed otherwise by the Commissioner review of the Appeal will be limited to the documentation submitted .
.. Directors Response The Director may submit a written response within Days of receiving notice that an Appeal was filed with the Commissioner .
.. Time and Alternatives for Commissioner Action Within Days of receiving an Appeal Conforming to Section .. or if applicable the Directors response allowed by Section .. the Commissioner will A .
Affirm the decision of the Director or B .
Revise amend or reverse the decision of the Director .
..
Final Agency Action Any affirmation revision amendment or reversal by the Commissioner is final agency action as of the date of Receipt of such action by the Contractor .
If the Commissioner takes no action within such day period the decision of the Director shall be final agency action upon the expiration of said day period . .
Judicial Review All Bidders and Contractors hereby agree and acknowledge that with respect to any and all Disputes andor Issues arising from the Bid andor the Contract they must and will comply with all of the Notice and Dispute Resolution provisions of this Contract .
For related provisions see Sections ..
Escalation Process and ..
Mandatory Notice .
All Bidders and Contractors hereby agree and acknowledge that they must comply with and exhaust the Notice and Dispute Resolutions provisions of this Contract to the point of Final Agency Action prior to seeking judicial review .
See Section ..
Final Agency Action .
All Bidders and Contractors hereby agree and acknowledge that the sole and exclusive means of judicial review of Final Agency Actions under the Contract is through a petition for review pursuant to Maine Rule of Civil Procedure C and Sections et seq .
of the Maine Administration Procedures Act to be filed in Maine Superior Court Kennebec County .
SECTION DEFAULT AND TERMINATION Scope of Section This Section contains general provisions related to Default and termination of the Contract . .
Default ..
Grounds for Default The Contractor and the Surety are in Default of the Contract if the Contractor or the Surety A .
Fails to Promptly begin the Work under the Contract after being authorized to proceed B .
Fails to perform the Work with sufficient labor Equipment or Materials to assure the timely Completion of the Work C. Performs Defective Work neglects or refuses to uncover remove or rebuild Unacceptable Work or neglects or refuses to uncover Unauthorized or Uninspected Work when directed by the Department D. Discontinues the prosecution of the Work without Departmental approval E. Continues to perform Work after the Department directs that Work be stopped F. Fails to resume Work which has been suspended as required by the Contract G. Becomes insolvent or is declared bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency that could affect the Work in any way H. Allows any final judgment to stand against the Contractor unsatisfied for a period of ten Days I .
Makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors without authorization by the Department or J .
In any other manner fails to perform the Work in Substantial Conformity with any material provision of the Contract .
.. Notice of Default Cure Except as otherwise provided in this Contract if Default occurs the Department may give written Notice of Default to the Contractor and its Surety .
Failure to give Notice of Default is in no way a waiver by the Department of any provision of the Contract .
If the Contractor or Surety fails to completely cure such Default within a period of Days after Notice of Default then the Department may A terminate the Contract for cause in accordance with Section .. For Cause or B take prosecution of the Work away from the Contractor without violating the Contract . .
Termination The Department may by written order to the Contractor terminate the Contract as provided in this Section .
Termination of the Contract or portion thereof shall not relieve the Contractor of its Contractual responsibilities for the Work completed including warranty obligations nor shall it relieve the Surety of its obligation for claims arising from the Work or the Contract .
.. For Cause If the Contractor fails to completely cure all Defects identified in the Notices of Default provided for in Section .. within the day cure period provided the Department may immediately terminate the Contract for cause by written Notice of Termination For Cause .
In this event the Department may use any or all Materials and Equipment for the Work and may enter into an Agreement with another entity for the Completion of the Work or use such other methods as in the opinion of the Department are required for the Completion of the intent of the Contract in an acceptable and timely manner .
The Department will pay for all Accepted items of Work as of the date of Termination at agreed upon prices .
Items eliminated in their entirety by Termination will be paid for as provided in Section .
Elimination of Items except that there will be no reductions in the amount of the credit to the Department .
The Contractor shall make all Work records available to the Department upon request regarding payment under this Section .
All costs and charges incurred by the Department together with the cost of completing the Work specified in the Contract will be deducted from amounts otherwise due the Contractor .
If such expenses exceed the sum that would have been payable under the Contract then the Contractor and the Surety are liable and shall pay to the Department the amount of such excess within Days of the Delivery of a Statement setting forth such expenses to the Contractor and the Surety as applicable .
If the Contractor files for bankruptcy at any time before expiration of the warranty periods provided by this Contract then the Contractor and its Surety agree if requested by the Department and within Days of such request to take all actions necessary or convenient to reject or accept this Contract under the executory Contract provisions of the federal bankruptcy code .
.. For Convenience The Department may terminate this Contract for convenience or for any reason that is in the best interest of the Department .
Terminations caused without fault of or for reasons beyond the control of the Contractor are Terminations for Convenience .
The Department will notify the Contractor of such terminations by sending a Notice of Termination for Convenience .
In case of a Termination for Convenience the Department will pay for all Accepted items of Work as of the date of termination at agreed upon prices .
Items eliminated in their entirety by Termination will be paid for as provided in Section .
Elimination of Items .
The Contractor shall make all Work records available to the Department upon request regarding payment under this Section .
Acceptable Materials obtained by the Contractor for the Work but which have not been incorporated therein may at the option of the Department be purchased from the Contractor at Actual Cost Delivered to a prescribed location or otherwise disposed of as mutually agreed .
After Receipt of Notice of Termination for Convenience from the Department the Contractor may also submit a claim for additional damages or costs not covered above or elsewhere in this Contract to the Project Manager within Days of the effective Termination date .
Such claim may include such cost items as idle Equipment time Bidding and Project investigative costs overhead expenses attributable to the Project terminated legal and accounting charges involved in claim preparation Subcontractor costs not otherwise paid for idle labor cost if Work is stopped in advance of termination date guaranteed payments for private land usage as part of the original Contract and any other cost or damage item for which the Contractor reasonably believes reimbursement should be made .
In no event however will loss of anticipated profits be considered as part of any settlement .
The Contractor agrees to make the Bid Escrow Documentation if any and its cost records available to the extent necessary to determine the validity and amount of each item claimed .
The Department will respond in writing to such claim within Days of Receipt .
If the Contractor wants additional consideration the Contractor must Deliver a written Notice of Unresolved Dispute to the Director as provided in Section .. Notice of Unresolved Dispute and comply with all other applicable Dispute resolution provisions of Section Resolution of Disputes .
A APPENDIX A TO DIVISION SECTION BIDDING PROVISIONS A .
Federally Required Certifications By signing and delivering a Bid the Bidder certifies as provided in all certifications set forth in this Appendix A Federal Contract Provisions Supplement including Certification Regarding No Kickbacks to Procure Contract as provided on this page below .
Certification Regarding Noncollusion as provided on page below .
Certification Regarding Nonsegregated Facilities as provided by FHWA Form section III set forth on page below .
Certification Regarding Debarment Suspension Ineligibility and Voluntary Exclusion as provided by FHWA Form section XI set forth on page below .
Certification Regarding Use of Contract Funds for Lobbying as provided by FHWA Form section XII set forth on page below .
Unless otherwise provided below the term Bidder for the purposes of these certifications includes the Bidder its principals and the persons signing the Bid .
Upon execution of the Contract the Bidder then called the Contractor will again make all the certifications indicated in this paragraph above .
CERTIFICATION REGARDING NO KICKBACKS TO PROCURE CONTRACT Except expressly stated by the Bidder on sheets submitted with the Bid if any the Bidder hereby certifies to the best of its knowledge and belief that it has not A employed or retained for a commission percentage brokerage contingent fee or other consideration any firm or person other then a bona fide employee working solely for me to solicit or secure this contract B agreed as an express or implied condition for obtaining this contract to employ or retain the services of any firm or person in connection with carrying out the contract or C paid or agreed to pay to any firm organization or person other than a bona fide employee working solely for me any fee contribution donation or consideration of any kind for or in connection with procuring or carrying out the contract By signing and submitting a Bid the Bidder acknowledges that this certification is to be furnished to the Maine Department of Transportation and the Federal Highway Administration U.S. Department of Transportation in connection with this contract in anticipation of federal aid highway funds and is subject to applicable state and federal laws both criminal and civil .
A CERTIFICATION REGARDING NONCOLLUSION Under penalty of perjury as provided by federal law U.S.C .
the Bidder hereby certifies to the best of its knowledge and belief that the Bidder has not either directly or indirectly entered into any agreement participated in any collusion or otherwise taken any action in restraint of competitive bidding in connection with the Contract .
For a related provisions see Section .. C of the Standard Specifications Effects of Signing and Delivery of Bids Certifications Section of this Appendix A entitled Other Federal Requirements including section XI Certification Regarding Debarment Suspension Ineligibility and Voluntary Exclusion and section XII .
Certification Regarding Use of Contract Funds for Lobbying .
B .
Bid Rigging Hotline To report bid rigging activities call The U.S. Department of Transportation DOT operates the above tollfree hotline Monday through Friday a.m. to p.m. eastern time .
Anyone with knowledge of possible bid rigging bidder collusion or other fraudulent activities should use the hotline to report such activities .
The hotline is part of the DOTs continuing effort to identify and investigate highway construction contract fraud and abuse and is operated under the direction of the DOT Inspector General .
All information will be treated confidentially and caller anonymity will be respected .
SECTION FEDERAL EEO AND CIVIL RIGHTS REQUIREMENTS Unless expressly otherwise provided in the Bid Documents the provisions contained in this Section of this Federal Contract Provisions Supplement are hereby incorporated into the Bid Documents and Contract .
A. Nondiscrimination Civil Rights Title VI The Contractor and its subcontractors shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this Contract .
The Contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of CFR Part in the award and administration of DOT assisted contracts .
Failure by the Contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the Department deems appropriate .
The Contractor and subcontractors shall comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of as amended and with all State of Maine and other Federal Civil Rights laws .
For related provisions see Subsection B Nondiscrimination and Affirmative Action Executive Order of this Section and Section Other Federal Requirements of this Federal Contract Provisions Supplement including section II Nondiscrimination of the Required Contract Provisions Federal Aid Construction Contracts FHWA .
A B. Nondiscrimination and Affirmative Action Executive Order Pursuant to Executive Order which was issued by President Johnson in and amended in and this Contract provides as follows .
The Contractor shall take specific affirmative actions to ensure equal employment opportunity .
The evaluation of the Contractors compliance with these specifications shall be based upon its efforts to achieve maximum results from its actions .
The Contractor shall document these efforts fully and shall implement affirmative action steps at least as extensive as the following Ensure and maintain a working environment free of harassment intimidations and coercion at all sites and in all facilities at which the Contractors employees are assigned to work .
The Contractor where possible will assign two or more women to each construction project .
The Contractor shall specifically ensure that all forepersons superintendents and other onsite supervisory personnel are aware of and carry out the Contractors obligation to maintain such a working environment with specific attention to minority or female individuals working at such sites or in such facilities .
Establish and maintain a current list of minority and female recruitment sources provide written notification to minority and female recruitment sources and to community organizations when the Contractor or its union have employment opportunities available and to maintain a record of the organizations responses .
Maintain a current file of the names addresses and telephone numbers of each minority and female offthestreet applicant and minority or female referral from a union a recruitment source or community organization and of what action was taken with respect to each such individual .
If such individual was sent to the union hiring hall for referral and was not referred back to the Contractor by the union or if referred not employed by the Contractor this shall be documented in the file with the reason therefore along with whatever additional actions the Contractor may have taken .
Provide immediate written notification to the Departments Civil Rights Office when the union or unions with which the Contractor has a collective bargaining agreement has not referred to the Contractor a minority person or woman sent by the Contractor or when the Contractor has other information that the union referral process has impeded the Design Builders efforts to meet its obligations .
Develop onthejob training opportunities andor participate in training programs for the area which expressly include minorities and women including upgrading programs and apprenticeship and trainee programs relevant to the Contractors employment needs especially those programs funded or approved by the Department of Labor .
The Contractor shall provide notice of these programs to the sources compiled under B above .
Disseminate the Contractors EEO policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and training programs and requesting their cooperation in assisting the Contractor in meeting its A EEO obligation by including it in any policy manual and collective bargaining agreement by publicizing it in the company newspaper annual report etc .
by specific review of the policy with all management personnel and with all minority and female employees at least once a year and by posting the company EEO policy on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each location where construction work is performed .
Review at least annually the companys EEO policy and affirmative action obligations under these specifications with all employees having any responsibility for hiring assignment layoff termination or other employment decisions including specific review of these items with onsite supervisory personnel such as Superintendents General Forepersons etc .
prior to the initiation of construction work at any job site .
A written record shall be made and maintained identifying the time and place of these meetings persons attending subject matter discussed and disposition of the subject matter .
Disseminate the Contractors EEO policy externally by including it in any advertising in the news media specifically including minority and female news media and providing written notification to and discussing the Contractors EEO policy with other Contractors and Subcontractors with whom the Contractor does or anticipates doing business .
Direct its recruitment efforts both orally and written to minority female and community organizations to schools with minority and female students and to minority and female recruitment and training organizations serving the Contractors recruitment area and employment needs .
Not later that one month prior to the date for the acceptance of applications for apprenticeship or other training by any recruitment source the Contractor shall send written notification to organizations such as the above describing the openings screenings procedures and test to be used in the selection process .
Encourage present minority and female employees to recruit other minority persons and women and where reasonable provide after school summer and vacation employment to minority and female youth both on the site and in other areas of a Contractors workforce .
Validate all tests and other selection requirements .
Conduct at least annually an inventory and evaluation at least of all minority and female personnel for promotional opportunities and encourage these employees to seek or to prepare for through appropriate training etc .
such opportunities .
Ensure that seniority practices job classifications work assignments and other personnel practices do not have a discriminatory effect by continually monitoring all personnel and employment related activities to ensure that the EEO policy and the Contractors obligations under these specifications are being carried out .
Ensure that all facilities and company activities are non segregated except that separate or singleuser toilet and necessary changing facilities shall be provided to assure privacy between the sexes .
A Document and maintain a record of all solicitations of offers for subcontracts from minority and female construction Contractors and suppliers including circulation of solicitations to minority and female Contractor associations and other business associations .
Conduct a review at least annually of all supervisors adherence to and performance under the Contractors EEO policies and affirmative action obligations .
C. Goals for Employment of Women and Minorities Per Executive Order craft tradesperson goals are .
women and .
minorities employed .
However goals may be adjusted upward at the mutual agreement of the Contractor and the Department .
Calculation of these percentages shall not include OntheJob Training Program trainees and shall not include clerical or field clerk position employees .
For a more complete presentation of requirements for such Goals see the federally required document Goals for Employment of Females and Minorities set forth in the next pages below .
Start of GOALS FOR EMPLOYMENT OF FEMALES AND MINORITIES Federally Required Contract Document .
Solicitations d The following notice shall be included in and shall be part of all solicitations for offers and bids on all Federal and federally assisted construction contracts or subcontracts in excess of to be performed in geographical areas designated by the Director pursuant to .
of this part see CFR .a Notice of Requirement for Affirmative Action to Ensure Equal Opportunity Executive Order .
The Offerors or bidders attention is called to the Equal Opportunity Clause and the Standard Federal Equal Employment Specifications set forth herein . .
The goals and timetables for minority and female participation expressed in percentage terms for the Contractors aggregate work force in each trade on all construction work in the covered area are as follows Goals for female participation in each trade .
Goals for minority participation for each trade Maine Bangor ME .
NonSMSA Counties Aroostook Hancock Penobscot Piscataquis Waldo Washington A PortlandLewiston ME SMSA Counties LewistonAuburn ME .
Androscoggin Portland ME .
Cumberland Sagadahoc NonSMSA Counties .
Franklin Kennebec Knox Lincoln Oxford Somerset York These goals are applicable to all the Contractors construction work whether or not it is Federal or federally assisted performed in the covered area .
If the contractor performs construction work in a geographical area located outside of the covered area it shall apply the goals established for such geographical area where the work is actually performed .
With regard to this second area the contractor also is subject to the goals for both its federally involved and non federally involved construction .
The contractors compliance with the Executive Order and the regulations in CFR Part shall be based on its implementation of the Equal Opportunity Clause specific affirmative action obligations required by the specifications set forth in CFR .a and its efforts to meet the goals .
The hours of minority and female employment and training must be substantially uniform throughout the length of the contract and in each trade and the contractor shall make a good faith effort to employ minorities and women evenly on each of its projects .
The transfer of minority or female employees or trainees from Contractor to Contractor or from project to project for the sole purpose of meeting the Contractors goals shall be in violation of the contract the Executive Order and the regulations in CFR Part .
Compliance with the goals will be measured against the total work hours performed . .
The Contractor shall provide written notification to the Director of the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs within working days of award of any construction subcontract in excess of at any tier for construction work under the contract resulting from this solicitation .
The notification shall list the name address and telephone number of the subcontractor employer identification number of the subcontractor estimated dollar amount of the subcontract estimated started and completion dates of the subcontract and the geographical area in which the subcontract is to be performed. . As used in this Notice and in the Contract resulting from this solicitation the covered area is insert description of the geographical areas where the contract is to be performed giving the state county and city if any .
STANDARD FEDERAL EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT SPECIFICATIONS EXECUTIVE ORDER .
As used in these specifications A a .
Covered area means the geographical area described in the solicitation from which this contract resulted b .
Director means Director Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs United States Department of Labor or any person to whom the Director delegates authority c. Employer identification number means the Federal Social Security number used on the Employers Quarterly Federal Tax Return U.S. Treasury Department form d. Minority includes i Black all persons having origins in any of the Black African racial groups not of Hispanic origin ii Hispanic all persons of Mexican Puerto Rican Cuban Central or South American or other Spanish Culture or origin regardless of race iii Asian and Pacific Islander all persons having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East Southeast Asia the Indian Subcontinent or the Pacific Islands and iv American Indian or Alaskan Native all persons having origins in any of the original peoples of the North America and maintaining identifiable tribal affiliations through membership and participation or community identification . .
Whenever the Contractor or any subcontractor at any tier subcontracts a portion of the work involving any construction trade it shall physically include in each subcontract in excess of the provisions of these specifications and the Notice which contains the applicable goals for minority and female participation and which is set forth in the solicitations from which this contract resulted . .
If the contractor is participating pursuant to CFR .
in a Hometown Plan approved by the U.S. Department of Labor in the covered area either individually or through an association its affirmative action obligations on all work in the Plan area including goals and timetables shall be in accordance with that Plan for those trades which have unions participating in the Plan .
Contractors must be able to demonstrate their participation in and compliance with the provisions of any such Hometown Plan .
Each Contractor or Subcontractor participating in an approved Plan is individually required to comply with its obligations under the EEO clause and to make a good faith effort to achieve each goal under the Plan in each trade in which it has employees .
The overall good faith performance by other Contractors for Subcontractors toward a goal in an approved Plan does not excuse any covered Contractors or Subcontractors failure to take good faith efforts to achieve the Plan goals and timetables . .
The Contractor shall implement the specific affirmative action standards provided in paragraphs a. through p. of these specifications .
The goals set forth in the solicitation from which this contract resulted are expressed as percentages of the total hours of employment and training of minority and female utilization the Contractor should reasonably be able to achieve in each construction trade in which it has employees in contractors performing A construction work in geographical areas where they do not have a Federal or federally assisted construction contract shall apply the minority and female goals established for the geographical areas where the work is being performed .
Goals are published periodically in the Federal Register in notice form and such notices may be obtained from any Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs office or from Federal procurement contracting officers .
The Contractor is expected to make substantially uniform progress in meeting its goals in each craft during the period specific . .
Neither the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement nor the failure by a union with whom the Contractor has a collective bargaining agreement to refer either minorities or women shall excuse the Contractors obligations under these specifications Executive Order or the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto . .
In order for the non working training hours of apprentices and trainees to be counted in meeting the goals such apprentices and trainees must be employed by the Contractor during the training period and the Contractor must have made a commitment to employ the apprentices and trainees at the completion of their training subject to the availability of employment opportunities .
Trainees must be trained pursuant to training programs approved by the U.S. Department of Labor . .
The Contractor shall take specific affirmative actions to ensure equal employment opportunity .
The evaluation of the Contractors compliance with these specifications shall be based upon its effort to achieve maximum results from its actions .
The Contractor shall document these efforts fully and shall implement affirmative action steps at least as expensive as the following a .
Ensure and maintain a working environment free of harassment intimidation coercion at all sites and in all facilities at which the Contractors employees are assigned to work .
The Contractor when possible will assign two or more women to each construction project .
The Contractor shall specifically ensure that all foremen superintendents and other onsite supervisory personnel are aware of and carry out the Contractors obligation to maintain such a working environment with specific attention to minority or female individuals working at such sites or in such facilities .
b .
Establish and maintain a current list of minority and female recruitment sources provide written notification to minority and female recruitment sources and to community organizations when the Contractor or its unions have employment opportunities available and maintain a record of the organizations responses .
c. Maintain a current file of the names addresses and telephone numbers of each minority and female offthestreet applicant and minority or female referral from a union a recruitment sources or community organization and of what action was taken with respect to each such individual .
If such individual was sent to the union hiring hall for referral and was not referred back to the Contractor by the union or if referred not A employed by the Contractor this shall be documented in the file with the reason therefore along with whatever additional actions the Contractor may have taken .
d. Provide immediate written notification to the Director when the union or unions with which the Contractor has a collective bargaining agreement has not referred to the Contractor a minority person or woman sent by the Contractor or when the Contractor has other information that the union referral process has impeded the Contractors efforts to meet its obligations .
e. Develop onthejob training opportunities andor participate in training programs for the area which expressly include minorities and women including upgrading programs and apprenticeship and trainee programs relevant to the Contractors employment needs especially those programs funded or approved by the Department of Labor .
The Contractor shall provide notice of these programs to the sources complied under b above .
f. Disseminate the Contractors EEO policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and training programs and requesting their cooperation in assisting the Contractor in meeting its EEO obligations by including in any policy manual and collective bargaining agreement by publicizing it in the company newspaper annual report etc .
by specific review of the policy with all management personnel and with all minority and female employees at least once a year and by posting the company EEO policy on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each location where construction work is performed .
g. Review at least annually the companys EEO policy and affirmative action obligations under these specifications with all employees having any responsibility for hiring assignment layoff termination or other employment decisions including specific review of these items with onsite supervisory personnel such as Superintendents General Foremen etc .
prior to the initiation of construction work at any job site .
A written record shall be made and maintained identifying the time and place of these meetings persons attending subject matter discussed and disposition of the subject matter .
h. Disseminate the Contractors EEO policy externally by including it in any advertising in the news media specifically including minority and female news media and providing written notification to and discussing the Contractors EEO policy with other Contractors and Subcontractors with whom the Contractor does or anticipates doing business .
i .
Direct its recruitment efforts both oral and written to minority female and community organizations to schools with minority and female students and to minority and female recruitment and training organizations serving the Contractors recruitment area and employment needs .
Not later than one month other training by any recruitment source the Contractor shall send written notification to organizations such as the above describing prior to the date for the acceptance of applications for apprenticeship or the openings screening procedures and tests to be used in the selection process .
A j .
Encourage present minority and female employees to recruit other minority persons and women and where reasonable provide after school summer and vacation employment to minority and female youth both on site and in other areas of a Contractors work force .
k. Validate all tests and other selection requirements where there is an obligation to do so under CFR Part .
l. Conduct at least annually an inventory and evaluation at least of all minority and female personnel for promotional opportunities and encourage these employees to seek or to prepare for through appropriate training etc .
such opportunities .
m. Ensure that seniority practices job classifications work assignments and other personnel practices do not have a discriminatory effect by continually monitoring all personnel and employment related activities to ensure that the EEO policy and the Contractors obligations under these specifications are being carried out .
n. Ensure that all facilities and company activities are non segregated except that separate or singleuser toilet and necessary changing facilities shall be provided to assure privacy between the sexes .
o .
Document and maintain a record of all solicitations of offers for subcontracts from minority and female construction contractors and suppliers including circulation of solicitation to minority and female contractor associations and other business associations .
p. Conduct a review at least annually of all supervisors adherence to and performance under the Contractors EEO policies and affirmative action obligations . .
Contractors are encouraged to participate in voluntary associations which assist in fulfilling one or more of their affirmative action obligations a through p ..
The efforts of a contractor association joint contractorunion contractorcommunity or other similar group of which the contractor is a member and participant may be asserted as fulfilling any one or more of its obligations under a through p. of these specifications provided that the contractor actively participates in the group makes every effort to assure that the group has a positive impact on the employment of minorities and women in the industry ensures that the concrete benefits of the program and reflected in the Contractors minority and female work force participation makes a good faith effort to meet its individual goals and timetables and can provide access to documentation which demonstrates the effectiveness of actions take on behalf of the Contractor .
The obligation to comply however is the Contractors and failure of such a group to fulfill an obligation shall not be a defense for the Contractors noncompliance. . A single goal for minorities and a separate single goal for women have been established .
The Contractor however is required to provide equal employment opportunity and to take A affirmative action for all minority groups both make and female and all women both minority and nonminority .
Consequently the Contractor may be in violation of the Executive Order if a particular group is employed in a substantially disparate manner for example specific minority group of women is underutilized . .
The Contractor shall not use the goals and timetables or affirmative action even through the Contractor has achieved its goals for women generally the Contractor may be in violation of the Executive Order if standards to discriminate against any person because of race color religion sex or national origin . .
The Contractor shall not enter into any Subcontract with any person or firm debarred from Government contracts pursuant to Executive Order . .
The Contractor shall carry out such sanctions and penalties for violation of these specifications and of the Equal Opportunity Clause including suspension termination and cancellation of existing subcontracts as may be imposed or ordered pursuant to Executive Order as amended and its implementation regulations by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs .
Any Contractor who fails to carry out such sanctions and penalties shall be in violation of these specifications and Executive Order as amended . .
The Contractor in fulfilling its obligations under these specifications shall implement specific affirmative action steps at least as extensive as those standards prescribed in paragraph of these specifications so as to achieve maximum results from its efforts to ensure equal employment opportunity .
If the Contractor fails to comply with the requirements of the Executive Order the implementing regulations or these specifications the Director shall proceed in accordance with CFR .. .
The Contractor shall designate a responsible official to monitor all employment related activity to ensure that the company EEO policy is being carried out to submit reports relating to the provisions hereof as may be required by the Government and to keep records .
Records shall at least include for each employee the name address telephone numbers construction trade union affiliation if any employee identification number when assigned social security number race sex status e.g .
mechanic apprentice trainee helper or laborer dates of changes in status hours worked per week in the indicated trade rate of pay and location sat which the work was performed .
Records be maintained in an easily understandable and retrievable form however to the degree that existing records satisfy this requirement contractors shall not be required to maintain separate records . .
Nothing herein provided shall be construed as a limitation upon the application of other laws which establish different standards of compliance or upon the application of requirements for the hiring of local or other area residents e.g .
those under the Public Works Employment Act of and the Community Development Block Grant Program .
End of GOALS FOR EMPLOYMENT OF FEMALES AND MINORITIES A Federally Required Contract Document D. Disadvantaged Business Enterprise DBE Requirements The Department has established an annual Disadvantaged Business Enterprise goal to be achieved through race neutral means .
This goal will be adjusted periodically and will be provided by Supplemental Provision .
The Contractor shall comply with all provisions of this section regarding DBE participation and the Departments latest version of the Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Program Manual said Manual being incorporated herein by reference .
In the case of conflict between this Contract and said Manual this Contract shall control .
The Department reserves the right to adjust DBE goals on a projectbyproject basis by addendum .
Policy .
It is the Departments policy that DBEs as defined in CFR Part and referenced in the Transportation Equity Act for st Century of as amended from the Surface Transportation Uniform Relocation Assistance Act of and the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of .
The intent hereto remains to provide the maximum opportunity for DBEs to participate in the performance of contracts financed in whole or in part with federal funds .
The Department and its Contractors shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin ancestry sex age or disability in the award and performance of DOT assisted contracts .
Disadvantaged Business Enterprises are those so certified by the Maine Department of Transportation Civil Rights Office prior to bid opening date .
The Department has determined that elements of a good faith effort to meet the contract goal include but are not limited to the following .
Whether the Contractor advertised in general circulation trade association and minoritywomensfocus media concerning the subcontracting opportunities .
Whether the Contractor provided written notice to a reasonable number of specific DBEs that their interest in the contract is being solicited .
Whether the Contractor followed up on initial solicitations of interest by contacting DBEs to determine with certainty whether the DBEs were interested .
Whether the Contractor selected portions of the work to be performed by DBEs in order to increase the likelihood of meeting the DBE goals .
Whether the Contractor provided interested DBEs with adequate information about the plans specification and requirements of the contract A .
Whether the Contractor negotiated in good faith with interested DBEs not rejecting the DBE as unqualified without sound reasons based on a thorough investigation of their capabilities .
Whether the Contractor made efforts to assist interested DBEs with other appropriate technicalfinancial assistance required by the Department or Contractor .
Whether the Contractor effectively used the services of available minoritywomens community organizations minoritywomens business assistance offices and other organizations that provide assistance in the recruitment and placement of DBEs .
Substitutions of DBEs .
The following may be acceptable reasons for Civil Rights Office approval of such a change order The DBE defaults voluntarily removes itself or is overextended The Department deletes portions of the work to by performed by the DBE .
It is not intended that the ability to negotiate a more advantageous contract with another certified DBE be considered a valid basis for such a change in DBE utilization once the DBE Bid Submission review has been passed .
Any requests to alter the DBE commitment must be in writing and included with the change order .
Failure to carry out terms of this Standard Specification shall be treated as a violation of this contract and will result in contract sanctions which may include withholding of partial payments totaling the creditable dollars amount which would have been paid for said DBE participation termination of this contract or other measures which may affect the ability of the Contractor to obtain Department contracts .
Copies of the Maine Department of Transportations DBE Program may be obtained from Maine Department of Transportation Civil Rights Office State House Station Augusta Maine tel .
Quarterly Reporting Requirement .
The Contractor must submit Semiannual reports of actual dollars paid to Disadvantaged Business Enterprises DBEs on this Project to the MaineDOT Civil Rights Office by the end of the third week of April and October for the period covering the preceding six months considered Federal Fiscal Year periods .
The reports will be submitted directly to the Civil Rights Office on the form provided in the latest version of the DBE Program Manual .
Failure to submit the report by the deadline may result in a withholding of approval of partial payment estimates by the Department .
A SECTION OTHER FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS Unless expressly otherwise provided in the Bid Documents the provisions contained in this Section of this Federal Contract Provisions Supplement are hereby incorporated into the Bid Documents and Contract .
A .
Buy America If the cost of products purchased for permanent use in this project which are manufactured of steel iron or the application of any coating to products of these materials exceeds .
percent of the contract amount or .
whichever is greater the products shall have been manufactured and the coating applied in the United States .
The coating materials are not subject to this clause only the application of the coating .
In computing that amount only the cost of the product and coating application cost will be included .
Ore for the manufacture of steel or iron may be from outside the United States however all other manufacturing processes of steel or iron must be in the United States to qualify as having been manufactured in the United States .
United States includes the United States and any place subject to the jurisdiction thereof .
Products of steel include but are not limited to such products as structural steel piles guardrail steel culverts reinforcing steel structural plate and steel supports for signs luminaries and signals .
Products of iron include but are not limited to such products as cast iron grates .
Application of coatings include but are not limited to such applications as epoxy galvanized and paint .
To assure compliance with this section the Contractor shall submit a certification letter on its letterhead to the Department stating the following This is to certify that products made of steel iron or the application of any coating to products of these materials whose costs are in excess of .
or .
percent of the original contract amount whichever is greater were manufactured and the coating if one was required was applied in the United States .
B .
Materials a. Convict Produced Materials References U.S.C .
b CFR .
Applicability FHWAs prohibition against the use of convict material only applies to Federalaid highways .
Materials produced after July by convict labor may only be incorporated in a Federalaid highway construction project if such materials have been produced by convicts who are on parole supervised release or probation from a prison or A such material has been produced in a qualified prison facility e.g .
prison industry with the amount produced during any month period for use in Federalaid projects not exceeding the amount produced for such use during the month period ending July .
Materials obtained from prison facilities e.g .
prison industries are subject to the same requirements for Federalaid participation that are imposed upon materials acquired from other sources .
Materials manufactured or produced by convict labor will be given no preferential treatment .
The preferred method of obtaining materials for a project is through normal contracting procedures which require the contractor to furnish all materials to be incorporated in the work .
The contractor selects the source public or private from which the materials are to be obtained CFR .. Prison industries are prohibited from bidding on projects directly CFR .e but may act as material supplier to construction contractors .
Prison materials may also be approved as Statefurnished material .
However since public agencies may not bid in competition with private firms direct acquisition of materials from a prison industry for use as Statefurnished material is subject to a public interest finding with the Division Administrators concurrence CFR .d .
Selection of materials produced by convict labor as Statefurnished materials for mandatory use should be cleared prior to the submittal of the Plans Specifications Estimates PSE .
b. PatentedProprietary Products References U.S.C .
CFR .
FHWA will not participate directly or indirectly in payment for any premium or royalty on any patented or proprietary material specification or process specifically set forth in the plans and specifications for a project unless the item is purchased or obtained through competitive bidding with equally suitable unpatented items the STA certifies either that the proprietary or patented item is essential for synchronization with the existing highway facilities or that no equally suitable alternative exists or the item is used for research or for a special type of construction on relatively short sections of road for experimental purposes .
States should follow FHWAs procedures for Construction Projects Incorporating Experimental Features expermnt.htm for the submittal of work plans and evaluations .
The primary purpose of the policy is to have competition in selection of materials and allow for development of new materials and products .
The policy further permits materials and products that are judged equal may be bid under generic specifications .
If only patented or proprietary products are acceptable they shall be bid as alternatives with all or at least a reasonable number of acceptable materials or products listed and the Division Administrator may approve a single source if it can be found that its utilization is in the public interest .
A Trade names are generally the key to identifying patented or proprietary materials .
Trade name examples include M Corten etc .
Generally products identified by their brand or trade name are not to be specified without an or equal phrase and if trade names are used all or at least a reasonable number of acceptable equal materials or products should be listed .
The licensing of several suppliers to produce a product does not change the fact that it is a single product and should not be specified to the exclusion of other equally suitable products .
c. State Preference References U.S.C .
CFR .
Materials produced within Maine shall not be favored to the exclusion of comparable materials produced outside of Maine .
State preference clauses give particular advantage to the designated source and thus restrict competition .
Therefore State preference provisions shall not be used on any Federalaid construction projects .
This policy also applies to State preference actions against materials of foreign origin except as otherwise permitted by Federal law .
Thus States can not give preference to inState material sources over foreign material sources .
Under the Buy America provisions the States are permitted to expand the Buy America restrictions provided that the STA is legally authorized under State law to impose more stringent requirements .
d. State OwnedFurnishedDesignated Materials References U.S.C .
CFR .
Current FHWA policy requires that the contractor must furnish all materials to be incorporated in the work and the contractor shall be permitted to select the sources from which the materials are to be obtained .
Exceptions to this requirement may be made when there is a definite finding by MaineDOT and concurred in by Federal Highway Administrations FHWA Division Administrator that it is in the public interest to require the contractor to use materials furnished by the MaineDOT or from sources designated by MaineDOT .
The exception policy can best be understood by separating Statefurnished materials into the categories of manufactured materials and local natural materials .
Manufactured Materials When the use of Statefurnished manufactured materials is approved based on a public interest finding such use must be made mandatory .
The optional use of Statefurnished manufactured materials is in violation of our policy prohibiting public agencies from competing with private firms .
Manufactured materials to be furnished by MaineDOT must be acquired through competitive bidding unless there is a public interest finding for another method and concurred in by FHWAs Division Administrator .
Local Natural Materials When MaineDOT owns or controls a local natural materials source such as a borrow pit or a stockpile of salvaged pavement material etc .
the materials may be designated for either optional or mandatory use however mandatory use will require a public interest finding PIF and FHWAs Division Administrators concurrence .
A In order to permit prospective bidders to properly prepare their bids the location cost and any conditions to be met for obtaining materials that are made available to the contractor shall be stated in the bidding documents .
Mandatory Disposal Sites Normally the disposal site for surplus excavated materials is to be of the contractors choosing although an optional sites may be shown in the contract provisions .
A mandatory site shall be specified when there is a finding by MaineDOT with the concurrence of the Division Administrator that such placement is the most economical or that the environment would be substantially enhanced without excessive cost .
Discussion of the mandatory use of a disposal site in the environmental document may serve as the basis for the public interest finding .
Summarizing FHWA policy for the mandatory use of borrow or disposal sites mandatory use of either requires a public interest finding and FHWAs Division Administrators concurrence mandatory use of either may be based on environmental consideration where the environment will be substantially enhanced without excessive additional cost and where the use is based on environmental considerations the discussion in the environmental document may be used as the basis for the public interest finding .
Factors to justify a public interest finding should include such items as cost effectiveness system integrity and local shortages of material .
C. Standard FHWA Contract Provisions FHWA Unless expressly otherwise provided in the Bid Documents the following Required Contract Provisions Federal Aid Construction Contracts FHWA are hereby incorporated into the Bid Documents and Contract .
Start of FHWA REQUIRED CONTRACT PROVISIONS FEDERALAID CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS As revised through May FHWA Revised May A REQUIRED CONTRACT PROVISIONS FEDERALAID CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS I .
General II .
Nondiscrimination III .
Nonsegregated Facilities IV .
DavisBacon and Related Act Provisions V. Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act Provisions VI .
Subletting or Assigning the Contract VII .
Safety Accident Prevention VIII .
False Statements Concerning Highway Projects IX .
Implementation of Clean Air Act and Federal Water Pollution Control Act X .
Compliance with Governmentwide Suspension and Debarment Requirements XI .
Certification Regarding Use of Contract Funds for Lobbying ATTACHMENTS A .
Employment and Materials Preference for Appalachian Development Highway System or Appalachian Local Access Road Contracts included in Appalachian contracts only I .
GENERAL .
Form FHWA must be physically incorporated in each construction contract funded under Title excluding emergency contracts solely intended for debris removal .
The contractor or subcontractor must insert this form in each subcontract and further require its inclusion in all lower tier subcontracts excluding purchase orders rental agreements and other agreements for supplies or services .
The applicable requirements of Form FHWA are incorporated by reference for work done under any purchase order rental agreement or agreement for other services .
The prime contractor shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor lowertier subcontractor or service provider .
Form FHWA must be included in all Federalaid designbuild contracts in all subcontracts and in lower tier subcontracts excluding subcontracts for design services purchase orders rental agreements and other agreements for supplies or services .
The designbuilder shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor lowertier subcontractor or service provider .
Contracting agencies may reference Form FHWA in bid proposal or request for proposal documents however the Form FHWA must be physically incorporated not referenced in all contracts subcontracts and lowertier subcontracts excluding purchase orders rental agreements and other agreements for supplies or services related to a construction contract .
A .
Subject to the applicability criteria noted in the following sections these contract provisions shall apply to all work performed on the contract by the contractors own organization and with the assistance of workers under the contractors immediate superintendence and to all work performed on the contract by piecework station work or by subcontract. . A breach of any of the stipulations contained in these Required Contract Provisions may be sufficient grounds for withholding of progress payments withholding of final payment termination of the contract suspension debarment or any other action determined to be appropriate by the contracting agency and FHWA . .
Selection of Labor During the performance of this contract the contractor shall not use convict labor for any purpose within the limits of a construction project on a Federalaid highway unless it is labor performed by convicts who are on parole supervised release or probation .
The term Federalaid highway does not include roadways functionally classified as local roads or rural minor collectors .
II .
NONDISCRIMINATION The provisions of this section related to CFR Part are applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts and to all related construction subcontracts of or more .
The provisions of CFR Part are not applicable to material supply engineering or architectural service contracts .
In addition the contractor and all subcontractors must comply with the following policies Executive Order CFR CFR Title USC Section the Rehabilitation Act of as amended USC Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of as amended and related regulations including CFR Parts and and CFR Parts and .
The contractor and all subcontractors must comply with the requirements of the Equal Opportunity Clause in CFR .b and for all construction contracts exceeding the Standard Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Construction Contract Specifications in CFR ..
Note The U.S. Department of Labor has exclusive authority to determine compliance with Executive Order and the policies of the Secretary of Labor including CFR and CFR .
The contracting agency and the FHWA have the authority and the responsibility to ensure compliance with Title USC Section the Rehabilitation Act of as amended USC and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of as amended and related regulations including CFR Parts and and CFR Parts and .
The following provision is adopted from CFR Appendix A with appropriate revisions to conform to the U.S. Department of Labor US DOL and FHWA requirements . .
Equal Employment Opportunity Equal employment opportunity EEO requirements not to discriminate and to take affirmative action to assure equal opportunity as set forth under laws A executive orders rules regulations CFR CFR CFR CFR and CFR and orders of the Secretary of Labor as modified by the provisions prescribed herein and imposed pursuant to U.S.C .
shall constitute the EEO and specific affirmative action standards for the contractors project activities under this contract .
The provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act of U.S.C .
et seq .
set forth under CFR and CFR are incorporated by reference in this contract .
In the execution of this contract the contractor agrees to comply with the following minimum specific requirement activities of EEO a .
The contractor will work with the contracting agency and the Federal Government to ensure that it has made every good faith effort to provide equal opportunity with respect to all of its terms and conditions of employment and in their review of activities under the contract .
b .
The contractor will accept as its operating policy the following statement It is the policy of this Company to assure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race religion sex color national origin age or disability .
Such action shall include employment upgrading demotion or transfer recruitment or recruitment advertising layoff or termination rates of pay or other forms of compensation and selection for training including apprenticeship pre apprenticeship andor onthejob training. . EEO Officer The contractor will designate and make known to the contracting officers an EEO Officer who will have the responsibility for and must be capable of effectively administering and promoting an active EEO program and who must be assigned adequate authority and responsibility to do so . .
Dissemination of Policy All members of the contractors staff who are authorized to hire supervise promote and discharge employees or who recommend such action or who are substantially involved in such action will be made fully cognizant of and will implement the contractors EEO policy and contractual responsibilities to provide EEO in each grade and classification of employment .
To ensure that the above agreement will be met the following actions will be taken as a minimum a .
Periodic meetings of supervisory and personnel office employees will be conducted before the start of work and then not less often than once every six months at which time the contractors EEO policy and its implementation will be reviewed and explained .
The meetings will be conducted by the EEO Officer .
b .
All new supervisory or personnel office employees will be given a thorough indoctrination by the EEO Officer covering all major aspects of the contractors EEO obligations within thirty days following their reporting for duty with the contractor .
c. All personnel who are engaged in direct recruitment for the project will be instructed by the EEO Officer in the contractors procedures for locating and hiring minorities and women .
A d. Notices and posters setting forth the contractors EEO policy will be placed in areas readily accessible to employees applicants for employment and potential employees .
e. The contractors EEO policy and the procedures to implement such policy will be brought to the attention of employees by means of meetings employee handbooks or other appropriate means . .
Recruitment When advertising for employees the contractor will include in all advertisements for employees the notation An Equal Opportunity Employer .
All such advertisements will be placed in publications having a large circulation among minorities and women in the area from which the project work force would normally be derived .
a .
The contractor will unless precluded by a valid bargaining agreement conduct systematic and direct recruitment through public and private employee referral sources likely to yield qualified minorities and women .
To meet this requirement the contractor will identify sources of potential minority group employees and establish with such identified sources procedures whereby minority and women applicants may be referred to the contractor for employment consideration .
b .
In the event the contractor has a valid bargaining agreement providing for exclusive hiring hall referrals the contractor is expected to observe the provisions of that agreement to the extent that the system meets the contractors compliance with EEO contract provisions .
Where implementation of such an agreement has the effect of discriminating against minorities or women or obligates the contractor to do the same such implementation violates Federal nondiscrimination provisions .
c. The contractor will encourage its present employees to refer minorities and women as applicants for employment .
Information and procedures with regard to referring such applicants will be discussed with employees . .
Personnel Actions Wages working conditions and employee benefits shall be established and administered and personnel actions of every type including hiring upgrading promotion transfer demotion layoff and termination shall be taken without regard to race color religion sex national origin age or disability .
The following procedures shall be followed a .
The contractor will conduct periodic inspections of project sites to insure that working conditions and employee facilities do not indicate discriminatory treatment of project site personnel .
b .
The contractor will periodically evaluate the spread of wages paid within each classification to determine any evidence of discriminatory wage practices .
c. The contractor will periodically review selected personnel actions in depth to determine whether there is evidence of discrimination .
Where evidence is found the contractor will A promptly take corrective action .
If the review indicates that the discrimination may extend beyond the actions reviewed such corrective action shall include all affected persons .
d. The contractor will promptly investigate all complaints of alleged discrimination made to the contractor in connection with its obligations under this contract will attempt to resolve such complaints and will take appropriate corrective action within a reasonable time .
If the investigation indicates that the discrimination may affect persons other than the complainant such corrective action shall include such other persons .
Upon completion of each investigation the contractor will inform every complainant of all of their avenues of appeal. . Training and Promotion a .
The contractor will assist in locating qualifying and increasing the skills of minorities and women who are applicants for employment or current employees .
Such efforts should be aimed at developing full journey level status employees in the type of trade or job classification involved .
b .
Consistent with the contractors work force requirements and as permissible under Federal and State regulations the contractor shall make full use of training programs i.e .
apprenticeship and onthejob training programs for the geographical area of contract performance .
In the event a special provision for training is provided under this contract this subparagraph will be superseded as indicated in the special provision .
The contracting agency may reserve training positions for persons who receive welfare assistance in accordance with U.S.C .
a. c. The contractor will advise employees and applicants for employment of available training programs and entrance requirements for each .
d. The contractor will periodically review the training and promotion potential of employees who are minorities and women and will encourage eligible employees to apply for such training and promotion . .
Unions If the contractor relies in whole or in part upon unions as a source of employees the contractor will use good faith efforts to obtain the cooperation of such unions to increase opportunities for minorities and women .
Actions by the contractor either directly or through a contractors association acting as agent will include the procedures set forth below a .
The contractor will use good faith efforts to develop in cooperation with the unions joint training programs aimed toward qualifying more minorities and women for membership in the unions and increasing the skills of minorities and women so that they may qualify for higher paying employment .
b .
The contractor will use good faith efforts to incorporate an EEO clause into each union agreement to the end that such union will be contractually bound to refer applicants without regard to their race color religion sex national origin age or disability .
A c. The contractor is to obtain information as to the referral practices and policies of the labor union except that to the extent such information is within the exclusive possession of the labor union and such labor union refuses to furnish such information to the contractor the contractor shall so certify to the contracting agency and shall set forth what efforts have been made to obtain such information .
d. In the event the union is unable to provide the contractor with a reasonable flow of referrals within the time limit set forth in the collective bargaining agreement the contractor will through independent recruitment efforts fill the employment vacancies without regard to race color religion sex national origin age or disability making full efforts to obtain qualified andor qualifiable minorities and women .
The failure of a union to provide sufficient referrals even though it is obligated to provide exclusive referrals under the terms of a collective bargaining agreement does not relieve the contractor from the requirements of this paragraph .
In the event the union referral practice prevents the contractor from meeting the obligations pursuant to Executive Order as amended and these special provisions such contractor shall immediately notify the contracting agency . .
Reasonable Accommodation for Applicants Employees with Disabilities The contractor must be familiar with the requirements for and comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act and all rules and regulations established there under .
Employers must provide reasonable accommodation in all employment activities unless to do so would cause an undue hardship . .
Selection of Subcontractors Procurement of Materials and Leasing of Equipment The contractor shall not discriminate on the grounds of race color religion sex national origin age or disability in the selection and retention of subcontractors including procurement of materials and leases of equipment .
The contractor shall take all necessary and reasonable steps to ensure nondiscrimination in the administration of this contract .
a .
The contractor shall notify all potential subcontractors and suppliers and lessors of their EEO obligations under this contract .
b .
The contractor will use good faith efforts to ensure subcontractor compliance with their EEO obligations. . Assurance Required by CFR .b a .
The requirements of CFR Part and the State DOTs U.S. DOTapproved DBE program are incorporated by reference .
b .
The contractor or subcontractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this contract .
The contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of CFR Part in the award and administration of DOTassisted contracts .
A Failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the contracting agency deems appropriate. . Records and Reports The contractor shall keep such records as necessary to document compliance with the EEO requirements .
Such records shall be retained for a period of three years following the date of the final payment to the contractor for all contract work and shall be available at reasonable times and places for inspection by authorized representatives of the contracting agency and the FHWA .
a .
The records kept by the contractor shall document the following The number and work hours of minority and nonminority group members and women employed in each work classification on the project The progress and efforts being made in cooperation with unions when applicable to increase employment opportunities for minorities and women and The progress and efforts being made in locating hiring training qualifying and upgrading minorities and women b .
The contractors and subcontractors will submit an annual report to the contracting agency each July for the duration of the project indicating the number of minority women and non minority group employees currently engaged in each work classification required by the contract work .
This information is to be reported on Form FHWA .
The staffing data should represent the project work force on board in all or any part of the last payroll period preceding the end of July .
If onthejob training is being required by special provision the contractor will be required to collect and report training data .
The employment data should reflect the work force on board during all or any part of the last payroll period preceding the end of July .
III .
NONSEGREGATED FACILITIES This provision is applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts and to all related construction subcontracts of or more .
The contractor must ensure that facilities provided for employees are provided in such a manner that segregation on the basis of race color religion sex or national origin can not result .
The contractor may neither require such segregated use by written or oral policies nor tolerate such use by employee custom .
The contractors obligation extends further to ensure that its employees are not assigned to perform their services at any location under the contractors control where the facilities are segregated .
The term facilities includes waiting rooms work areas restaurants and other eating areas time clocks restrooms washrooms locker rooms and other storage or dressing areas parking lots drinking fountains recreation or entertainment areas transportation and housing provided for employees .
The contractor shall provide separate or singleuser restrooms and necessary dressing or sleeping areas to assure privacy between sexes .
A IV .
DAVISBACON AND RELATED ACT PROVISIONS This section is applicable to all Federalaid construction projects exceeding and to all related subcontracts and lowertier subcontracts regardless of subcontract size .
The requirements apply to all projects located within the rightofway of a roadway that is functionally classified as Federalaid highway .
This excludes roadways functionally classified as local roads or rural minor collectors which are exempt .
Contracting agencies may elect to apply these requirements to other projects .
The following provisions are from the U.S. Department of Labor regulations in CFR .
Contract provisions and related matters with minor revisions to conform to the FHWA format and FHWA program requirements . .
Minimum wages a .
All laborers and mechanics employed or working upon the site of the work will be paid unconditionally and not less often than once a week and without subsequent deduction or rebate on any account except such payroll deductions as are permitted by regulations issued by the Secretary of Labor under the Copeland Act CFR part the full amount of wages and bona fide fringe benefits or cash equivalents thereof due at time of payment computed at rates not less than those contained in the wage determination of the Secretary of Labor which is attached hereto and made a part hereof regardless of any contractual relationship which may be alleged to exist between the contractor and such laborers and mechanics .
Contributions made or costs reasonably anticipated for bona fide fringe benefits under section b of the DavisBacon Act on behalf of laborers or mechanics are considered wages paid to such laborers or mechanics subject to the provisions of paragraph .d .
of this section also regular contributions made or costs incurred for more than a weekly period but not less often than quarterly under plans funds or programs which cover the particular weekly period are deemed to be constructively made or incurred during such weekly period .
Such laborers and mechanics shall be paid the appropriate wage rate and fringe benefits on the wage determination for the classification of work actually performed without regard to skill except as provided in CFR .a .
Laborers or mechanics performing work in more than one classification may be compensated at the rate specified for each classification for the time actually worked therein Provided That the employers payroll records accurately set forth the time spent in each classification in which work is performed .
The wage determination including any additional classification and wage rates conformed under paragraph .b .
of this section and the Davis Bacon poster WH shall be posted at all times by the contractor and its subcontractors at the site of the work in a prominent and accessible place where it can be easily seen by the workers .
b .
The contracting officer shall require that any class of laborers or mechanics including helpers which is not listed in the wage determination and which is to be employed under the contract shall be classified in conformance with the wage determination .
The contracting officer shall approve an additional classification and wage rate and fringe benefits therefore only when the following criteria have been met A i The work to be performed by the classification requested is not performed by a classification in the wage determination and ii The classification is utilized in the area by the construction industry and iii The proposed wage rate including any bona fide fringe benefits bears a reasonable relationship to the wage rates contained in the wage determination .
If the contractor and the laborers and mechanics to be employed in the classification if known or their representatives and the contracting officer agree on the classification and wage rate including the amount designated for fringe benefits where appropriate a report of the action taken shall be sent by the contracting officer to the Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division Employment Standards Administration U.S. Department of Labor Washington DC .
The Administrator or an authorized representative will approve modify or disapprove every additional classification action within days of receipt and so advise the contracting officer or will notify the contracting officer within the day period that additional time is necessary .
In the event the contractor the laborers or mechanics to be employed in the classification or their representatives and the contracting officer do not agree on the proposed classification and wage rate including the amount designated for fringe benefits where appropriate the contracting officer shall refer the questions including the views of all interested parties and the recommendation of the contracting officer to the Wage and Hour Administrator for determination .
The Wage and Hour Administrator or an authorized representative will issue a determination within days of receipt and so advise the contracting officer or will notify the contracting officer within the day period that additional time is necessary .
The wage rate including fringe benefits where appropriate determined pursuant to paragraphs .b .
or .b .
of this section shall be paid to all workers performing work in the classification under this contract from the first day on which work is performed in the classification .
c. Whenever the minimum wage rate prescribed in the contract for a class of laborers or mechanics includes a fringe benefit which is not expressed as an hourly rate the contractor shall either pay the benefit as stated in the wage determination or shall pay another bona fide fringe benefit or an hourly cash equivalent thereof .
d. If the contractor does not make payments to a trustee or other third person the contractor may consider as part of the wages of any laborer or mechanic the amount of any costs reasonably anticipated in providing bona fide fringe benefits under a plan or program Provided That the Secretary of Labor has found upon the written request of the contractor that the applicable standards of the DavisBacon Act have been met .
The Secretary of Labor may require the contractor to set aside in a separate account assets for the meeting of obligations under the plan or program .
A .
Withholding The contracting agency shall upon its own action or upon written request of an authorized representative of the Department of Labor withhold or cause to be withheld from the contractor under this contract or any other Federal contract with the same prime contractor or any other federallyassisted contract subject to DavisBacon prevailing wage requirements which is held by the same prime contractor so much of the accrued payments or advances as may be considered necessary to pay laborers and mechanics including apprentices trainees and helpers employed by the contractor or any subcontractor the full amount of wages required by the contract .
In the event of failure to pay any laborer or mechanic including any apprentice trainee or helper employed or working on the site of the work all or part of the wages required by the contract the contracting agency may after written notice to the contractor take such action as may be necessary to cause the suspension of any further payment advance or guarantee of funds until such violations have ceased. . Payrolls and basic records a. Payrolls and basic records relating thereto shall be maintained by the contractor during the course of the work and preserved for a period of three years thereafter for all laborers and mechanics working at the site of the work .
Such records shall contain the name address and social security number of each such worker his or her correct classification hourly rates of wages paid including rates of contributions or costs anticipated for bona fide fringe benefits or cash equivalents thereof of the types described in section bB of the DavisBacon Act daily and weekly number of hours worked deductions made and actual wages paid .
Whenever the Secretary of Labor has found under CFR .aiv that the wages of any laborer or mechanic include the amount of any costs reasonably anticipated in providing benefits under a plan or program described in section bB of the DavisBacon Act the contractor shall maintain records which show that the commitment to provide such benefits is enforceable that the plan or program is financially responsible and that the plan or program has been communicated in writing to the laborers or mechanics affected and records which show the costs anticipated or the actual cost incurred in providing such benefits .
Contractors employing apprentices or trainees under approved programs shall maintain written evidence of the registration of apprenticeship programs and certification of trainee programs the registration of the apprentices and trainees and the ratios and wage rates prescribed in the applicable programs .
b .
The contractor shall submit weekly for each week in which any contract work is performed a copy of all payrolls to the contracting agency .
The payrolls submitted shall set out accurately and completely all of the information required to be maintained under CFR .ai except that full social security numbers and home addresses shall not be included on weekly transmittals .
Instead the payrolls shall only need to include an individually identifying number for each employee e.g .
the last four digits of the employees social security number .
The required weekly payroll information may be submitted in any form desired .
Optional Form WH is available for this purpose from the Wage and Hour Division Web site at httpwww.dol.govesawhdformswhinstr.htm or its successor site .
The prime contractor is responsible for the submission of copies of payrolls by all subcontractors .
Contractors and subcontractors shall maintain the full social security number and current address of each covered A worker and shall provide them upon request to the contracting agency for transmission to the State DOT the FHWA or the Wage and Hour Division of the Department of Labor for purposes of an investigation or audit of compliance with prevailing wage requirements .
It is not a violation of this section for a prime contractor to require a subcontractor to provide addresses and social security numbers to the prime contractor for its own records without weekly submission to the contracting agency .. Each payroll submitted shall be accompanied by a Statement of Compliance signed by the contractor or subcontractor or his or her agent who pays or supervises the payment of the persons employed under the contract and shall certify the following i That the payroll for the payroll period contains the information required to be provided under .
aii of Regulations CFR part the appropriate information is being maintained under .
ai of Regulations CFR part and that such information is correct and complete ii That each laborer or mechanic including each helper apprentice and trainee employed on the contract during the payroll period has been paid the full weekly wages earned without rebate either directly or indirectly and that no deductions have been made either directly or indirectly from the full wages earned other than permissible deductions as set forth in Regulations CFR part iii That each laborer or mechanic has been paid not less than the applicable wage rates and fringe benefits or cash equivalents for the classification of work performed as specified in the applicable wage determination incorporated into the contract .
The weekly submission of a properly executed certification set forth on the reverse side of Optional Form WH shall satisfy the requirement for submission of the Statement of Compliance required by paragraph .b .
of this section .
The falsification of any of the above certifications may subject the contractor or subcontractor to civil or criminal prosecution under section of title and section of title of the United States Code .
c. The contractor or subcontractor shall make the records required under paragraph .a .
of this section available for inspection copying or transcription by authorized representatives of the contracting agency the State DOT the FHWA or the Department of Labor and shall permit such representatives to interview employees during working hours on the job .
If the contractor or subcontractor fails to submit the required records or to make them available the FHWA may after written notice to the contractor the contracting agency or the State DOT take such action as may be necessary to cause the suspension of any further payment advance or guarantee of funds .
Furthermore failure to submit the required records upon request or to make such records available may be grounds for debarment action pursuant to CFR .. . Apprentices and trainees a. Apprentices programs of the USDOL .
A Apprentices will be permitted to work at less than the predetermined rate for the work they performed when they are employed pursuant to and individually registered in a bona fide apprenticeship program registered with the U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration Office of Apprenticeship Training Employer and Labor Services or with a State Apprenticeship Agency recognized by the Office or if a person is employed in his or her first days of probationary employment as an apprentice in such an apprenticeship program who is not individually registered in the program but who has been certified by the Office of Apprenticeship Training Employer and Labor Services or a State Apprenticeship Agency where appropriate to be eligible for probationary employment as an apprentice .
The allowable ratio of apprentices to journeymen on the job site in any craft classification shall not be greater than the ratio permitted to the contractor as to the entire work force under the registered program .
Any worker listed on a payroll at an apprentice wage rate who is not registered or otherwise employed as stated above shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the classification of work actually performed .
In addition any apprentice performing work on the job site in excess of the ratio permitted under the registered program shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the work actually performed .
Where a contractor is performing construction on a project in a locality other than that in which its program is registered the ratios and wage rates expressed in percentages of the journeymans hourly rate specified in the contractors or subcontractors registered program shall be observed .
Every apprentice must be paid at not less than the rate specified in the registered program for the apprentices level of progress expressed as a percentage of the journeymen hourly rate specified in the applicable wage determination .
Apprentices shall be paid fringe benefits in accordance with the provisions of the apprenticeship program .
If the apprenticeship program does not specify fringe benefits apprentices must be paid the full amount of fringe benefits listed on the wage determination for the applicable classification .
If the Administrator determines that a different practice prevails for the applicable apprentice classification fringes shall be paid in accordance with that determination .
In the event the Office of Apprenticeship Training Employer and Labor Services or a State Apprenticeship Agency recognized by the Office withdraws approval of an apprenticeship program the contractor will no longer be permitted to utilize apprentices at less than the applicable predetermined rate for the work performed until an acceptable program is approved .
b .
Trainees programs of the USDOL .
Except as provided in CFR .
trainees will not be permitted to work at less than the predetermined rate for the work performed unless they are employed pursuant to and individually registered in a program which has received prior approval evidenced by formal certification by the U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration .
The ratio of trainees to journeymen on the job site shall not be greater than permitted under the plan approved by the Employment and Training Administration .
A Every trainee must be paid at not less than the rate specified in the approved program for the trainees level of progress expressed as a percentage of the journeyman hourly rate specified in the applicable wage determination .
Trainees shall be paid fringe benefits in accordance with the provisions of the trainee program .
If the trainee program does not mention fringe benefits trainees shall be paid the full amount of fringe benefits listed on the wage determination unless the Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division determines that there is an apprenticeship program associated with the corresponding journeyman wage rate on the wage determination which provides for less than full fringe benefits for apprentices .
Any employee listed on the payroll at a trainee rate who is not registered and participating in a training plan approved by the Employment and Training Administration shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the classification of work actually performed .
In addition any trainee performing work on the job site in excess of the ratio permitted under the registered program shall be paid not less than the applicable wage rate on the wage determination for the work actually performed .
In the event the Employment and Training Administration withdraws approval of a training program the contractor will no longer be permitted to utilize trainees at less than the applicable predetermined rate for the work performed until an acceptable program is approved .
c. Equal employment opportunity .
The utilization of apprentices trainees and journeymen under this part shall be in conformity with the equal employment opportunity requirements of Executive Order as amended and CFR part .
d. Apprentices and Trainees programs of the U.S .
DOT .
Apprentices and trainees working under apprenticeship and skill training programs which have been certified by the Secretary of Transportation as promoting EEO in connection with Federal aid highway construction programs are not subject to the requirements of paragraph of this Section IV .
The straight time hourly wage rates for apprentices and trainees under such programs will be established by the particular programs .
The ratio of apprentices and trainees to journeymen shall not be greater than permitted by the terms of the particular program . .
Compliance with Copeland Act requirements .
The contractor shall comply with the requirements of CFR part which are incorporated by reference in this contract. . Subcontracts .
The contractor or subcontractor shall insert Form FHWA in any subcontracts and also require the subcontractors to include Form FHWA in any lower tier subcontracts .
The prime contractor shall be responsible for the compliance by any subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor with all the contract clauses in CFR .. . Contract termination debarment .
A breach of the contract clauses in CFR .
may be grounds for termination of the contract and for debarment as a contractor and a subcontractor as provided in CFR .. .
Compliance with DavisBacon and Related Act requirements .
All rulings and interpretations of the DavisBacon and Related Acts contained in CFR parts and are herein incorporated by reference in this contract .
A .
Disputes concerning labor standards .
Disputes arising out of the labor standards provisions of this contract shall not be subject to the general disputes clause of this contract .
Such disputes shall be resolved in accordance with the procedures of the Department of Labor set forth in CFR parts and .
Disputes within the meaning of this clause include disputes between the contractor or any of its subcontractors and the contracting agency the U.S. Department of Labor or the employees or their representatives. . Certification of eligibility .
a .
By entering into this contract the contractor certifies that neither it nor he or she nor any person or firm who has an interest in the contractors firm is a person or firm ineligible to be awarded Government contracts by virtue of section a of the DavisBacon Act or CFR .a .
b .
No part of this contract shall be subcontracted to any person or firm ineligible for award of a Government contract by virtue of section a of the DavisBacon Act or CFR .a .
c. The penalty for making false statements is prescribed in the U.S. Criminal Code U.S.C. . V. CONTRACT WORK HOURS AND SAFETY STANDARDS ACT The following clauses apply to any Federalaid construction contract in an amount in excess of and subject to the overtime provisions of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act .
These clauses shall be inserted in addition to the clauses required by CFR .a or CFR .. As used in this paragraph the terms laborers and mechanics include watchmen and guards . .
Overtime requirements .
No contractor or subcontractor contracting for any part of the contract work which may require or involve the employment of laborers or mechanics shall require or permit any such laborer or mechanic in any workweek in which he or she is employed on such work to work in excess of forty hours in such workweek unless such laborer or mechanic receives compensation at a rate not less than one and onehalf times the basic rate of pay for all hours worked in excess of forty hours in such workweek . .
Violation liability for unpaid wages liquidated damages .
In the event of any violation of the clause set forth in paragraph .
of this section the contractor and any subcontractor responsible therefor shall be liable for the unpaid wages .
In addition such contractor and subcontractor shall be liable to the United States in the case of work done under contract for the District of Columbia or a territory to such District or to such territory for liquidated damages .
Such liquidated damages shall be computed with respect to each individual laborer or mechanic including watchmen and guards employed in violation of the clause set forth in paragraph .
of this section in the sum of for each calendar day on which such individual was required or permitted to work in excess of the standard workweek of forty hours without payment of the overtime wages required by the clause set forth in paragraph .
of this section . .
Withholding for unpaid wages and liquidated damages .
The FHWA or the contacting agency shall upon its own action or upon written request of an authorized representative of the A Department of Labor withhold or cause to be withheld from any moneys payable on account of work performed by the contractor or subcontractor under any such contract or any other Federal contract with the same prime contractor or any other federallyassisted contract subject to the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act which is held by the same prime contractor such sums as may be determined to be necessary to satisfy any liabilities of such contractor or subcontractor for unpaid wages and liquidated damages as provided in the clause set forth in paragraph .
of this section. . Subcontracts .
The contractor or subcontractor shall insert in any subcontracts the clauses set forth in paragraph .
through .
of this section and also a clause requiring the subcontractors to include these clauses in any lower tier subcontracts .
The prime contractor shall be responsible for compliance by any subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor with the clauses set forth in paragraphs .
through .
of this section .
VI .
SUBLETTING OR ASSIGNING THE CONTRACT This provision is applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts on the National Highway System . .
The contractor shall perform with its own organization contract work amounting to not less than percent or a greater percentage if specified elsewhere in the contract of the total original contract price excluding any specialty items designated by the contracting agency .
Specialty items may be performed by subcontract and the amount of any such specialty items performed may be deducted from the total original contract price before computing the amount of work required to be performed by the contractors own organization CFR .. a .
The term perform work with its own organization refers to workers employed or leased by the prime contractor and equipment owned or rented by the prime contractor with or without operators .
Such term does not include employees or equipment of a subcontractor or lower tier subcontractor agents of the prime contractor or any other assignees .
The term may include payments for the costs of hiring leased employees from an employee leasing firm meeting all relevant Federal and State regulatory requirements .
Leased employees may only be included in this term if the prime contractor meets all of the following conditions the prime contractor maintains control over the supervision of the daytoday activities of the leased employees the prime contractor remains responsible for the quality of the work of the leased employees the prime contractor retains all power to accept or exclude individual employees from work on the project and the prime contractor remains ultimately responsible for the payment of predetermined minimum wages the submission of payrolls statements of compliance and all other Federal regulatory requirements .
b .
Specialty Items shall be construed to be limited to work that requires highly specialized knowledge abilities or equipment not ordinarily available in the type of contracting A organizations qualified and expected to bid or propose on the contract as a whole and in general are to be limited to minor components of the overall contract . .
The contract amount upon which the requirements set forth in paragraph of Section VI is computed includes the cost of material and manufactured products which are to be purchased or produced by the contractor under the contract provisions . .
The contractor shall furnish a a competent superintendent or supervisor who is employed by the firm has full authority to direct performance of the work in accordance with the contract requirements and is in charge of all construction operations regardless of who performs the work and b such other of its own organizational resources supervision management and engineering services as the contracting officer determines is necessary to assure the performance of the contract. . No portion of the contract shall be sublet assigned or otherwise disposed of except with the written consent of the contracting officer or authorized representative and such consent when given shall not be construed to relieve the contractor of any responsibility for the fulfillment of the contract .
Written consent will be given only after the contracting agency has assured that each subcontract is evidenced in writing and that it contains all pertinent provisions and requirements of the prime contract . .
The selfperformance requirement of paragraph is not applicable to designbuild contracts however contracting agencies may establish their own selfperformance requirements .
VII .
SAFETY ACCIDENT PREVENTION This provision is applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts . .
In the performance of this contract the contractor shall comply with all applicable Federal State and local laws governing safety health and sanitation CFR .
The contractor shall provide all safeguards safety devices and protective equipment and take any other needed actions as it determines or as the contracting officer may determine to be reasonably necessary to protect the life and health of employees on the job and the safety of the public and to protect property in connection with the performance of the work covered by the contract . .
It is a condition of this contract and shall be made a condition of each subcontract which the contractor enters into pursuant to this contract that the contractor and any subcontractor shall not permit any employee in performance of the contract to work in surroundings or under conditions which are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to hisher health or safety as determined under construction safety and health standards CFR promulgated by the Secretary of Labor in accordance with Section of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act U.S.C. . A . Pursuant to CFR .
it is a condition of this contract that the Secretary of Labor or authorized representative thereof shall have right of entry to any site of contract performance to inspect or investigate the matter of compliance with the construction safety and health standards and to carry out the duties of the Secretary under Section of the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act U.S.C .. VIII .
FALSE STATEMENTS CONCERNING HIGHWAY PROJECTS This provision is applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts .
In order to assure high quality and durable construction in conformity with approved plans and specifications and a high degree of reliability on statements and representations made by engineers contractors suppliers and workers on Federalaid highway projects it is essential that all persons concerned with the project perform their functions as carefully thoroughly and honestly as possible .
Willful falsification distortion or misrepresentation with respect to any facts related to the project is a violation of Federal law .
To prevent any misunderstanding regarding the seriousness of these and similar acts Form FHWA shall be posted on each Federalaid highway project CFR in one or more places where it is readily available to all persons concerned with the project U.S.C .
reads as follows Whoever being an officer agent or employee of the United States or of any State or Territory or whoever whether a person association firm or corporation knowingly makes any false statement false representation or false report as to the character quality quantity or cost of the material used or to be used or the quantity or quality of the work performed or to be performed or the cost thereof in connection with the submission of plans maps specifications contracts or costs of construction on any highway or related project submitted for approval to the Secretary of Transportation or Whoever knowingly makes any false statement false representation false report or false claim with respect to the character quality quantity or cost of any work performed or to be performed or materials furnished or to be furnished in connection with the construction of any highway or related project approved by the Secretary of Transportation or Whoever knowingly makes any false statement or false representation as to material fact in any statement certificate or report submitted pursuant to provisions of the Federalaid Roads Act approved July Stat .
as amended and supplemented Shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than years or both .
A IX .
IMPLEMENTATION OF CLEAN AIR ACT AND FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT This provision is applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts .
By submission of this bidproposal or the execution of this contract or subcontract as appropriate the bidder proposer Federalaid construction contractor or subcontractor as appropriate will be deemed to have stipulated as follows .
That any person who is or will be utilized in the performance of this contract is not prohibited from receiving an award due to a violation of Section of the Clean Water Act or Section of the Clean Air Act. . That the contractor agrees to include or cause to be included the requirements of paragraph of this Section X in every subcontract and further agrees to take such action as the contracting agency may direct as a means of enforcing such requirements .
X .
CERTIFICATION REGARDING DEBARMENT SUSPENSION INELIGIBILITY AND VOLUNTARY EXCLUSION This provision is applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts designbuild contracts subcontracts lowertier subcontracts purchase orders lease agreements consultant contracts or any other covered transaction requiring FHWA approval or that is estimated to cost or more as defined in CFR Parts and . .
Instructions for Certification First Tier Participants a .
By signing and submitting this proposal the prospective first tier participant is providing the certification set out below .
b .
The inability of a person to provide the certification set out below will not necessarily result in denial of participation in this covered transaction .
The prospective first tier participant shall submit an explanation of why it can not provide the certification set out below .
The certification or explanation will be considered in connection with the department or agencys determination whether to enter into this transaction .
However failure of the prospective first tier participant to furnish a certification or an explanation shall disqualify such a person from participation in this transaction .
c. The certification in this clause is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when the contracting agency determined to enter into this transaction .
If it is later determined that the prospective participant knowingly rendered an erroneous certification in addition to other remedies available to the Federal Government the contracting agency may terminate this transaction for cause of default .
d. The prospective first tier participant shall provide immediate written notice to the contracting agency to whom this proposal is submitted if any time the prospective first tier A participant learns that its certification was erroneous when submitted or has become erroneous by reason of changed circumstances .
e. The terms covered transaction debarred suspended ineligible participant person principal and voluntarily excluded as used in this clause are defined in CFR Parts and .
First Tier Covered Transactions refers to any covered transaction between a grantee or subgrantee of Federal funds and a participant such as the prime or general contract .
Lower Tier Covered Transactions refers to any covered transaction under a First Tier Covered Transaction such as subcontracts .
First Tier Participant refers to the participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a grantee or subgrantee of Federal funds such as the prime or general contractor .
Lower Tier Participant refers any participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a First Tier Participant or other Lower Tier Participants such as subcontractors and suppliers .
f. The prospective first tier participant agrees by submitting this proposal that should the proposed covered transaction be entered into it shall not knowingly enter into any lower tier covered transaction with a person who is debarred suspended declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this covered transaction unless authorized by the department or agency entering into this transaction .
g. The prospective first tier participant further agrees by submitting this proposal that it will include the clause titled Certification Regarding Debarment Suspension Ineligibility and Voluntary ExclusionLower Tier Covered Transactions provided by the department or contracting agency entering into this covered transaction without modification in all lower tier covered transactions and in all solicitations for lower tier covered transactions exceeding the threshold .
h. A participant in a covered transaction may rely upon a certification of a prospective participant in a lower tier covered transaction that is not debarred suspended ineligible or voluntarily excluded from the covered transaction unless it knows that the certification is erroneous .
A participant is responsible for ensuring that its principals are not suspended debarred or otherwise ineligible to participate in covered transactions .
To verify the eligibility of its principals as well as the eligibility of any lower tier prospective participants each participant may but is not required to check the Excluded Parties List System website httpswww.epls.gov which is compiled by the General Services Administration .
i .
Nothing contained in the foregoing shall be construed to require the establishment of a system of records in order to render in good faith the certification required by this clause .
The knowledge and information of the prospective participant is not required to exceed that which is normally possessed by a prudent person in the ordinary course of business dealings .
j .
Except for transactions authorized under paragraph f of these instructions if a participant in a covered transaction knowingly enters into a lower tier covered transaction with a person who is suspended debarred ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this A transaction in addition to other remedies available to the Federal Government the department or agency may terminate this transaction for cause or default. . Certification Regarding Debarment Suspension Ineligibility and Voluntary Exclusion First Tier Participants a .
The prospective first tier participant certifies to the best of its knowledge and belief that it and its principals Are not presently debarred suspended proposed for debarment declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participating in covered transactions by any Federal department or agency Have not within a threeyear period preceding this proposal been convicted of or had a civil judgment rendered against them for commission of fraud or a criminal offense in connection with obtaining attempting to obtain or performing a public Federal State or local transaction or contract under a public transaction violation of Federal or State antitrust statutes or commission of embezzlement theft forgery bribery falsification or destruction of records making false statements or receiving stolen property Are not presently indicted for or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a governmental entity Federal State or local with commission of any of the offenses enumerated in paragraph a of this certification and Have not within a threeyear period preceding this applicationproposal had one or more public transactions Federal State or local terminated for cause or default .
b .
Where the prospective participant is unable to certify to any of the statements in this certification such prospective participant shall attach an explanation to this proposal . .
Instructions for Certification Lower Tier Participants Applicable to all subcontracts purchase orders and other lower tier transactions requiring prior FHWA approval or estimated to cost or more CFR Parts and a .
By signing and submitting this proposal the prospective lower tier is providing the certification set out below .
b .
The certification in this clause is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was entered into .
If it is later determined that the prospective lower tier participant knowingly rendered an erroneous certification in addition to other remedies available to the Federal Government the department or agency with which this transaction originated may pursue available remedies including suspension andor debarment .
A c. The prospective lower tier participant shall provide immediate written notice to the person to which this proposal is submitted if at any time the prospective lower tier participant learns that its certification was erroneous by reason of changed circumstances .
d. The terms covered transaction debarred suspended ineligible participant person principal and voluntarily excluded as used in this clause are defined in CFR Parts and .
You may contact the person to which this proposal is submitted for assistance in obtaining a copy of those regulations .
First Tier Covered Transactions refers to any covered transaction between a grantee or subgrantee of Federal funds and a participant such as the prime or general contract .
Lower Tier Covered Transactions refers to any covered transaction under a First Tier Covered Transaction such as subcontracts .
First Tier Participant refers to the participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a grantee or subgrantee of Federal funds such as the prime or general contractor .
Lower Tier Participant refers any participant who has entered into a covered transaction with a First Tier Participant or other Lower Tier Participants such as subcontractors and suppliers .
e. The prospective lower tier participant agrees by submitting this proposal that should the proposed covered transaction be entered into it shall not knowingly enter into any lower tier covered transaction with a person who is debarred suspended declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this covered transaction unless authorized by the department or agency with which this transaction originated .
f. The prospective lower tier participant further agrees by submitting this proposal that it will include this clause titled Certification Regarding Debarment Suspension Ineligibility and Voluntary ExclusionLower Tier Covered Transaction without modification in all lower tier covered transactions and in all solicitations for lower tier covered transactions exceeding the threshold .
g. A participant in a covered transaction may rely upon a certification of a prospective participant in a lower tier covered transaction that is not debarred suspended ineligible or voluntarily excluded from the covered transaction unless it knows that the certification is erroneous .
A participant is responsible for ensuring that its principals are not suspended debarred or otherwise ineligible to participate in covered transactions .
To verify the eligibility of its principals as well as the eligibility of any lower tier prospective participants each participant may but is not required to check the Excluded Parties List System website httpswww.epls.gov which is compiled by the General Services Administration .
h. Nothing contained in the foregoing shall be construed to require establishment of a system of records in order to render in good faith the certification required by this clause .
The knowledge and information of participant is not required to exceed that which is normally possessed by a prudent person in the ordinary course of business dealings .
i .
Except for transactions authorized under paragraph e of these instructions if a participant in a covered transaction knowingly enters into a lower tier covered transaction with a person who A is suspended debarred ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participation in this transaction in addition to other remedies available to the Federal Government the department or agency with which this transaction originated may pursue available remedies including suspension andor debarment .
Certification Regarding Debarment Suspension Ineligibility and Voluntary Exclusion Lower Tier Participants .
The prospective lower tier participant certifies by submission of this proposal that neither it nor its principals is presently debarred suspended proposed for debarment declared ineligible or voluntarily excluded from participating in covered transactions by any Federal department or agency. . Where the prospective lower tier participant is unable to certify to any of the statements in this certification such prospective participant shall attach an explanation to this proposal .
XI .
CERTIFICATION REGARDING USE OF CONTRACT FUNDS FOR LOBBYING This provision is applicable to all Federalaid construction contracts and to all related subcontracts which exceed CFR . .
The prospective participant certifies by signing and submitting this bid or proposal to the best of his or her knowledge and belief that a .
No Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid by or on behalf of the undersigned to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any Federal agency a Member of Congress an officer or employee of Congress or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the awarding of any Federal contract the making of any Federal grant the making of any Federal loan the entering into of any cooperative agreement and the extension continuation renewal amendment or modification of any Federal contract grant loan or cooperative agreement .
b .
If any funds other than Federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any Federal agency a Member of Congress an officer or employee of Congress or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with this Federal contract grant loan or cooperative agreement the undersigned shall complete and submit Standard FormLLL Disclosure Form to Report Lobbying in accordance with its instructions . .
This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction was made or entered into .
Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for A making or entering into this transaction imposed by U.S.C. . Any person who fails to file the required certification shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than and not more than for each such failure . .
The prospective participant also agrees by submitting its bid or proposal that the participant shall require that the language of this certification be included in all lower tier subcontracts which exceed and that all such recipients shall certify and disclose accordingly .
A ATTACHMENT A EMPLOYMENT AND MATERIALS PREFERENCE FOR APPALACHIAN DEVELOPMENT HIGHWAY SYSTEM OR APPALACHIAN LOCAL ACCESS ROAD CONTRACTS This provision is applicable to all Federalaid projects funded under the Appalachian Regional Development Act of . . During the performance of this contract the contractor undertaking to do work which is or reasonably may be done as onsite work shall give preference to qualified persons who regularly reside in the labor area as designated by the DOL wherein the contract work is situated or the subregion or the Appalachian counties of the State wherein the contract work is situated except a .
To the extent that qualified persons regularly residing in the area are not available .
b .
For the reasonable needs of the contractor to employ supervisory or specially experienced personnel necessary to assure an efficient execution of the contract work .
c. For the obligation of the contractor to offer employment to present or former employees as the result of a lawful collective bargaining contract provided that the number of nonresident persons employed under this subparagraph c shall not exceed percent of the total number of employees employed by the contractor on the contract work except as provided in subparagraph below . .
The contractor shall place a job order with the State Employment Service indicating a the classifications of the laborers mechanics and other employees required to perform the contract work b the number of employees required in each classification c the date on which the participant estimates such employees will be required and d any other pertinent information required by the State Employment Service to complete the job order form .
The job order may be placed with the State Employment Service in writing or by telephone .
If during the course of the contract work the information submitted by the contractor in the original job order is substantially modified the participant shall promptly notify the State Employment Service . .
The contractor shall give full consideration to all qualified job applicants referred to him by the State Employment Service .
The contractor is not required to grant employment to any job applicants who in his opinion are not qualified to perform the classification of work required . .
If within one week following the placing of a job order by the contractor with the State Employment Service the State Employment Service is unable to refer any qualified job applicants to the contractor or less than the number requested the State Employment Service will forward a certificate to the contractor indicating the unavailability of applicants .
Such certificate shall be made a part of the contractors permanent project records .
Upon receipt of this certificate the contractor may employ persons who do not normally reside in the labor area to fill positions covered by the certificate notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph c above .
A .
The provisions of CFR .e allow the contracting agency to provide a contractual preference for the use of mineral resource materials native to the Appalachian region . .
The contractor shall include the provisions of Sections through of this Attachment A in every subcontract for work which is or reasonably may be done as onsite work .
End of FHWA Chapter DIVISION EARTHWORK SECTION CLEARING RIGHTOFWAY .
Description This work shall consist of clear cutting selective clearing and thinning tree trimming removing single trees including dead blown down or uprooted trees removing and disposing of all stumps and debris within the limits of the rightofway and easement areas except such objects as are designated to remain or are to be removed in accordance with other sections of these specifications .
This work shall also include the preservation from injury to or defacement of all vegetation and objects designated to remain and the treatment of stumps with herbicides .
a .
Clearing shall consist of cutting and disposing of all trees down timber brush bushes and debris within designated limits .
b .
Tree trimming shall consist of removing any designated branches and other tree portions for preservation purposes .
c. Selective Clearing and Thinning shall consist of cutting and disposing of designated trees down timber stubs brush bushes and debris within designated limits .
This work also includes application of approved herbicides on hardwood stumps .
d. Removing trees shall consist of cutting and disposing of single trees stumps and roots located outside the limits of clearing or selective clearing and thinning limits as indicated on the plans or as authorized. . A single tree is defined as any tree or remains of a tree still standing inches or more in its average diameter measured as specified in Subsection .
Method of Measurement and taller than feet measured from the ground at the base of the tree. . A stump is defined as the remains of a single tree inches or more at its average diameter from which the toppings have been removed and which is less than feet in height measured from the ground at the base of the stump. . Materials Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Subsection of Section .
Herbicide .
General The Resident will verify clearing and selective clearing limit lines and designated items that are to be preserved and to remain .
Unsound or unsightly branches of trees and shrubs designated to remain and not specified to be removed under another item shall be removed as directed .
Branches of trees extending over the roadbed shall be trimmed to provide a clear height of feet above the road and shoulder surface .
Trimming shall be done by skilled workers and in accordance with good tree surgery practices .
Alignment stakes grade stakes witness stakes boundary markers bench marks and tie points shall be preserved until permission is given for their destruction. . Clearing In areas indicated on the plans all trees down timber brush bushes shrubs plants and debris not designated to remain shall be removed and disposed of .
In areas where the proposed embankment is not designated to be grubbed as provided in Subsection .
Preparation of the Embankment Area all stumps shall be cut off as close to the ground as is practicable .
When stumps are to remain in the backslope rounding of cut sections they shall be cut flush with the final slope line .
All wood in the clearing area except trees designated to remain shall become the property of the Contractor unless otherwise provided .
The Contractor shall take special care to completely dispose of all elm trees removed .
All live hardwood stumps inch or more in diameter located between the lines of improvement and the outermost clearing or selective clearing lines shall be treated with an approved herbicides unless specifically exempted .
In areas where stumps and shrubs are to remain the surface of the ground shall not be unduly disturbed or compacted .
Existing ground cover shall be preserved insofar as possible and the area shall be left neat and clean and in a condition that is reasonably consistent with the surroundings . .
Selective Clearing and Thinning In order that trees may be properly marked the Contractor shall give the Resident at least weeks notice before starting work .
Only those trees or bushes designated to be removed shall be cut .
In no event shall selective clearing and thinning operations begin until approval is given .
All dead or diseased trees or shrubs junk trash litter or foreign matter of any kind shall be removed from the areas to be enhanced .
This shall include uprooted stumps and all branches tops trunks and dead wood resulting from woodcutting operations or from any other causes .
Trees and shrubs to be preserved shall be carefully pruned to remove all dead diseased and injured wood .
In addition in certain areas the Resident may require the branches of designated trees to be removed to a height above ground as directed .
Complete clearing may be required in certain areas .
Such clearing shall be included under this Subsection .
Storing logs and pulpwood in thinned areas shall be avoided .
The Contractor shall avoid disturbing or compacting the existing ground surfaces as well as avoiding damage to plant growth .
The use of heavy equipment operating anywhere within the area to be selectively thinned will not be allowed unless authorized .
Any injury to trees and shrubs that are to be preserved shall be carefully repaired .
Disturbed ground surface shall be restored as nearly as possible to natural conditions .
Pruning and repairs to live trees and shrubs shall be done by skilled workers or tree surgeons according to approved arboricultural practice .
All stumps new or old shall be cut off as close to the ground as is practicable .
Trees falling outside the specified limits of the thinning areas shall be removed and disposed of in a satisfactory manner .
Undesirable trees leaning or falling over the highway rightofway from outside shall be cut at the property line. . Herbicides All herbicides shall be approved by the Department of Transportation Landscape Architect .
The herbicides shall be applied by Certified Pesticide Applicators in accordance with State Pesticides Control Board Regulations .
With the exception of coniferous softwood trees stumps over inch in diameter resulting from cutting live hardwood trees and shrubs shall be treated with approved herbicide spray mixture .
The spray mixture may be applied at any time until regrowth from the stumps has reached a height of approximately inches except that it shall not be applied when the stumps are wet or frozen .
The herbicide spray mixture shall be sprayed on all exposed surfaces of stumps and the stems of regrowth until there is complete saturation and runoff .
Particular attention to coverage shall be given to the bark and all exposed roots .
All stumps shall receive at least one treatment with the herbicide spray mixture .
At the time of final acceptance live regrowth of hardwood tree seedlings shall have been substantially eliminated .
Any remaining regrowth will require another treatment before final acceptance .
Particular care must be taken that the herbicide mix does not come in contact with or too near live trees and shrubs that are to be preserved .
Unless otherwise directed the spray mixture shall not be applied closer than feet from the trunk of a tree that is to remain .
When directed live stumps in specified areas shall be exempted from spraying with herbicides .
The Contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the treated area until final acceptance of the work .
All damage or dieback shall be repaired at the Contractors expense as directed .
At the time of final acceptance the area shall be free of all dead dying or damaged trees and shrubs and litter of any kind as well as free from regrowth . .
Disposal All brush timber logs and other woody debris shall be disposed of by approved methods .
The Contractor shall make every effort to provide useful disposition of woody material that may be marketable .
If the Contractor can demonstrate that a reasonably suitable market for the material is not available other disposal methods may be approved .
Acceptable methods of disposal may include chipping grinding and burying .
Burning will not be allowed .
a. Chipping Wood chippers shall reduce woody material to chips not over  inch thick by not over inches long and the chips shall be spread uniformly over the ground or as directed .
b. Burying Brush and logs may be disposed of by burying in approved waste dumps or by placing in the portion of the embankments outside a slope horizontal to vertical extending from the edge of the shoulder to the existing ground and covering with a minimum of feet of earth .
Excavation or borrow used to cover the brush and logs in the slopes may be placed in layers at least feet thick and compacted only to the extent that the stability of the slope is assured .
For a related provision see Department of Environmental Protection Code of Maine Regulations Section .
c. Burning Burning is not allowed .
Removing Single Trees and Stumps When called for on the plans or otherwise designated complete removal and disposal of single trees and stumps shall be required and shall include the backfilling of stump holes .
Trees which have been uprooted shall be removed by cutting the tree and removing the stump from the ground or where approved the stumps may be placed back in the hole to present a natural appearance .
The area shall be graded to conform to the surrounding terrain . .
Method of Measurement Clearing and selective clearing and thinning will be measured by the acre determined from horizontal dimensions acceptably and actually cleared or thinned within the limits shown on the plans or additional areas flagged by the Resident .
Areas not shown on the plans or not flagged for clearing or thinning will not be measured for payment .
As an alternative to field measurements the Contractor and the Resident may agree in writing that the acreage acceptably cleared for payment will be that shown in the Schedule of Items .
If such an agreement is reached no further measuring and computing of quantities will be required and the quantity referred to herein will be final .
Single trees and stumps will be measured by each unit .
The size of the tree shall be the average diameter determined by circumferential measurement at a height of  feet above the ground .
When trees are removed under this contract and the removal of the stump is required the stump size shall be the same size as that determined for the tree .
The size of all other stumps shall be the greatest horizontal cross sectional dimension determined at the top of the stump .
Trees or stumps which have multiple trunks protruding from a single base trunk shall be measured for payment as a single tree or stump .
Individual trunks of multiple trunk trees or stumps having a diameter of less than inches will not be included to determine the size of a tree or stump . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of clearing selective clearing and thinning will be paid for at the contract unit price per acre .
The accepted quantity of single trees and stumps removed will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Payment for trees shall include removal and disposal of the entire tree except stumps .
All stumps as defined in Subsection .
d. and designated to be removed will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Payment shall include removal and disposal of the stumps and roots .
When the Schedule of Items does not contain an estimated quantity for clearing and it is not noted on the plans as incidental the work when authorized will be paid for under the provisions of Section .
Extra Work .
When the use of herbicide or tree paint is required to complete the work included under this section it will not be paid for directly but will be considered as included in the other contract pay items .
Grubbing when required will be measured and paid for as provided in Section Excavation and Embankment .
Payment for removal of trees and stumps not defined as contract pay items under Section .d shall be considered incidental to the contract and no separate payment will be made .
Removal of unsound and unsightly branches and trimming branches of trees as specified in Subsection .
General will be paid for under the provisions of Sections .
Extra Work or Equipment Rental .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Clearing Acre .
Selective Clearing and Thinning Acre .
Removing Single Tree Top Only Each .
Removing Stump Each SECTION REMOVING STRUCTURES AND OBSTRUCTIONS .
Description This work shall consist of removing wholly or in part and satisfactory disposing of all designated buildings structures bituminous pavement Portland cement concrete pavement manholes catch basins and other obstructions which are required to be removed except for the obstructions to be removed and disposed of under other contract items .
It shall also include salvaging designated materials . .
Removing Buildings The Contractor shall remove and dispose of all buildings and foundations indicated on plans or bid documents .
Cavities remaining as a result of foundation or structure removal shall be filled to the level of the surrounding ground and if within the limits of embankment or below the subgrade in excavation areas shall be compacted in accordance with applicable embankment construction requirements .
Details of the ownership of the buildings and all the equipment fixtures and materials therein except equipment belonging to a Utility or equipment or fixtures specifically excepted and details relative to the date of availability of the property will be stated in the Special Provision .
Written notice will be given the Contractor when any building becomes available before the date specified in the special provision .
On the abovespecified date or upon notice of availability ownership of the buildings shall transfer from the State to the Contractor who then shall proceed with the work required under this section .
The buildings shall not be used or occupied for any purpose while in the rightofway and the buildings shall be removed as soon as possible after the date available unless otherwise authorized .
If during the negotiations between the Department and the owners of the building specified under this section agreements are made with the owners to move remove or raze the buildings the Department reserves the right to remove any or all items from the contract upon written notice to the Contractor and no payment will be made for the items .
Removal of debris when necessary under such conditions will be accomplished under Section Hand Labor and Section Equipment Rental .
All debris and unusable materials shall be removed to an approved dump or waste area and buried .
No material shall be disposed of by burning .
For a related provision see Department of Environmental Protection Maine Solid Waste Management Rules CMR Ch .
Landfill Siting Design and Operation . .
Removing Existing Superstructure Structural Concrete Railings Curbs Sidewalks and Bridges Removing existing superstructures shall consist of removing and disposing of existing superstructure including fill pavement railing and all other material on or over the superstructure unless otherwise specified .
Removing existing structural concrete shall be to the limits designated on the plans and shall be accomplished without damage to the portion of the structure to remain .
Removing existing bridge shall be to the limits shown on the plans .
Existing concrete curbs granite curbs and concrete sidewalks shall be removed to the limits shown on the plans using a chipping hammer or pavement breaker of a size approved by the Resident or any other method approved by the Resident which will not damage the structural integrity of the concrete deck to remain .
Before removal of existing concrete curbs or sidewalks the fascia removal line as indicated on the plans shall be saw cut to a depth of inch minimum .
Care shall be taken not to damage any reinforcing steel that is to remain in the bridge .
When the material from an existing structure is to be retained by the Department the Contractor shall carefully dismantle it and all materials except those that may be specified to be reused in the new structure shall be loaded on trucks supplied by the Department or carefully stored by the Contractor within the rightofway .
The use of any portion of the salvaged material in connection with new or temporary construction shall not be anticipated by the Contractor .
The dismantling of metal structures or railings shall when especially provided include the removal of all bolts and rivets necessary to disconnect the members and the matchmarking of these members for future reassembling .
When the material from an existing structure is designated to become the property of the Contractor it shall be entirely removed and disposed of out of sight of the highway and beyond the limits of the rightofway .
Such material shall not be deposited in rivers streams or other bodies of water .
If the material is to be wasted then it shall be disposed of at an approved location .
When practical any suitable material removed shall be used in backfilling or for the formation of embankments and no additional allowances for payment will be made .
Unsuitable or surplus material shall be disposed of in an approved waste area .
Blasting or other operations necessary for the removal of an existing structure or obstruction which might damage new construction shall be completed before placing the new work .
If this is not feasible the work shall be done only when approved and entirely at the Contractors risk . .
Removing Existing Bituminous Pavement and Concrete Wearing Surface from Bridges and Scarifying the Top of Deck The full depth of existing bituminous pavement or concrete wearing surface shall be removed from curb to curb for the entire length of the bridge .
Membrane waterproofing if present shall also be removed in a manner approved by the Resident .
Extreme care shall be taken to avoid damaging the top of the concrete deck to remain .
All existing deck concrete damaged by the Contractor which is not specified to be scarified or rehabilitated shall be repaired .
Such repair shall be at the expense of the Contractor .
When rehabilitation of the top of the deck is called for on the plans the work will be done in accordance with Section Rehabilitation of Structural Concrete Bridge Decks .
When scarifying the top of the deck is called for the specified depth of material shall be removed from curb to curb for the entire length of the bridge .
Removal shall be accomplished by an approved scarifying machine .
Areas that can not be removed by a scarifying machine such as adjacent to curbs drains and armored joints shall be removed by using a maximum pound chipping hammer or pavement breaker . .
Removing Portland Cement Concrete Pavement All Portland cement concrete pavement and Portland cement concrete base course designated for removal shall be broken into pieces suitable for use in construction or embankment or disposed of as directed by the Resident .
When used in construction of embankments the maximum size of any fragment shall not exceed the thickness of the layer being placed .
The Contractor may at their option and with approval dispose of material in approved waste areas and replace with an equivalent volume of granular borrow at no cost to the State . .
Removing Manholes or Catch Basins Where the manhole or catch basin is under a roadway of embankment the sides shall be removed to a depth of at least feet below subgrade .
When the plans do not provide for the complete removal of pipes connecting to the catch basin or manhole said pipe if to be connected to new pipe shall not be disturbed or if no connection is called for the pipe shall be tightly plugged with mortared masonry .
Floors of the structures shall be broken up or removed to permit drainage .
The open cavity shall be filled with earth and thoroughly compacted . .
Removing Bituminous Concrete Pavement The equipment for removing the bituminous pavement shall be capable of scarifying and loading the bituminous pavement without including any gravel except that adhering to the pavement .
The remaining gravel shall be graded to drain as approved by the Resident . .
Removing Pavement Surface The equipment for removing the bituminous surface shall be a power operated milling machine or grinder capable of removing bituminous concrete pavement to the required depth transverse cross slope and profile grade by the use of an automated grade and slope control system .
The controls shall automatically increase or decrease the pavement removal depth as required and readily maintain desired cross slope to compensate for surface irregularities in the existing pavement course .
The equipment shall be capable of accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from a fixed reference such as a grade wire or from the existing pavement surface using a foot minimum contact ski floating beam or foot noncontact grade control beam .
The Contractor shall locate and remove all objects in the pavement through the work area that would be detrimental to the planing or grinding machine .
The finished milled surface will be inspected before being accepted and any deviations in the profile exceeding  inch under a foot string line or straightedge placed parallel to the centerline will be corrected .
Any deviations in the crossslope that exceed  inch under a foot string line or straightedge placed transversely to centerline will be corrected .
All corrections will be made with approved methods and materials .
Any areas that require corrective measures will be subject to the same acceptance tolerances .
Excess material that becomes bonded to the milled surface will be removed to the Residents satisfaction before the area is accepted. . Pavement Butt Joints The equipment for removing the bituminous surface shall be a cold milling machine or a power operated planer capable of removing the existing pavement to the required depth width grade and slope .
The milled surface shall have a uniform texture and provide acceptable rideability for vehicles .
Should resurfacing be delayed or the resulting milled surface is unsatisfactory for any reason bituminous leveling course or temporary pavement may be required .
The Contractor shall clean the milled surface and surrounding area of all loose material prior to use by traffic . .
Method of Measurement Removing buildings removing existing superstructures and removing existing bridges will each be measured by the lump sum .
Removing Portland cement concrete pavement removing bituminous concrete pavement pavement butt joints and removing pavement surface will be measured by the square yard with no deductions made for areas occupied by existing catch basins and manholes .
Removing existing structural concrete will be measured either by the cubic yard in place before work starts on the particular portion of the structure to be removed or by the lump sum as specified .
Remove existing railings will be measured by the foot in place along the grade and line of the railing from outside to outside of end posts or rail projections whichever is greater .
The removing of existing bituminous pavement removing existing concrete wearing surface removing of existing concrete curbs and sidewalks from bridges and scarifying of the concrete deck will each be measured for payment as one lump sum unit complete and accepted .
The removing of existing manholes and catch basins will be measured by the unit . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of removing building removing existing superstructure and removing existing bridge will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for removing and disposing of the obstructions and building foundations down to an elevation matching the surrounding ground as directed by the Resident .
Removing Portland cement concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price will be full compensation for removing and disposing of pavement and pavement reinforcement .
Material for backfilling holes resulting from removal of obstructions will be measured and paid for as provided in Section Excavation and Embankments .
The quantity of structural concrete removed will be paid for either at the contract unit price per cubic yard or at the contract lump sum price which price shall include disposal of the concrete .
The quantity of railing removed will be paid for at the respective contract unit price per foot of railing removed and disposed of .
Removing and scarifying existing concrete removing existing concrete wearing surface and removing existing bituminous pavement from bridges will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the respective contract pay item involved .
Removing membrane waterproofing if present on the existing deck shall be incidental to the removing of bituminous pavement .
The containment and disposal of pollutants during the removal of materials from an existing bridge will not be paid for directly but shall be incidental to the related contract Pay Item .
These payment provisions shall prevail over those of Section Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control for this work only .
The payment for each contract pay item will be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor equipment for all formwork and for all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Removing existing manholes and catch basins will be paid for at the contract unit bid price each which price shall include all work materials labor and equipment .
New pipe as required by the plans will be paid for separately under the appropriate pay item .
Where new pipe is to be connected to existing pipe the Contractor shall furnish and install at their expense pipe necessary to replace any existing pipe damaged beyond the limits of pipe removal shown on the plans .
Removing bituminous concrete pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price for the number of square yards removed as required by the plans or as ordered by the Resident which price will be full compensation for removing and disposing of the bituminous pavement and re grading of the remaining material .
The accepted quantity of pavement butt joints will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard which price will be full compensation for removing and salvaging the bituminous material .
Any bituminous leveling material or temporary pavement required will not be measured for payment directly but will be incidental to the related contract Pay Items .
The accepted quantity of removing pavement surface will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
This price will be full compensation for removing the material to the required depth profile and cross slope complete cleaning of the milled surface suitable for paving and for salvaging hauling and stockpiling excess material to an approved designated area .
Locating and removing objects and additional milling and paving required to correct deviations will not be paid for separately but will be included in the contract unit price per square yard .
When the pay item calls for material to be retained by the Department payment shall include the salvage of these materials custody preservation and storage on the rightofway and disposal as provided herein .
When the proposal does not include pay items for removal of structures and obstructions as provided in this Section such work shall be incidental to the various contract pay items and no direct payment will be made except that removal of foundations and Portland cement concrete pavement will be paid as provided in Section Excavation and Embankment .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Removing Building No .
___ Lump Sum .
Removing Existing Superstructure Lump Sum Retained by Department .
Removing Existing Superstructure Lump Sum Property of Contractor .
Removing Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Square Yard .
Removing Existing Structural Concrete Cubic Yard .
Removing Existing Concrete Lump Sum .
Scarifying Concrete Deck Top xx inch Lump Sum .
Removing of Existing Bituminous Pavement Lump Sum .
Removing of Existing Concrete Lump Sum Curbs Sidewalks .
Removing Existing Railings Foot Retained by Department .
Removed Existing Railings Foot Property of Contractor .
Removing Existing Manhole or Catch Basin Each .
Removing Existing Structural Concrete Lump Sum .
Removing Existing Bridge Lump Sum .
Removing Bituminous Concrete Pavement Square Yard .
Removing Pavement Surface Square Yard .
Pavement Butt Joints Square Yard .
Removing Existing Concrete Wearing Surface Lump Sum SECTION EXCAVATION AND EMBANKMENT .
Description This work shall consist of removing hauling disposing and compacting if required of all material not being removed under some other item encountered for the construction of the project in accordance with the specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
Excavation except structural excavation will be classified as common excavation rock excavation unclassified excavation as hereafter defined .
Material not classified as excavation that is required to construct embankments backfill trenches and holes shall be classified as borrow .
a .
Common Excavation shall consist of removing all material encountered in grading the project within the limits of construction and in driveways which is not otherwise classified and paid for .
Common excavation shall include the removing and disposing of boulders solid mortared stone masonry and concrete masonry when each is less than yd in volume and all soft and disintegrated rock which can be removed with ordinary excavating machinery .
It shall include grubbing which consists of the removing and disposing of all stumps roots bushes grass turf or other objectionable material and it shall include berm ditches and cut slope downspouts .
Common Excavation shall include muck removal which shall consist of excavating and disposing of saturated or unsaturated mixtures of soils and organic matter not suitable for embankment foundation material regardless of moisture content .
Common Excavation shall also include removing and disposing of all earth material encountered in excavating for permanent stream channel diversion channel widening or straightening when designated on the Plans outside the limits of structural excavation or other classifications .
b .
Rock Excavation shall consist of removing hard igneous metamorphic and sedimentary rock which can not be excavated without drilling and blasting or drilling and splitting and all boulders solid mortared stone masonry concrete masonry each having a volume of yd or more .
The use of perchlorate is not allowed in blasting operations .
c. Unclassified Excavation shall consist of common excavation and rock excavation as classified above and not measured separately .
When identical unit prices are bid for Common Excavation and for Rock Excavation such bids shall be considered as a bid for Unclassified Excavation of the combined items and shall be so classified. . Materials Borrow shall consist of approved material required for the construction of embankments or for other portions of the work as designated and shall be obtained from beyond the limits of the required cut slopes .
Unless otherwise designated in the contract the Contractor shall make their own arrangements for obtaining borrow and shall pay all costs involved .
No material shall be removed from an approved borrow pit except for use under this contract .
Material shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections of Division Materials Common Borrow .
Granular Borrow .
Gravel Borrow .
Rock Borrow .
Slope blanket backfill material shall meet the requirements of aggregate for base subbase Type D specified in Subsection .
Aggregate for Base and Subbase as directed . .
Unauthorized Use of Materials No common excavation rock excavation unclassified excavation or borrow which is designated for use in embankments or backfill may be diverted for the Contractors own use .
Any unauthorized use of such material will be adjusted by deducting quantities measured by the most appropriate method as determined and of the quantity deducted from the total amount. . General Prior to beginning excavating grading and embankment operations in any area all necessary clearing in that area shall have been performed in accordance with Section Clearing RightofWay .
Unsuitable material shall be disposed of as directed and no material shall be wasted without permission .
Excavating operations shall be conducted so that material outside of the limits of slopes will not be disturbed .
The Resident may designate as unsuitable those soils which can not be properly compacted in embankments and all such unsuitable material shall be disposed of in approved waste storage areas or waste areas as directed .
Suitable material taken from excavation shall be used in the construction of embankment subgrade and for backfilling as indicated on the plans or as directed except that if the volume of suitable excavated material exceeds that required to construct the embankments to the grades indicated the excess shall be used as directed or wasted .
The Contractor shall give the Resident sufficient time before beginning excavation to take necessary cross section elevations and measurements .
The Contractor shall not excavate beyond the dimensions slopes and elevations established and no material shall be removed prior to the staking out and cross sectioning the site .
Unless otherwise authorized borrow material shall not be placed until after all suitable excavation has been placed in the embankment unless the use of granular borrow is called for on the plans or required for use under embankments or in conjunction with the use of excavated material or for the maintenance of traffic .
If the Contractor places more borrow than is required and thereby causes a waste of suitable excavation material the amount of such waste will be measured by the method deemed most appropriate and of the amount deducted from the borrow volume .
When different unit prices are bid for Common Excavation and Rock Excavation the Contractor will be required to strip earth from the ledge to provide an opportunity for the Resident to take the necessary measurements .
When identical prices are bid for Common Excavation and Rock Excavation the Contractor will not be required to strip the earth from the ledge .
When it is necessary to temporarily remove fencing designated to remain the fencing shall be replaced by the Contractor at their expense in as good a condition as it was originally .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the confinement of livestock when a portion of the fence is removed .
When new fencing for confinement of livestock is required it shall be erected before existing fencing is disturbed .
Where new fencing can not be erected in its final location temporary fencing shall be at the Contractors expense .
Excavating for obliterating old roadways or salvaging material from old roadways shall include all grading operations necessary to incorporate the old roadway into the new roadway and surroundings or placing salvaged material in a stockpile as directed .
The degree of finish for grading ditches and slopes both fill slopes and cut slopes shall be that obtainable from machine operations .
Ditches shall be constructed to within inches above or below the grade called for on the cross sections or as otherwise modified but in no case shall the ditch be finished in a condition that will not allow the flow of water .
Ditches shall be graded to the extent that puddles will not form .
All provisions for measurement and payment limits shall remain in force and no payment will be made for unauthorized work done beyond authorized pay limits .
Unstable slopes subject to sliding and slumping shall be excavated to the lines and grades shown or as directed .
Immediately after each location is excavated approved stone or granular slope blanket backfill material shall be placed and shaped to match the adjacent slopes .
Ledge slopes shall be scaled cleaned of all loose material immediately as the excavation proceeds .
The ledge slope shall then be examined by the Contractor to determine if the slope is stable .
If the slope is not deemed stable upon this examination then immediate steps shall be taken by the Contractor to insure the stability of the slope during construction .
There will be no additional pay for any temporary protection required for the construction of the project. . Salvage of Existing Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement All existing hot mix asphalt pavement designated to be removed under this contract must be salvaged for utilization .
Existing hot mix asphalt pavement material shall not be deposited in any waste area or be placed below subgrade in any embankment .
Methods of utilization may be any of the following .
Used as a replacement for untreated aggregate surface course on entrances provided the material contains no particles greater than inches in any dimension .
Payment will be made under Pay Item .
Untreated Aggregate Surface Course or .
Untreated Aggregate Surface Course Truck Measure .
Material shall be placed shaped compacted and stabilized as directed by the Resident. . Used as the top of gravel .
Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP shall be processed such that the material contains no particles greater than  inches in any dimension .
When this method is utilized a surcharge will not be required .
Stockpiled at commercial or approved sites for commercial or MaineDOT use. . Other approved methods proposed by the Contractor and approved by the Resident which will assure proper use of the existing hot mix asphalt pavement .
The cost of salvaging hot mix asphalt material will be included for payment under the applicable pay item with no additional allowances made which will be full compensation for removing temporarily stockpiling and rehandling if necessary and utilizing the material in entrances or other approved uses or stockpiling at an approved site as described above .
The material will also be measured and paid for under the applicable Pay Item if it is reused for aggregate in entrances or other approved uses. . Rock Excavation and Blasting .
All blasting operations including the storage and handling of explosives and blasting agents shall be performed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Standard Specifications and all other pertinent Federal State and local regulations . .
The Contractor shall observe the entire blast area to guard against potential hazards before commencing work in the cut . .
In case of conflict between regulations or between regulations and this Specification the Contractor shall comply with the strictest applicable codes regulations or Specifications. . GENERAL REQUIREMENTS a .
The Resident will at all times have the authority to prohibit or halt the Contractors blasting operations if it is apparent that through the methods being employed the required slopes are not being obtained in a stable condition or the safety and convenience of the public is being jeopardized .
b .
Explosives shall be stored handled and employed in accordance with Federal State and Local regulations .
No explosives caps detonators or fuses shall be stored on the project site during nonworking hours .
c. The overburden shall be removed or trenches shall be excavated through the overburden at the intervals directed by the Resident normally ft. but in no case closer than ft. apart to permit cross sectioning of the rock in its original position .
Rock removed prior to sectioning will be considered as Common Excavation. . SUBMITTALS a .
Advance submittal Not less than two weeks prior to commencing drilling and blasting operations or at any time the Contractor proposes to change drilling and blasting methods the Contractor shall submit a Blasting Plan to the Resident for review .
The Blasting Plan shall contain full details of the drilling and blasting patterns and controls the Contractor proposes to use for both the controlled and production blasting .
Review of the Blasting Plan by the Department shall not relieve the Contractor of his responsibility for the safety accuracy and adequacy of the Plan when implemented in the field .
The Blasting Plan shall contain the following information .
i .
Station limits of proposed shots .
ii .
Plan and section views of the proposed drill pattern including free face burden blasthole spacing blasthole diameters blasthole angles lift height and subdrill depth .
iii .
Loading diagram showing type and amount of explosives primers initiators and location and depth of stemming .
iv .
Initiators sequence of blastholes including delay times and delay system .
v. Manufacturers data sheets for all explosives primers and initiators to be used . .
The delay elements in blasting caps are known to deteriorate with age .
For this reason it is required that all blasting caps used on the project be less than one year of age .
Blasting products will be allowed on the job site if the date codes are missing . .
When in the opinion of the Resident any blasting product is either of excessive age or in what appears to be a deteriorated condition all work will cease until the products age or quality can be determined . .
Explosives containing Perchlorate compounds shall not be used on Department projects .
vi .
Details of the audible advance signal system to be employed at the job site .
vii .
Precautions to protect nearby structures and cultural features .
b .
Daily Blasting Logs The Contractor shall provide the Resident with a daily log of blasting operations submitted on a weekly basis .
The log shall be updated at the close of each working day .
The log shall include the number of blasts times and dates of blasts the blasting locations and patterns and all information shown below i .
Station limits of the shot .
ii .
Plan and section views of drill pattern including free face burden blasthole spacing blasthole diameters lift height and subdrill depth .
iii .
Loading diagram showing type and amount of explosive primers initiators and location and depth of stemming .
iv .
Initiators sequence of blastholes including delay times and delay system in each blasthole .
v. Mats or other protection used .
vi .
Signature of the Blaster in charge .
c. The Contractor shall report to the Resident in writing all blasting complaints received by the Contractor within hours of receipt .
Each blast complaint report shall include the name and address of the complainant time received date and time of blast complained about and a description of the circumstances which led to the complaint . .
BLAST VIBRATION CONTROL AND MONITORING a .
The Contractor shall be required to monitor blasting vibrations both ground and air concussions and shall provide a PreBlast Condition survey of all structures and cultural features that may be affected .
b .
When nearby structures utilities or adjacent slopes may be subject to damage from blastinduced ground vibrations the ground vibrations shall be controlled by the use of properly designed delay sequences and appropriate charge weights per delay .
c. When vibration damage to adjacent structures or cultural features is possible the Contractor shall monitor each blast with an approved seismograph located as approved by the Department between the blast area and the closest structure subject to blast damage .
The seismograph used shall be capable of recording particle velocity for three mutually perpendicular components of vibration in the range generally found with controlled blasting. . FLYROCK CONTROL Before the firing of any blast in areas where flying rock or debris may result in personal injury or damage to property the rock to be blasted shall be covered with approved blasting mats soil or other equally serviceable material to prevent flyrock .
The method of flyrock control shall be subject to approval by the Resident . .
CONTROLLED BLASTING METHODS Controlled blasting is defined as a blasting method which utilizes a line of closely spaced lightly loaded blastholes that are fired either before or after the main production blast to define a break line on the perimeter of the excavation .
The purpose of the Controlled blasting is to create a stable rock face with a fall zone to protect the traveling public from rockfall hazard and to protect existing structures adjacent and nearby properties and the public from damage or injury .
Controlled blasting shall be required on all rock critical slopes .
a .
Production blasting refers to the main fragmentation blasting resulting from widely spaced production holes drilled throughout the main excavation area adjacent to the presplit line .
Production holes shall be detonated in a controlled delay sequence .
b. Presplitting is defined as the establishment of a free surface of a shear plane in rock by the controlled usage of explosives and blasting accessories in appropriately aligned and spaced drill holes so that the resulting split rock is not affected by subsequent blasting and excavation operations .
The purpose of presplitting is to minimize damage to the rock backslope and to help ensure long term stability .
When presplitting the detonation of the presplit line shall be before the detonation of any production holes .
i .
Prior to drilling all overburden and all loose and disintegrated rock shall be removed down to solid rock in the vicinity of the presplit lines .
Potentially dangerous boulders beyond the excavation limits shall also be removed as directed by the Resident .
ii .
Presplitting shall extend a minimum of feet ahead of the limits of production blasting within the section or to the end of the cut as applicable .
iii .
All drilling equipment used to drill the presplit holes shall have electromechanical or electronic devices affixed to that equipment to accurately determine the angle at which the drill steel enters the rock .
Presplit hole drilling will not be permitted if these devices are missing or inoperative .
iv .
The length of the presplit holes shall not exceed feet in depth unless approved by the Resident .
Rock deeper than feet shall usually be presplit in lifts but no lift shall be less than feet in depth .
When the cut height will require more than one lift a maximum foot offset between lifts shall be permitted to allow for equipment clearance .
No payment will be made for additional excavated quantity caused by offsetting of presplit lines for less than foot lifts .
Drilling feet below ditch bottom will be allowed to facilitate removal of the toe berm .
v. Before placing charges the contractor shall determine that the hole is free of obstructions for its entire depth .
All necessary precautions shall be exercised so that placing the charges will not cause caving of material from the walls of the holes .
vi .
The diameter of the explosives used in presplit holes shall not be greater than  the diameter of the hole .
vii .
Continuous column cartridge explosives manufactured especially for presplitting shall be used for all presplitting .
The bottom charge of a presplit hole may be larger than the line charges but shall not be large enough to cause overbreak .
The top charge of the presplitting hole shall be placed far enough below the collar and reduced sufficiently to avoid overbreaking and heaving .
The upper portion of all presplit holes from the top charge to the hole collar shall be stemmed .
viii .
The presplit slope face shall not deviate more than one foot from a plane passing though adjacent drillholes except where the character of the rock is such that as determined by the Resident irregularities are unavoidable .
The onefoot plane shall be measured perpendicular to the plane of the slope .
In no case shall any portion of the slope encroach on the roadbed .
c. Cushion blasting .
Where the horizontal distance from the existing rock face to the cut face is less than feet or if rock conditions warrant this approach the contractor may use cushion blast in lieu of presplitting .
Cushion blasting is similar to presplitting except that the detonation along the cut face occurs after the detonation of all production holes .
With the exception of the above criteria requirements previously given for presplitting shall also apply to cushion blasting .
d. Sliver Cuts For sliver cuts pioneering the top of cuts and preparing a working platform to begin the controlled blasting may require unusual work methods and use of equipment .
The contractor may use angle drilled holes during the initial pioneering operations to obtain the desired rock face .
Hole spacing shall not exceed inches. . Roadway Excavation Roadway excavation shall be maintained in such condition that the excavation surface will be well drained .
Temporary drains drainage ditches and culverts shall be constructed to intercept and divert water that may adversely affect the condition of the excavation and the prosecution of the work .
Excavation in general shall proceed in an upgrade direction .
Subgrades shall be promptly graded and rolled to minimize absorption of water .
Adjacent ditches shall be graded to the extent that puddles will not form .
Grubbing areas which can not be drained shall be promptly filled with approved excavation or borrow to such an elevation that surface drainage will be effective .
If due to unusual circumstances drainage by gravity can not be accomplished the Resident may require the Contractor to provide adequate means of pumping the area .
Pumping may be required on a hour a day continuous basis and no direct compensation for cost of pumping will be made .
Muck shall be removed in such a manner to insure its complete removal with no areas remaining or trapped below the embankment .
Excavated muck shall be deposited in designated waste storage areas as shown on the plans or as otherwise directed .
When muck is encountered that was not contemplated on the plans it shall be disposed of as indicated above .
Excavation adjacent to roots of trees or shrubs which are to remain shall be removed by hand .
When excavating results in a subgrade of unsuitable soil the Resident may require the Contractor to remove the unsuitable material and backfill the area with approved material .
The Contractor shall conduct their operations in such a way that the Resident can take the necessary measurements before the backfill is placed .
Material classified as rock whether paid for as rock excavation or unclassified excavation shall be excavated to the required depth .
Care shall be taken that undrained pockets will not be left in the surface of the rock remaining .
The space between the rock remaining and the normal subgrade shown on the plans shall be backfilled with the designated aggregate subbase or aggregate base pulverized rock or other approved material .
The Contractor shall conduct their excavating and hauling work in a manner that will cause as little contamination as possible .
Fine grading at the normal subgrade line will be required unless aggregate subbase or aggregate base material is used .
Ditches in rock cuts shall be constructed with no protrusions of rock above the designated rock cut pay lines .
The space between the rock remaining and the finished surface of the ditch shall be backfilled with broken rock .
For earth and rock backslopes designated to be constructed on a horizontal to vertical slope or flatter the slope shall be uniformly finished to within inches above or inches below the lines designated but in no case shall projections of rock extend over inches above the actual finished surface of the slope as constructed .
Rock backslopes designated to be constructed on a  horizontal to vertical slope shall be excavated at least to a vertical plane .
Buried structures and obstructions as specified in Section .. Materials and Items Found on the Project located within the designated limits of the work shall be removed as part of the applicable excavation item for type of work being performed .
Buried structures and obstructions located below or outside the required excavation whose removal is ordered shall be removed and such removal paid for as Common Excavation Rock Excavation or Unclassified Excavation whichever is applicable. . Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade .
Subgrade areas shall be shattered to the dimensions shown on the Plans or as directed by the Resident .
The area of blasted rock subgrade shall extend sufficiently beyond the beginning and end of cut areas to ensure the shattering of all rock to a depth of feet below subgrade elevation to eliminate water pockets .
After detonation any rock that protrudes above the subgrade elevation after subgrade has been proof rolling shall be removed .
When directed by the Resident the Contractor shall excavate a trench across the blasted rock to determine if the rock is broken and rearranged to a depth of feet below subgrade .
Afterwards the trench shall be backfilled with the rock removed . .
Waste Areas It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to obtain necessary permits and approvals from all pertinent State and Federal agencies and from the local municipality before the establishment of waste areas off the project .
In addition written permission of the property owners shall be obtained by the Contractor including permission to dispose of waste in the area .
Copies of all required permits shall be given to the Resident .
Provisions shall be made for temporary and permanent erosion controls at waste areas which shall include but not necessarily be limited to grading the surface to drain covering the surface with loam or other earthy material that will support growth and seeding and mulching .
Seed and mulch shall be applied in accordance with Section Seeding .
Entrances to waste areas located within wooded areas shall be in accordance with Subsection .
Haul Roads .
When waste areas are located within wooded areas a screen of trees at least feet wide shall be maintained between the nearest edge of the waste area and the rightofway line or the construction limit line .
The entrances to waste areas shall be treated in the same manner as the waste area except that if entrances in wooded areas exceed feet in width the ground shall also be replanted with trees compatible with the type growth in adjacent area .
These plantings shall extend for a length of feet along the entrance road or as otherwise directed .
All trees that are damaged uprooted or otherwise moved as a result of the waste material and trees that have had waste material placed around them to the extent that they may die shall be cut and removed at the expense of the Contractor .
Designated waste areas may be established by the Department .
When such waste areas are established the location and other conditions relating to them will be described in the Special Provisions or on the plans .
Waste material shall not be disposed of in wetlands without prior approval and the acquisition by the Contractor of all necessary Federal State and local permits .
Wetlands are those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions .
Wetlands generally include swamps marshes bogs and similar areas .
The Contractor shall be solely responsible for delays and costs resulting from or associated with the proposed disposal of waste material in wetlands . .
Haul Roads In wooded areas haul roads shall be kept to a minimum width and placed at approximately right angles to the road or angled away from view of oncoming traffic . .
Borrow The location of all borrow pits and rock borrow quarries shall be approved in accordance with Section ..
Pit Requirements and Section Rehabilitation of Pits .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident sufficiently in advance of opening any borrow areas so that cross section elevations and measurements of the ground surface after stripping may be taken and the borrow material can be tested before being used .
Existing pits shall when directed be graded and shaped by the Contractor before being crosssectioned for original measurements .
Borrow pits shall be excavated to neat lines and all slopes shall be dressed uniformly and left in a neat condition .
Before the completion of the project all borrow pits and haul roads shall be graded to blend with adjacent ground loamed if necessary seeded and mulched .
When practicable the bottom of all pits shall be graded to drain the pit . .
Preparation of the Embankment Area When the depth of the embankment measured vertically below subgrade does not exceed feet the area on which the embankment is to be placed shall be grubbed as defined in Subsection .
a .
When the embankment is more than feet as measured above all vegetation in the embankment area shall be cut as specified in Section Clearing RightofWay .
When embankment is to be placed and compacted on hillsides or where new embankment is to be compacted against existing embankment slopes steeper than vertical to horizontal shall be continuously benched by excavating steps into the existing material of sufficient width to permit operations of placing and compacting the additional material .
Material removed shall be placed and compacted along with the new embankment material .
When such benching is required it will be as indicated on the plans called for in the special provisions or as directed. . Embankment Construction General Layers of material for embankments shall start at the deepest portion of the fill and as placement progresses layers shall be constructed approximately horizontal .
Except for the first layer over swampy ground and cleared areas roadway embankment of earth material shall be placed in layers not exceeding inches loose measure unless otherwise approved and the material compacted as specified before the next layer is placed .
When it is impractical to construct layers over the full width of the cross section partial width layers may be authorized .
Effective spreading equipment shall be used on each layer to obtain uniform thickness .
Each layer shall be crowned and maintained free of ruts and ridges to provide direct drainage of water from the embankment .
As the compaction of each layer progresses grading and manipulating will be required to assure uniform density .
Construction equipment shall be routed uniformly over the entire surface of each layer .
Embankments within feet of a bridge abutment structural plate or box culvert type structure shall be compacted by the moisture and density control method as specified in Section .
Construction of Earth Embankment with Moisture and Density Control except that rock embankments may be constructed over culverts as specified in Section .
Construction of Rock Embankments .
Water shall be added or removed if necessary in order to obtain required compaction .
Aeration of excavated roadway materials to reduce the moisture content to within specified limits shall be as specified under Section .
Aerating .
When placing layers of specified thickness is not feasible such as filling in water or over swampy ground the initial layer of embankment may be constructed in one layer to an elevation where bridging will be accomplished .
In embankment areas where no grubbing is required the material placed in the first layer shall be of sufficient depth to cover all stumps .
When the excavation or borrow consists predominantly of fragments of such size that the material can not be placed in embankments in layers of specified thickness without breaking down the pieces such material may be placed in layers in thickness not exceeding the approximate average size of the larger rocks but in no case shall layers exceed feet .
Rocks exceeding this thickness shall be separated and collectively placed in accordance with the requirements for rock embankments .
Each layer shall be leveled and smoothed with suitable leveling equipment and by even distribution of rock spalls and finer rock fragments or earth .
The Resident may test any or all layers by moisture and density control as specified in Section .
Construction of Earth Embankment with Moisture and Density Control which are constructed in depths exceeding inches .
The layers so constructed shall not be placed above an elevation feet below the finish subgrade .
The remainder of the embankment shall be composed of suitable material smoothed and placed in layers not exceeding inches loose thickness and compacted as specified for earth embankments .
Where guardrail is to be installed rock shall not be placed in the embankment under the location of the guardrail to an elevation feet below the finished grade of the shoulder .
Rocks broken concrete and other solid materials shall not be placed in any portions of embankments where piling is to be placed or driven or where Utility facilities are to be placed .
Excess or unsuitable excavated material including rock and boulders which can not be used in embankments shall be placed in the nearest available waste areas .
When it is impossible to dispose of all material in the manner described the remainder shall be disposed of in approved waste areas .
When material obtained from roadway excavation is unsatisfactory for use in the formation of embankments due to excessive moisture content can be rendered satisfactory for such use by combining it with granular material the unsatisfactory material shall be combined with granular borrow or granular excavation when and as directed by the Resident .
If the embankment is required to be deposited on only one side of abutments wing walls piers or culvert headwalls care shall be taken that the area immediately adjacent to the structure is not compacted excessively to the extent that it will cause overturning of or excessive pressure against the structure .
When embankment is to be placed on both sides of a concrete wall structural plate or box type structure operations shall be so conducted that the embankment is always at approximately the same elevation on both sides of the structure .
At the close of each days work the embankment surface shall be graded crowned smoothed rolled and sealed against infiltration of water .
The portion of the embankment and subbase outside a vertical to  horizontal slope ex tending from the edge of the finished shoulder to the existing ground as shown on the Standard Detail entitled Disposal of Waste Materials will be required to be compacted only to the extent that stability of the slope is assured .
As construction of the embankment progresses material placed in the portion of the embankment outside the vertical to  horizontal slope shall not be placed above the elevation of the surface of the main embankment unless provisions are made to allow drainage of surface water from the embankment .
The surface of the slopes shall be finished to present a uniform neat appearance .
The portion of the embankment inside the aforementioned vertical to  horizontal slope lines shall be compacted in accordance with the designated embankment compaction requirements specified for the project. . Construction of Earth EmbankmentLayer Method The layer method will be required unless otherwise specified .
Unless otherwise approved the material shall be deposited and spread upon compacted material in full width layers not more than inches in depth loose measure .
Clay or loam soils shall be compacted by use of sheeps foot or tamping type roller having a minimum weight on each tamper under working conditions of psi of cross sectional bearing area .
Sand or gravel soils shall be compacted by vibratory type compaction equipment or by pneumatic tired equipment and if necessary by the addition of water .
A combination of the above or other methods capable of producing equivalent results may be used .
The compacting operations shall be continued until each layer is compacted to its full depth and width .
With approval the Contractor may place layers in excess of inches and less than inches loose measure providing the specified compaction requirements are obtained and the Contractor agrees to make necessary test excavation for the Resident to determine density .
The Contractor will be required to demonstrate that the compaction equipment and methods are obtaining satisfactory compaction .
Satisfactory compaction for the purpose of the demonstration is defined as not less than of the maximum density .
The maximum density shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D correcting for oversize particles according to AASHTO T except mixtures may have percent or less retained on the  inch sieve .
An Adjustment ChartSpreadsheet for this correction is available at the MaineDOT Central Laboratory in Bangor Maine .
Field density tests will be performed by the Department in accordance with AASHTO T . Compaction of each layer of base or subbase material that exceeds percent retained on the  inch sieve shall continue until a density of not less than of the maximum density has been achieved for the full width and depth of the layer .
Density tests and the maximum density determined by a control section shall be performed by the Department .
A foot section at the start of the operation will be designated as the control section .
The contractor shall add or remove water to the control section as directed until the Department determines that optimum moisture has been obtained .
The control section shall then be rolled as directed using the specified compaction equipment until the Department determines that four consecutive passes do not increase the dry density by more than lbft .
The compaction process shall be repeated for each roller .
Once the compaction process is complete the Department will perform several additional density tests .
The average of these tests shall be used to determine the maximum density of the control section. . Construction of Earth Embankment with Moisture and Density Control The contract or Section .
will designate the areas to be constructed with moisture and density control and the distance below subgrade to which such methods shall be applied .
The moisture content at the time of compaction shall be suitable to obtain the required density .
The maximum density shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D correcting for oversize particles according to AASHTO T except mixtures may have percent or less retained on the  inch sieve .
An Adjustment ChartSpreadsheet for this correction is available at the MaineDOT Central Laboratory in Bangor Maine .
Field density tests will be performed by the Department .
All material in embankments above the elevation designated on the plans for moisture density control shall be placed at a moisture content suitable to obtain the required density .
Each layer placed with controlled moisture shall be compacted to not less than of the maximum density .
Compaction of each layer of base or subbase material that exceeds percent retained on the  inch sieve shall continue until a density of not less than of the maximum density has been achieved for the full width and depth of the layer .
Density tests and the maximum density determined by a control section shall be performed by the Department .
A foot section at the start of the operation will be designated as the control section .
The contractor shall add or remove water to the control section as directed until the Department determines that optimum moisture has been obtained .
The control section shall then be rolled as directed using the specified compaction equipment until the Department determines that four consecutive passes do not increase the dry density by more than lbft .
The compaction process shall be repeated for each roller .
Once the compaction process is complete the Department will perform several additional density tests .
The average of these tests shall be used to determine the maximum density of the control section. . Construction of Rock Embankments The material for rock embankment shall be placed in compacted layers not exceeding feet in depth .
Depositing the rock directly over the end of the fill from the hauling equipment will not be permitted it shall be deposited on the fill and pushed into place .
The top of the rock embankment shall be so choked that there will be no infiltration of the earth embankment placed on the top of the rock embankment .
This method shall be used only in fills in excess of feet in depth .
In no case shall the rock embankment be placed within foot of subgrade feet in guardrail areas .
When structures are located under rock embankment they shall be covered with not less than feet of earth excavation or borrow before the rock embankment is placed over the structures. . Winter Construction of Embankments Frozen material shall not be placed in the core embankment .
The construction of embankments may continue during cold weather only when all frozen material in the top of the core embankment or the existing ground is moved to the waste area before placing additional material .
When this procedure results in additional borrow quantity the additional borrow will not be paid for directly .
Compaction shall be in accordance with the specified method of embankment construction .
When the prevailing temperatures are below F all material used in embankment construction shall have a moisture content at the time of compaction equal to or less than the optimum moisture content .
The embankment shall not be constructed upon frozen material except that such construction of embankments may be allowed providing the total depth of the added fill including bases plus the depth of the frozen material beneath does not exceed feet .
Frozen material may be left in the embankment only if it has been compacted as specified before freezing .
The Contractor shall not resume construction of any embankments built in this manner until all frozen material has thawed .
If test holes are required to make this determination they shall be dug and backfilled with satisfactory compaction at the Contractors expense .
Before additional material is added uncompacted material on the surface of such embankments shall be either recompacted in accordance with the specified method of embankment construction or removed . .
Preparation and Protection of the Subgrade Unless otherwise provided the subgrade shall be brought to a condition of uniform stability and compacted for the full width of the roadway by grading and rolling operation and shall be maintained to no tolerance above or inches below the required grade and cross section .
The surface shall be compacted to uniform density and stability and graded to the extent that puddles of water will not form .
Additional material required as a result of low subgrade shall be furnished and placed at the expense of the Contractor .
The required compaction shall be the same as specified for embankments .
When the subgrade occurs in cuts the required compaction shall apply to a depth of inches below subgrade unless otherwise specified .
The Contractor shall protect the subgrade from damage .
Ditches and drains along the roadway shall be maintained to effectively drain the subgrade .
In no case shall vehicles be allowed to travel in a single track and form ruts .
No material shall be deposited on a subgrade until the subgrade has been approved . .
Method of Measurement Except as otherwise provided excavation and borrow will be measured by the number of cubic yards measured in place by cross sectional elevations .
Measurements will include slides in common excavation and unclassified excavation not attributable to carelessness of the Contractor and authorized excavation of earth rock shale muck or other unsuitable material .
Volumes will be computed by the average end area method or by other methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
When granular borrow or gravel borrow is placed for backfill behind bridge abutments and around structural plate pipes pipe arches and plate arches to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans the quantity measured for payment will be that portion of the number of cubic yards shown in the Schedule of Items that is estimated for the structure .
This quantity is considered final and no adjustments will be made except under the following conditions a .
When the structure is founded on ledge the quantity measured will be what is actually placed to maximum allowable horizontal dimensions shown on the plans .
b .
When changes to the plans are made by the Resident .
Muck excavation to be measured for payment as common excavation will be the number of cubic yards of material acceptably excavated from areas shown on the plans or other authorized areas not shown on the plans or placed in waste storage areas or hauled to an approved waste area .
Muck excavation shall be measured in its original position by cross sectional elevations and the volume computed by the average end area method .
If muck is stored in excess of the maximum slope requirements of any waste storage area the amount requiring reloading hauling and disposing of in other waste storage areas or approved waste areas will not again be measured for payment .
When it is impractical to measure excavation by the cross sectional method acceptable methods involving threedimensional measurements may be used .
When small quantities of borrow are involved and it is impractical to measure in place a quantity not exceeding cubic yards per item for a single project may be measured in vehicles at the point of delivery .
If a dedicated borrow pit is available for the project the entire quantity may be measured pit quantity .
When measured in vehicles the quantity for payment shall be of the quantity determined for earth and of the quantity determined for rock as shown on delivery slips .
When pit measured the amount for payment shall be of the quantity so measured for earth material and of the quantity so measured for rock .
Unless otherwise authorized measurement for excavation in earth cuts will be made to the designated slopes .
Field changes made by the Resident will be measured by cross sections or by other acceptable methods .
Elevations for final cross sections shall be determined at the surface of the finished ground with no additional allowance for thickness of loam sod riprap hay mulch or other type of ground cover except that excavation for slope gravel blanket will be measured by the cubic yard .
Unless otherwise authorized measurement for excavation in rock slopes designated to be constructed on a vertical to horizontal slope or flatter will be made to the designated slope line providing the finished slope is within tolerances described in Subsection .
Roadway Excavation .
If the finished slope line is not within the tolerances described payment will be made to the designated cut slope line or to the finished slope line whichever yields the lesser quantity .
Unless otherwise authorized measurement for excavation in rock slopes designated to be constructed on a vertical to  horizontal slope will be made to the designated slope providing the rock is excavated beyond a vertical plane .
There will be no payment for material removed beyond the designated slope line .
Unless authorized material placed in embankments outside a surface parallel to and inches beyond the neat line of embankment slope or inches beyond the neat line of the waste storage area in which waste has been placed will not be included in the quantity for payment and will be deducted from the borrow at of the material so measured in place .
The elevations for final cross sections for excavation shall be determined at the surface of the finished ground with no additional allowance for thickness of loam sod riprap temporary erosion control blanket hay mulch or other type ground surface except that excavation for slope gravel blanket will be measured by the cubic yard .
Measurements will be made for unsuitable materials actually excavated and removed to obtain proper compaction in cut sections and in foundations for fill sections .
Aeration of excavated materials to reduce moisture content to specified limits will be measured as specified under Section Equipment Rental .
The quantity of Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade to be measured for payment will be the number of square yards of subgrade plan area drilled and detonated in accordance with this Section measured at subgrade level .
The number of cubic yards of excavation required by the Resident to inspect the depth of shattered and rearranged rock computed at a maximum width of inches will be measured for payment as Structural Earth Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures Below Grade .
When Structural Rock Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures and Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade occur at the same location measurement and payment for Structural Rock Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures will be made for the required trench .
This area will not be included in the measurement and payment for Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade .
Controlled Blasting shall be paid by the linear foot of presplitting holes and extra drilled holes without explosives measured from the top of the drill hole at the rock surface to the bottom of the hole or to the elevation of the required subgrade whichever is higher or to an established bench elevation .
Portions of holes not meeting the requirements of Subsection will not be measured .
Production holes will not be measured .
Presplitting holes and extra drilled holes without explosives drilled where presplitting is not required by this specification will not be measured .
Where presplitting is required excavated rock will be paid only to the slope and depth lines shown on the plans or as ordered by the Resident .
Where the Resident determines that the removal of additional rock is necessary due to conditions clearly not attributable to the Contractors methods of operations the payment lines will be adjusted to the limits ordered to include only rock actually removed within such limits . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of excavation and borrow will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard for each of the pay items included in the Schedule of Items .
Payment shall be full compensation for obtaining borrow when required and for excavating loading hauling placing grading and compacting all material necessary for the formation of embankments .
It shall also include full compensation for disposing of unsuitable and surplus material when necessary .
It shall also include excavation in embankments for determining compaction density .
Haul connected with the disposal of waste or surplus material or both shall be limited to a maximum distance of feet beyond the limits of the project for disposal in flattening slopes or other roadway work .
If no disposal areas are designated the haul shall be made to an approved waste area supplied by the Contractor .
Payment for removal of unstable material below subgrade in cuts will be paid at the contract unit price per cubic yard for Common Excavation or Unclassified Excavation whichever is appropriate .
Payment for placing and compacting any backfill except Special Backfill placed in accordance with Section Structural Excavation will not be paid for separately but will be included in the payment for any one of the related excavation items provided however there is suitable excavation material available in its original position at the time of backfilling .
When there is no suitable material available for backfilling the material authorized will be paid for under the contract item for the class of material used .
When rock is encountered and no item is included in the contract for its removal the excavation of the rock will be paid for at times the contract unit price for common excavation .
The furnishing and placing of backfill material between the rock remaining and the normal subgrade line of rock cuts will not be paid for directly but shall be considered incidental to the work .
The quantity of Aggregate Subbase or Aggregate Base for payment in rock cuts shall include only the material placed above the normal subgrade lines .
Earth material from beyond the designated slope lines on earth cut slopes as specified in Section .
Method of Measurement and when authorized may be paid for when used to construct embankments at the contract unit bid price for excavation or borrow whichever is less .
Costs for furnishing and placing material necessary to backfill and to grade rock cut slopes designated to be constructed on a slope of vertical to horizontal or flatter will be considered to be included under the payment for the material used either excavation or borrow .
When muck is encountered the excavation of the muck will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for Common Excavation or Unclassified Excavation .
Excavation which requires more than one handling prior to final placement in the embankments including material placed as backfill and loamy top soil to be stockpiled and reserved for later use on the slopes will be paid for at the contract unit price for Common Excavation Unclassified Excavation or Rock Excavation as the case may be for each handling approved by the Department .
It may be paid for under another contract item for the second handling when so authorized .
Each handling shall be considered to include the operations of excavating loading transporting unloading and disposing of earth or rock material .
Excavation for unstable slopes for slope blanket backfill as specified in Subsection .
General will be paid for at twice the contract unit price bid for common excavation .
Backfill material will be paid for as specified in Subsection .
Basis of Payment .
Excavation for benching to receive embankments will not be paid for directly but shall be incidental to the other contract items .
Water added to embankment material to aid in compaction will not be paid for directly but shall be considered included in the contract items .
Payment for compacting the soils in the abutment and pier areas after the topsoil has been removed will not be made directly but shall be considered included in the other contract items .
Removing Portland cement concrete pavement and Portland cement concrete base course when not included in the contract as a separate pay item will be paid for under Pay Item .
Rock Excavation .
Payment for excavating or filling and compacting material in building or other foundation holes whether existing or created by the removal of structures and obstructions will be made under the appropriate pay item for excavation or borrow and no additional allowances will be made .
All work and materials required to grade loam seed and hay mulch waste areas and haul roads to and from waste areas to eliminate unsightly conditions and to control erosion will not be paid for directly but will be considered included in the work of the various classifications of excavation all as specified in Section .
Waste Areas .
Stripping pits to obtain necessary borrow will not be paid for separately but will be considered included in the other contract items .
When common excavation and rock excavation are reclassified as unclassified excavation payment will be made for the reclassified items under Pay Item .
Unclassified Excavation at the identical unit bid price .
Unless otherwise provided in contracts with common excavation rock excavation or unclassified excavation items grading furnishing and placing loam seed and mulch in waste areas shall be considered incidental to the contract and no separate payment will be made .
The accepted quantities of Drilled and Blasted Solid Rock Subgrade as measured will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square yard for the specified Contract items .
Payment will be full compensation for performing the work specified including the removal of blasted rock that may swell above subgrade and its disposition on the project as directed by the Resident .
Excavation and backfill required to inspect the depth of broken rock below subgrade will be paid for at the Contract unit price per cubic yard for Structural Rock Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures .
The accepted quantity of presplitting rock will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot under Pay Item .
Presplitting Rock .
All costs incurred by the Contractor in preparing an approved blasting plan in maintaining a blasting log and in adopting revised blasting methods necessary to produce an acceptable test shot shall be considered incidental to the contract unit prices for rock excavation and presplitting rock Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Common Excavation Cubic Yard .
Common Excavation Plan Quantity Cubic Yard .
Rock Excavation Cubic Yard .
Presplitting Rock Linear Foot .
Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade Square yard .
Unclassified Excavation Cubic Yard .
Unclassified Excavation Plan Quantity Cubic Yard .
Common Borrow Cubic Yard .
Granular Borrow Cubic Yard .
Gravel Borrow Cubic Yard .
Rock Borrow Cubic Yard .
Crushed Stone inch Cubic Yard SECTION SHOULDER REHABILITATION .
Description This work shall consist of rehabilitating existing shoulders by grading and compacting shoulders and furnishing placing grading and compacting new shoulder aggregate to required grade . .
Aggregates New shoulder aggregate for shoulder rehabilitation shall be material meeting the requirements of Section .
Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course or Section .
b .
Aggregate for Subbase Type D. New shoulder aggregate for add shoulder aggregate shall be material meeting the requirements of Section .
Aggregate for Shoulders or Section .
b .
Aggregate for Subbase Type D. New shoulder aggregate used for shoulder rehabilitation or add shoulder aggregate will not be required to pass the Washington State Degradation Test . .
Existing Shoulder The existing shoulder for rehabilitate shoulder shall be prepared by grading with power equipment to provide a surface on which to place an aggregate course .
All sod tarpenetrated strips and other unsuitable material shall be removed to the extent required by the Resident .
Suitable excavated granular material may be used to fill low areas and to widen out to provide a uniform shoulder width as required .
Where required by the Resident the edge of the existing traveled lane shall be cut to provide a uniform edge .
For proposed paved shoulders the surface of the existing shoulder shall be graded and compacted approximately parallel to the proposed finished paved shoulder surface .
Surplus material shall be incorporated into embankments or disposed of in an approved waste area .
Add new shoulder aggregate to existing shoulders shall be to the widths and grades that are required by the typical sections. . New Aggregate After preparation of the existing shoulder and where the thickness of new shoulder aggregate for rehabilitated shoulders to be placed exceeds inches material meeting the requirements of Aggregate for Subbase Type D or Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course shall be placed to the required grade .
Where the thickness of new shoulder aggregate to be placed is inches or less material meeting the requirements of Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course shall be used .
The Contractor may at their option grade the existing shoulders to an elevation of inches or more below the proposed finished gravel surface and place material meeting the requirements of Aggregate for Subbase Type D full depth .
Where the thickness of new shoulder aggregate for add shoulder aggregate shoulders to be placed exceeds inches material meeting the requirements of Section .b Aggregate for Subbase Type D or Section .
Aggregate for Shoulders shall be placed to the required grade .
Where the thickness of new shoulder aggregate to be placed is inches or less material meeting the requirements of this provision shall be used .
The Contractor may at their option grade the existing shoulders to an elevation of inches or more below the proposed finished gravel surface and place material meeting the requirements of Section .
Aggregate for Subbase Type D full depth .
Surface Tolerance The completed surface of the rehabilitated shoulder shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  inch .
The completed surface of the add shoulder aggregate shoulder shall be shaped and maintained to a uniform machine finish . .
Method of Measurement The quantity of rehabilitation of existing shoulders and add shoulder aggregate measured for payment will be the number of square yards shown in the Schedule of Items in the contract .
This quantity will be considered final and no adjustments will be made except when the quantity shown in the Schedule of Items is added to or deducted from when changes to the plans are made by the Resident . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of rehabilitation of existing shoulder will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
No adjustment will be made to the quantity for payment except as described under Method of Measurement above .
Payment will be full compensation for cutting the edge joint removing pavement curb and other unsuitable material grading and compacting the existing shoulder disposing of surplus and unsuitable material and for furnishing placing grading and compacting new aggregate to the required depth suitable for paving at the time of paving .
The accepted quantity of Add Shoulder Aggregate to existing shoulder will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
No adjustment will be made to the quantity for payment except as described under Method of Measurement above .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing placing grading and compacting new aggregate to the required depth .
Additional material required as a result of crossslope variance of the pavement surface will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the contract unit price per square yard of rehabilitation of existing shoulder .
Grading furnishing and placing loam seed and mulch in required waste areas will be considered incidental to the contract and no separate payment will be made .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Add Shoulder Aggregate to Existing Square Yard Shoulder Plan Quantity .
Rehabilitation of Existing Shoulder Plan Quantity Square Yard SECTION SHOULDER RECONSTRUCTION .
Description This work shall consist of reconstructing or widening existing shoulders by excavating grading furnishing and compacting new shoulder aggregate and fill material if necessary in accordance with the thickness and typical sections shown on the plans . .
Aggregates New shoulder aggregate shall be material meeting the requirements of Section .
a .
Aggregate for Base Type B .
Fill material shall be existing excavation or common borrow from an outside source . .
Existing Shoulder The area shall be excavated to the depth shown on the typical section and graded to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  inch .
Where required by the Resident the edge of the existing travel lane pavement shall be cut to provide a uniform edge .
Excavated material shall be incorporated into embankments used to flatten existing slopes as directed or disposed of in an approved waste area. . New Aggregate After excavation new shoulder aggregate shall be placed and compacted to the required grade . .
Surface Tolerance The completed surface of the shoulder shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross section shape of  inch. . Compaction The aggregate shall be compacted to the requirements of Section .. .
Method of Measurement The quantity of reconstruction of existing shoulders and widening of existing shoulders measured for payment will be the number of square yards shown in the Schedule of Items in the Contract .
This quantity will be considered final and no adjustments will be made except when the quantity shown in the Schedule of Items is added to or deducted from when changes to the plans are made by the Resident . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of reconstruct existing shoulder will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
No adjustment will be made to the quantity for payment except as described under Method of Measurement above .
Payment will be full compensation for cutting the edge joint removing pavement curb and other unsuitable material excavating grading and compacting the existing shoulder disposing of surplus and unsuitable material and for furnishing placing grading and compacting new aggregate to the required depth .
The accepted quantity of widening of existing shoulder will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for excavating removal of pavement and other unsuitable material and for the cutting of edge joints .
Payment will also be full compensation for furnishing grading and compacting fill material disposing of surplus and unsuitable material and for furnishing placing grading and compacting new aggregate .
Grading furnishing and placing loam seed and mulch in required waste areas will be considered incidental to the contract and no separate payment will be made .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Reconstruction of Existing Shoulder Plan Quantity Square Yard .
Widening of Existing Shoulder Plan Quantity Square Yard SECTION STRUCTURAL EXCAVATION .
Description This work shall consist of excavating hauling and backfilling or disposing of all material encountered for the installation and construction of drainage and minor structures and for major structures in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grade and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
Excavating for structures below designated excavation limits as specified or shown on the plans will be included under this Section .
Material which is required to be excavated under another item shall not be included under this item .
Ditches at inlets and outlets of culverts special ditches and outlet ditches all as shown on the plans shall be constructed and paid for under Section Excavation and Embankment .
a. Drainage and Minor Structures shall include pipe culverts pipe arches underdrains catch basins manholes structural plate units box culverts culvert end walls concrete steps and other minor structures .
b .
Major Structures shall include abutments and piers for bridges rigid frame structures and masonry retaining walls .
c. Special backfill shall consist of obtaining hauling and placing selected material suitable for the location where it is to be used .
Structural backfill as a contract item will be called for on the plans or in the proposal .
d. Structural Rock Excavation shall consist of removing hard igneous metamorphic and sedimentary rock which can not be excavated without drilling and blasting or drilling and splitting and all boulders solid mortared stone masonry concrete masonry each having a volume of cubic yards or more. . Construction Methods The Contractor shall notify the Resident a sufficient length of time in advance of the beginning of structural excavation so that necessary elevations and measurements may be taken of the undisturbed ground .
When solid rock is encountered which is to be removed the Contractor shall uncover the rock and provide ample opportunity for the Resident to take the necessary measurements of the undisturbed rock .
Soil erosion control devices shall be in place at this time .
When the foundation material is soft or otherwise unsatisfactory the excavation shall be carried to a depth designated and the material removed below the elevation shown on the plan and shall be replaced with approved granular material thoroughly compacted or a lower elevation for the bottom of the structure shall be established .
Suitable material removed from the excavation area including that material removed from beyond the specified excavation pay limits shall be used for backfilling or for the formation of embankments and no additional allowances for payment will be made .
Unsuitable or surplus material shall be disposed of as directed .
When the foundation is to be placed on solid rock the rock shall be excavated to a firm surface either level stepped or serrated .
When solid or disintegrated rock or boulders are encountered the rock shall be excavated to a designated depth below the bottom of the proposed structures .
Except for installations of underdrain the material so removed shall be replaced with selected fine compressible material such as sand and uniformly compacted and shaped in accordance with Section .
Bedding .
When the structure is to rest on an excavated surface other than rock special care shall be taken not to disturb the bottom of the excavation .
If the surface upon which the structure is to rest is disturbed it shall be regraded and recompacted to the extent directed by the Resident .
After each excavation is completed the Contractor shall notify the Resident and no culverts or masonry shall be placed foundation piles driven or other installations made until the depth of the excavation and the character of the foundation material has been approved .
Before drainage or underdrain pipe is installed in cut areas where common excavation unclassified excavation or muck excavation is removed below the subgrade elevation shown on the plans the undercut roadbed shall be filled with approved granular material to a depth sufficient to support construction equipment .
All fill material shall be compacted as required. . Backfilling Backfilling shall consist of placing suitable material in all spaces excavated and not occupied by drainage structures bridge structures and other permanent structures up to the elevation of the existing ground or other elevations shown on the plans or designated .
Except for underdrain backfill and for structural plate pipe units backfill material for drainage and minor structures shall be fine readily compressible soil or granular material at or near optimum moisture content and shall not contain stones larger than inches frozen lumps chunks of clay mineral matter or any other objectionable material .
Backfill material for major structures shall be granular borrow or other material designated on the plans and shall be at or near optimum moisture content and shall not contain stones larger than inches frozen lumps chunks of clay mineral matter or any other objectionable matter .
Backfill shall not be placed against gravity sections of any structure including those comprised of masonry andor concrete until the structure has been in place for at least days or until mortar andor concrete cubescylinders cured with the structure establish that design strength has been reached .
For structures other than gravity structures that require reinforcing steel designed to resist applied dead and live loads no backfill shall be placed against the structure until the concrete has been in place for at least days or until concrete cylinders cured with the structure establish that the design strength has been reached .
Backfilling around pipes catch basins and manholes the joints of which are made with Portland cement mortar shall not be done until the mortar has been in place at least hours unless methods approved by the Resident are used to protect the mortar from being disturbed .
Except for structural plate units backfill material shall be uniformly distributed in layers of not more than inches in depth loose measure and each layer thoroughly compacted by use of approved compactors before successive layers are placed .
When backfill is being placed around a pipe or structure operations shall be so conducted that the fill is always at approximately the same elevation on both sides .
Water shall be added when necessary to increase the moisture content of the backfill material to obtain compaction .
Puddling or jetting of backfill will not be allowed unless specifically provided in the contract .
Structural plate units shall be backfilled in accordance with Section Structural Plate Pipes Pipe Arches Arches and Metal Box Culverts .
Unless otherwise indicated on the plans or directed all sheeting and bracing used during structural excavation shall be removed by the Contractor following the completion of the work and all voids resulting from use of the sheeting and bracing backfilled where necessary . .
Method of Measurement Structural excavation will be measured by the number of cubic yards of material removed measured in its original position acceptably excavated in conformity with the plans or as directed .
When structures are to be installed where roadway excavation is to be removed only the excavation beyond and below the roadway excavation limits will be classified as structural excavation .
a. Drainage and Minor Structures For these structures there will be no measurement for structural earth excavation except excavation required below a plane parallel with and inches below the bottom of the aforementioned structures as shown on the plans hereafter called Structural Earth Excavation Below Grade .
When measured for payment the quantity of Structural Earth Excavation Below Grade will be the amount actually excavated provided the maximum allowable horizontal dimensions do not exceed those bounded by vertical surfaces inches from the structure except inches outside the lines of the base of catch basins manholes structural plate units and box culverts and to the vertical neat lines of underdrain trenches as shown on the plans .
When rock is required to be excavated for installation of these structures the depth for measurement will be the actual depth required in accordance with the construction specifications or as otherwise designated for a maximum vertical dimension of foot below the bottom of the invert of the pipe for culvert pipe and for underdrain and foot below the bottom of the base for catch basins and manholes .
The quantity of rock will be the number of cubic yards actually removed provided the maximum allowable horizontal dimensions do not exceed those bounded by vertical surfaces specified in the preceding paragraph .
Any removal of solid rock for leveling stepping or serrating as shown on the plans Standard Details or determined shall be measured within the aforementioned limits .
b .
Major Structures For major structures the quantity measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards shown on the Schedule of Items in the contract .
This quantity is considered final and no adjustments will be made except under the following conditions .
When the structure is founded on ledge the quantity measured will be what is actually excavated to the top of the ledge and to maximum allowable horizontal dimensions bounded by vertical surfaces inches outside the neat lines of the base as shown on the plans . .
When changes to the plans are made by the Resident .
When the outermost limit of french drains exceeds the vertical planes stated above the limit to be measured for payment will be extended upward from the bottom of the french drain on a vertical plane bounded by the outermost limit of the french drains .
When rock is required to be excavated for the construction of major structures to definite elevations as shown on the plans or elevations designated by the Resident after the rock has been exposed the maximum depth of measurement for payment will be to a horizontal plane or planes located inches below the elevation shown or designated .
Removal of solid rock for leveling stepping or serrating as shown on the plans or determined shall be measured within the aforementioned limits and paid for as structural rock excavation .
When earth is required to be removed to uncover existing rock it will mean to excavate to undisturbed solid rock and will be so measured for payment .
c. Special Backfill The quantity of Special Backfill to be measured for payment as a contract item will be the number of cubic yards of material acceptably placed and measured in place but will not include replacement of material excavated beyond the specified pay limits for structural excavation . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of structural excavation when specified to be paid for separately will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
The work whether paid for separately or incidental to the structure shall include the placing and compacting of backfill the formation of any embankments made with material from structural excavation and the disposal of all surplus or unsuitable material unless otherwise specified .
Earth excavation for installation of drainage and minor structures except that which is defined as Below Grade will not be paid for and all costs for such excavation and disposal of materials will be considered incidental to the contract unit price per item for the structure being installed or constructed .
Rock excavation for the installation of these structures will be paid for at the contract unit price for Pay Item .
Structural Rock Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures .
The accepted quantity of Structural Earth Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures Below Grade and of Structural Rock Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
When rock is encountered and no Structural Rock Excavation Drainage and Minor Structures item is included in the contract the excavation of the rock will be paid for at times the contract unit price per cubic yard for Common Excavation .
When rock is encountered and no Structural Rock Excavation Major Structures or Structural Rock Excavation Piers is included in the contract the excavation of the rock will be paid for at times the contract unit price for structural earth excavation of the corresponding classification .
When it is necessary to excavate below the elevation shown on the plans for abutments masonry retaining walls piers or rigid frame structures payment for such excavation will be made at  times the contract unit price for the item classification applying where the extra depth is required .
Protective systems andor additional excavation for backsloping required for structural excavation will not be measured for payment but will be considered included in the payment for the related contract items .
When no bid item appears in the contract for clearing drainage ways maintenance of traffic special detours or cofferdams any necessary work of this type will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the work .
Unless otherwise specified payment under the pertinent contract items shall include costs of all pumping bailing drainage sheeting bracing and incidentals required for proper execution of the work .
Backfill or bedding materials except for material used to backfill underdrain whose source is other than structural excavation will be paid for under the class of material used .
Material used to backfill underdrain will not be paid for but shall be considered incidental to the cost of the underdrain .
Excavation for channels berm ditches and cut slope downspouts will be paid for under Section Excavation and Embankment .
Special backfill will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Structural Earth Excavation Drainage Cubic Yard Minor Structures Below Grade .
Structural Rock Excavation Drainage Cubic Yard Minor Structures .
Structural Earth Excavation Major Structures Cubic Yard Plan Quantity .
Structural Rock Excavation Major Structures Cubic Yard .
Structural Earth Excavation Piers Cubic Yard .
Structural Rock Excavation Piers Cubic Yard .
Special Backfill Cubic Yard SECTION BRUSH MATTING Reserved SECTION SAND DRAINS Reserved SECTION WICK DRAINS Reserved SECTION DITCH AND INSLOPE EXCAVATION .
Description This work shall consist of removing winter sand buildup and other earth material from existing inslopes and ditches .
New ditch areas consist of removing all material encountered including backslopes as needed. . Inslope Excavation From the edge of shoulder to the subgrade break the inslope will be graded to the original template or as directed by the typicals or construction notes .
From the subgrade break to a location on the slope that does not create a hinge point the inslope shall be machine graded and finished to a smooth condition so that the flow of water is unimpeded. . Inslope Excavation Guardrail Winter sand and other earth materials shall be removed from all paved areas .
From the edge of shoulder to the subgrade break the inslope will be graded to the original template or as directed by the typicals or construction notes .
From the subgrade break to a location on the slope that does not create a hinge point the inslope shall be machine graded and finished to a smooth condition so that the flow of water is unimpeded. . Inslope Rehabilitation Material shall be excavated from or placed on inslopes .
All inslopes shall be built from the edge of shoulder to the toe of slope to provide a horizontal to vertical minimum slope  horizontal to vertical in guardrail sections or as directed by the typicals or construction notes .
Added material shall be capable of attaining a growth of grass and shall be approved by the Resident .
Ditch Excavation Ditches and adjacent slopes will be graded to the original template from the edge of shoulder to the top of the backslope or as directed by the typicals or construction notes. . New Ditch Excavation Ditches and adjacent slopes will be graded from the edge of shoulder to the top of the backslope as directed by the typicals or construction notes . .
Method of Measurement The quantity of work done will be measured by the linear foot .
Measurements will be made along the ground parallel to the roadway centerline .
Payment for inslope rehabilitation will include excavation and fill areas . .
Basis of Payment Payment will be full compensation for excavating removing brush trees and stumps placing waste material in designated areas disposing excess materials rehabilitating waste areas including seed and mulch and for grading and finishing the work .
In inslope rehabilitation areas any borrow material needed to complete the rehabilitation of the inslopes will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to this item .
When rock is encountered in new ditch excavation areas and new ditch excavation rock is not included in the contract the excavation of the rock will be paid for at times the contract unit price for new ditch excavation .
The work will not be accepted for payment until inspected and approved by the Resident or authorized personnel .
Conditions of approval will include but are not limited to grade and smoothness flow of runoff proper functioning of the drainage system and cleanup of all disturbed areas including waste disposal areas .
Seed mulch and erosion control blanket applied on the project will be paid for under appropriate contract items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Inslope Excavation Linear Foot .
Inslope Rehabilitation Linear Foot .
Inslope Excavation Guardrail Linear Foot .
Inslope Excavation Guardrail Plan Quantity Linear Foot .
Ditch Excavation Linear Foot .
New Ditch Excavation Linear Foot .
New Ditch Excavation Ledge Linear Foot Chapter DIVISION BASES SECTION Through VACANT SECTION AGGREGATE BASE AND SUBBASE COURSE .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing one or more courses of aggregates on a prepared surface in accordance with the specifications in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections as shown on the plans or established . .
Aggregate Aggregates shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Subsections of Division Materials Aggregate Base Type A B . a Aggregate Base Type C . b Aggregate Subbase Type DE .
c Aggregate for base or subbase courses shall be material meeting the aggregate type requirements specified in the following table .
Material Aggregate Type Subsection .
Base Course Crushed A B or C Subbase Course Gravel D Subbase Course Gravel Below D or E Will be designated on the plans Contractors option When designated on the plans Type E Subbase may be used inches below and lower beneath the pavement For The various classes of base and subbase at the time it is deposited on the roadbed shall conform to the gradation requirements of the contract .
The Department will obtain samples from the roadbed for Acceptance either prior to or following compaction Oversized stones shall be removed from the aggregate before depositing on the roadway .
Oversized stones for the various types are as follows Type A will not pass a inch square mesh sieve Type B and Type C will not pass a inch square mesh sieve Type D and E will not pass a inch square mesh sieve .
Placing The maximum compacted thickness of any base or subbase course layer shall not exceed inches unless the Contractor demonstrates by a test section that the required compaction can be obtained .
If compacted layers more than inches are allowed the Contractor shall agree to make the necessary excavations and backfilling in the course for the Resident to determine the density .
When layers are constructed of differently graded aggregate fine grading of the lower layer will not be required except when millings are placed as the upper most layer .
In this case the coarse graded base layer shall be fine graded to  inch and compacted to the required specification prior to placing the layer of millings .
The layer of millings shall then be placed shaped and compacted within the tolerances specified below .
Each layer of aggregate shall be placed over the full width of the section except the Resident may authorize the Contractor to place less than full width layers when existing traffic or other conditions restrict operations over the full width of the section .
When the Contractor places material to complete the full width the exposed edge of the previously placed aggregate shall be cleaned of all contamination before additional base or subbase aggregate is placed adjacent to it .
Aggregate base and subbase courses may be placed upon frozen surfaces when such surfaces have been properly constructed .
The material as spread shall be well mixed with no pockets of either fine or coarse material .
Segregation of large or fine particles will not be allowed. . Shaping Compacting and Stabilizing Compaction of each layer of base and subbase shall continue until a density of not less than of the maximum density has been achieved for the full width and depth of the layer .
The maximum density shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D correcting for oversize particles according to AASHTO T except mixtures may have percent or less retained on the  inch sieve .
An Adjustment ChartSpreadsheet for this correction is available upon request .
Field density tests will be performed by the Department in accordance with AASHTO T . Compaction of each layer of base or subbase material that exceeds percent retained on the  inch sieve shall continue until a density of not less than of the maximum density has been achieved for the full width and depth of the layer .
Density tests and the maximum density determined by a field proctor shall be performed by the Department .
The surface compaction and stability shall be satisfactorily maintained until the pavement course has been placed .
If required additional water and fine material shall be applied to prevent checking raveling or rutting .
If the top of any layer becomes contaminated by degradation of the aggregate or addition of foreign material the contaminated material shall be removed and replaced with the specified material .
All layers of base and subbase course shall be compacted to the required density immediately after placing .
As soon as the compaction of any layer has been completed the next layer shall be placed unless otherwise authorized .
The Contractor shall bear full responsibility for and make all necessary repairs to the subbase course and the subgrade until the full depth of the subbase course is placed and compacted .
Repairs shall be considered incidental to other contract items .
The top of any base or subbase course layer shall be scarified and loosened for a minimum depth of inch immediately prior to the placing of the next layer of aggregate base or subbase .
This scarifying shall be considered incidental to placing the course and no separate payment will be made .
The surface of each layer shall be maintained during compaction operations in such a manner that a uniform texture is produced and the aggregate firmly keyed .
The moisture content of the material shall be maintained at the proper percent to attain the required compaction and stability .
If voids remain on the surface after the subbase course has been constructed to grade compacted checked and approved sandleveling material shall be dumped and spread as directed .
The quantity of sand leveling material shall be limited to the amount necessary to fill the voids and the minor low areas on the subbase surface .
After the sand leveling material has been spread it shall be completely rolled by a rubbertired roller with water applied if necessary .
The surface of this material shall be maintained in its compacted and graded condition until the hot mix asphalt pavement has been placed .
The furnishing spreading compacting and maintaining of sand leveling material will be considered included in the measurement and payment of the subbase course and no separate payment will be made .
If the Contractor wishes to route public traffic over the completed Aggregate Subbase Course for a period of time greater than hours the Aggregate Subbase Course shall be constructed with a minimum inch surcharge above the design grade .
Whenever the surcharge is used it shall be constructed with material meeting the requirements of Section .b Type D Aggregate .
Also whenever the surcharge is used it shall be placed on all the Aggregate Subbase Course subjected to public traffic .
When the surcharge is removed it may be placed in driveways sidewalks approach roads or the outer portions of the shoulders .
Removal of the surcharge shall be followed immediately in succession by the fine grading of the aggregate subbase and construction of the next course .
The furnishing placing maintaining and removal of the surcharge will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the Aggregate Subbase Course pay item . .
Surface Tolerance The completed surface of the subbase or base course shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  inch . .
Method of Measurement Except as otherwise provided base course subbase course to the level of subgrade will be measured by the cubic yard in place unless designated by pay item to be measured by truck measure .
When measured in place the width and thickness for measurement will be the width and thickness of base or subbase as shown on the plans or as modified .
The length will be along the centerline unless modified by other methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
All measurements will be in accordance with Section .
Measurement of Quantities for Payment .
When designated by pay item to be measured by truck measure the measurement will be made in vehicles at the point of delivery as shown on delivery slips in accordance with Section .. F Delivery Slips .
As an alternative to inplace measurement the Contractor and the Resident may agree in writing that the quantities of base or subbase for payment will be that shown in the Schedule of Items .
If such an agreement is reached no further measuring and computing of quantities will be required and the quantity referred to herein will be final .
Aggregate base course and aggregate subbase course designated by pay item to be measured in place and used for driveways and other locations difficult to accurately measure in place may be measured in vehicles at of the number of cubic yards accepted and used at the point of delivery as shown by Delivery Slips in accordance with Section .. F. The quantity so measured shall not exceed yd per contract after shrinkage .
Pit measured items will be measured by the cubic yard in its original position by ground modeling or other approved surveying methods .
The final quantity will be the amount actually removed from the pit and used on the Project .
Tailings screenings overburden material used as other pay items waste and unauthorized use of the material will be deducted from the final quantity amount . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of base course and subbase course of the type specified will be paid for at the respective contract unit price per cubic yard complete in place .
When aggregate is required for slope blanket backfill bedding under drainage structures and other foundations it shall be paid for at twice the contract unit price for the respective aggregate base or subbase course item used .
Payment for base and subbase courses shall be full compensation for purchasing material stripping pits excavating crushing screening hauling placing compacting and other necessary processes which are required to furnish acceptable material under this item .
Water andor fines added to material to aid compaction and stabilization to prevent raveling and rutting shall be incidental to the work .
The quantity for payment of base and subbase placed on rock subgrade shall include only that material placed above the normal subgrade line .
Furnishing and placing base and sub base backfill material between the rock and the normal subgrade line will not be paid for directly but shall be considered incidental to the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Aggregate Subbase CourseGravel Cubic Yard .
Aggregate Subbase CourseGravel Truck Measure Cubic Yard .
Aggregate Subbase CourseGravel Plan Quantity Cubic Yard .
Aggregate Base Course Type A Cubic Yard .
Aggregate Base Course Type B Cubic Yard .
Aggregate Base Course Type C Cubic Yard SECTION RECLAIMED MATERIAL FOR STABILIZED BASE Reserved SECTION FULL DEPTH RECYCLED PAVEMENT .
Description This work shall consist of pulverizing a portion of the existing roadway structure into a homogenous mass placing and compacting this material to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or established by the Resident. . Pulverized Material Pulverized material shall consist of the existing bituminous pavement and if specified a designated portion of the underlying gravel pulverized and blended into a homogenous mass .
Pulverized material will be processed to passing a inch square mesh sieve. . New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material New aggregate shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course .
Recycled material if required shall consist of material from the project or from offsite stockpiles that has been processed before use to passing a inch square mesh sieve .
Recycled material shall be conditionally accepted at the source by the Resident .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris and other materials not generally considered bituminous pavement. . Pulverizer The pulverizer shall be a selfpropelled machine specifically manufactured for cold inplace recycled type work and capable of reducing the required existing materials to a size that will pass a inch square mesh sieve .
The machine shall be equipped with standard automatic depth controls and must maintain a consistent cutting depth and width .
The machine also shall be equipped with a gauge to show depth of material being processed. . Placement Equipment Placement of the Full Depth Reclamation recycled material to the required slope and grade shall be done with an approved highway grader or by another method approved by the Resident. . Rollers The Full Depth Reclamation recycled material shall be rolled with a vibratory podtamping foot roller with a minimum inch diameter single drum .
The drum shall have a minimum of tamping feet inches in height and a minimum contact area per foot of in .
Final rolling shall be accomplished by a minimum inch width single drum vibratory soil compactor. . Pulverizing The entire depth of existing pavement shall be pulverized together with approximately inch of the underlying gravel into a homogenous mass .
All pulverizing shall be done with equipment that will provide a homogenous mass of pulverized material processed in place which will pass a inch square mesh sieve . .
Weather Limitations Full Depth Reclamation work shall not be performed when weather conditions are such that proper pulverizing spreading or compaction of the pulverized material can not be accomplished . .
Surface Tolerance The complete surface of the Full Depth Reclamation course shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  inch. . Full Depth Reclamation Procedure The reclaimed material will be processed to pass a inch square mesh sieve and then shaped and compacted to the crossslope and grade shown on the plans typicals or as directed by the Resident .
Extra material will be added if required by the contract or Resident to restore crossslope andor profile grade before pulverizing locations will be shown on the plans or described in the construction notes .
The Resident may add or delete locations while construction of the project is in progress .
All extra material whether shown on the plans or added will meet the requirements of Subsection .
New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material of this Special Provision .
The Contractor will use recycled pavement to the extent it is available in lieu of untreated aggregate surface course .
The Contractor shall be responsible for re establishing the existing profile grade as directed by the Resident .
In areas where a variable gravel course is called for or required the contractor shall pulverize grade and compact the existing pavement to allow for a consistent thickness of gravel .
Density tests and the maximum density as determined by a control section shall be performed as determined by the Department .
A foot section at the start of the operation will be designated as the control section .
The control section will be pulverized for a full lanewidth or a halfroad width and the contractor shall add water as directed until the Department determines that optimum moisture has been obtained .
The control section shall then be rolled as directed using the specified compaction equipment until the Department determines that four consecutive passes do not increase the dry density by more than lbft .
The compaction process shall be repeated for each roller .
Once the compaction process is complete the Department will perform several additional density tests .
The average of these tests shall be used to determine the maximum density of the control section .
The remaining fulldepth recycled material shall be compacted to a minimum density of of the target density as determined in the control section . .
Method of Measurement Full Depth Reclamation will be measured by the square yard . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Full Depth Reclamation will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete inplace which price will be full compensation for furnishing all equipment and labor for pulverizing blending placing grading compacting and for all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The addition of materials to restore profile grade andor crossslope in areas shown on the plans or described in the construction notes will be paid separately under designated pay items within the contract .
Payments will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Full Depth Recycled Pavement Square Yard Untreated Mainline Travelway .
Full Depth Recycled Pavement Square Yard Untreated Shoulder SECTION FULL DEPTH RECYCLING WITH CEMENT .
Description This work shall consist of pulverizing a portion of the existing roadway structure into a homogenous mass stabilizing the material with cement and placing and compacting this material to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or established by the Resident .
MATERIALS .
Pulverized Material Pulverized material shall consist of the existing asphalt pavement and one inch or more as specified of the underlying gravel pulverized and blended into a homogenous mass .
Pulverized material will be processed to percent passing a in square mesh sieve. . New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material New aggregate if required by the contract shall meet the requirements of Subsection .
Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course Type A .
Aggregate Subbase Course Gravel Type D processed to percent passing a inch square mesh sieve and meeting the requirements of .
Aggregate for Base and Subbase may be used in areas requiring depths greater than inches .
New aggregate will be measured and paid for under the appropriate item .
Recycled material if required shall consist of salvaged asphalt material from the project or from offsite stockpiles that has been processed before use to percent passing a in square mesh sieve .
Recycled material shall be conditionally accepted at the source by the Resident .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris or other materials not generally considered asphalt pavement .
Recycled material generated and salvaged from the project shall be used within the roadway limits to the extent it is available as described in .. No additional payment will be made for material salvaged from the project .
Recycled material supplied from offsite stockpiles shall be paid for as described in the contract or by contract modification. . Portland Cement The Portland Cement shall be Type I or II meeting the requirements of AASHTO M. . Water Water shall be clean and free from deleterious concentrations of acids alkalis salts or other organic or chemical substances .
EQUIPMENT .
Pulverizer The pulverizer shall be a selfpropelled machine specifically manufactured for fulldepth recycling work and capable of reducing the required existing materials to a size that will pass a in square mesh sieve .
The machine shall be equipped with standard automatic depth controls and must maintain a consistent cutting depth and width .
The machine also shall be equipped with a gauge to show depth of material being processed. . Cement Spreader Spreading of the Portland cement shall be done with a spreader truck designed to spread dry particulate such as Portland Cement or Lime or other approved means to insure a uniform distribution across the roadway and minimize fugitive dust .
Pneumatic application including through a slotted pipe will not be permitted .
Other systems that have been developed include fog systems vacuum systems etc .
Slurry applications could also be accepted .
The Department reserves the right to accept or reject the method of spreading cement based on the concerns specified herein .
The Contractor shall provide a method for verifying that the correct amount of cement is being applied .
Health and SafetyRighttoKnow Portland cement is considered a hazardous chemical under US OSHA Hazard Communication Rule CFR .
therefore all Contractors and Subcontractors are required to notify their workers of the potential health hazards associated with working with Portland cement .
In no area of the work site where cement or cementpavementgravel combination is being applied reworked with reclaimer rolled or graded shall respirable dust be allowed to exceed the NIOSH established respirable dust standard RDS recommended exposure limit REL of .
mgm for up to a hour workday during a hour work week .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident before commencing any work that involves Portland cement application reclaiming rolling or grading .
The Contractor shall designate a Hazardous Waste Operations Competent Person to provide direct onsite supervision plus health and safety monitoring for work in the Portland cement impacted sections of the project .
The Competent Person shall have certified training and experience in field implementation of the aforementioned regulations .
Submittals The Contractor shall submit a site specific Health and Safety Plan HASP to the Resident at least two weeks in advance of any Portland cement related work on the project .
Health and Safety Monitoring In any area of the project where Portland cement is being worked the Contractors designated Competent Person shall monitor the worker breathing zone for respirable dust .
In the event the OSHA respirable dust REL is exceeded the Contractors Competent Person shall direct operations to cease .
Operations will not recommence until the situation is corrected and respirable air returns to acceptable levels .
The Contractor shall provide all required health and safety monitoring equipment. . Placement Equipment Placement of the Full Depth recycled material to the required slope and grade shall be done with an approved highway grader or by another method approved by the Resident. . Rollers The full depth recycled material shall be rolled with a vibratory pad foot roller a vibratory steel drum soil compactor and a pneumatic tire roller .
The pad foot roller drum shall have a minimum of tamping feet inches in height a minimum contact area per foot of in and a minimum width of inches .
The vibratory steel drum roller shall have a minimum inches width single drum .
The pneumatic tire roller shall meet the requirements of Section .
and the minimum allowable tire pressure shall be psi .
MIX DESIGN The Department will supply a mix design for the recycling work based on test results from pavement and soil analysis taken to the design depth .
The Department will provide the following information prior to construction .
Percent of Portland cement to be used. . Optimum moisture content for proper compaction. . Additional aggregate if required .
After a test strip has been completed or as the work progresses it may be necessary for the Resident to make necessary adjustments to the mix design .
Changes to compensation will be in accordance with the Mix Design Special Provision .
CONSTRUCTION .
Pulverizing The entire depth of existing pavement shall be pulverized together with approximately inch or more of the underlying gravel into a homogenous mass .
All pulverizing shall be done with equipment that will provide a homogenous mass of pulverized material processed inplace which will pass a in square mesh sieve . .
Weather Limitations When Portland cement is used full depth recycled work shall be performed when A .
Cement stabilizing operations will be allowed between May th and September th inclusive in Zone Areas north of US Route from Gilead to Bangor and north of Route from Bangor to Calais .
Cement stabilizing will be allowed between May st and September th inclusive in Zone Areas south of Zone including the US Route and Route boundaries .
b .
The atmospheric temperature as determined by an approved thermometer placed in the shade at the recycling location is F and rising .
c. When there is no standing water on the surface .
d. During generally dry conditions or when weather conditions are such that proper pulverizing adding mixing and curing can be obtained using proper procedures and when compaction can be accomplished as determined by the Resident .
e. When the surface is not frozen and when overnight temperatures are expected to be above F. f. Wind conditions as such that the spreading of cement on the roadway ahead of the recycling machine will not adversely affect the operation cement will not be blown away . .
Surface Tolerance The complete surface of the Full Depth Reclamation course shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  inch. . Full Depth Recycling Procedure New aggregate or recycled material meeting the requirements of Section .
New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material shall be added as necessary to restore crossslope andor grade before pulverizing .
Locations will be shown on the plans or described in the construction notes the Resident may add other locations while construction of the project is in progress .
The Contractor will use recycled material to the extent it is available in lieu of new aggregate .
The material shall then be pulverized processed and blended into a homogeneous mass passing a in square mesh sieve .
Material found not pulverized down to a in size will be required to be reprocessed by the recycler with successive passes until approved by the Resident .
Should the Contractor be required to add new aggregate or recycled material to restore cross slope andor grade after the initial pulverizing process those areas will require reprocessing to blend into a homogenous mass passing a in square mesh sieve .
The resultant material shall be graded and compacted to the crossslope and profile shown on the plans or as directed by the Resident .
The Contractor will also be responsible for re establishing the existing profile grade .
The completed surface of the full depth recycled course shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  inch .
The initial reclaiming process density requirements will be the same as Section .
unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
Following completion of the initial reclaiming process cement shall be spread uniformly over the full width of roadway to be recycled just prior to each pass of the stabilizing operation in a continuous process by means of a mechanical spreader .
Dry stabilizing agents shall be spread at the prescribed rate in the mix design as provided by the Department .
These additives shall then be uniformly blended into a homogeneous mass until an apparent uniform distribution has occurred .
The Resident may adjust the rate of application as necessary .
Sufficient water shall be added through the recycler head during the recycling process to ensure thorough blending to meet the optimum moisture for compaction as specified .
Water shall be added only by means of a controlled system on the recycling machine .
Care shall be taken to prevent excessive wetting .
A second water truck may be required during recycling operations to assist in the compaction and water control efforts .
The rate of water supplied shall be kept constant unless changed due to project material changes .
The resultant material shall be graded and compacted to the crossslope and profile shown on the plans or as directed by the Resident .
The Contractor will also be responsible for re establishing the existing profile grade .
The completed surface of the full depth recycled course shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  in .
Areas not meeting this tolerance will be repaired as described in Section .. After compaction the roadway surface shall be treated with a light application of water and rolled with pneumatictired rollers to create a closeknit texture .
The finished layer shall be free from A .
Surface laminations B. Segregation of fine and coarse aggregate C. Corrugations centerline differential potholes or any other defects that may adversely affect the performance of the layer .
The Contractor shall protect and maintain the recycled layer until a lift of pavement is applied .
Frequent light watering shall be performed to keep the finished cement stabilized material moist for at least hours .
Watering will continue from hours to week if the equipment is available onsite .
Any damage or defects in the layer shall be repaired immediately .
An even and uniform surface shall be maintained .
The recycled surface shall be swept prior to hot mix asphalt placement . .
Repairs Repairs and maintenance of the recycled layers during and after the curing period resulting from damage caused by traffic weather or environmental conditions or resulting from damage caused by the Contractors operations or equipment shall be completed at no additional cost to the Department .
Low areas will be repaired using a hot mix asphalt shim .
Areas up to in high can be repaired by either milling the high area or shimming the low areas adjacent to the high area with hot mix asphalt areas greater than in high will be repaired by shimming the low areas adjacent to the high area with hot mix asphalt .
All repair work will be done with the Residents approval at the Contractors expense .
TESTING REQUIREMENTS .
Quality Control The Contractor shall operate in accordance with the approved Quality Control Plan QCP to assure a product meeting the contract requirements .
The QCP shall meet the requirements of Section .
Quality Control and this Section .
The Contractor shall not begin recycling operations until the Department approves the QCP in writing .
Prior to performing any recycling process the Department and the Contractor shall hold a Pre recycle conference to discuss the recycling schedule type and amount of equipment to be used sequence of operations and traffic control .
A copy of the QC random numbers to be used on the project shall be provided to the Resident .
All field supervisors including the responsible onsite recycling process supervisor shall attend this meeting .
The QCP shall address any items that affect the quality of the Recycling Process including but not limited to the following A .
Sources for all materials including New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material .
B .
Make and type of rollers including weight weight per inch of steel wheels and average contact pressure for pneumatic tired rollers .
C. Testing Plan .
D. Recycling operations including recycling speed yield monitoring procedures for avoiding recycling and curing in inclement weather methods to ensure that segregation is minimized procedures for mix design modification grading and compacting operations and methods to introduce water throughout the cement treated layer and cement application procedure .
E. Methods for protecting the finished product from damage and procedures for any necessary corrective action .
F. Method of grade checks .
G. Examples of Quality Control forms .
H. Name responsibilities and qualifications of the Responsible onsite Recycling Supervisor experienced and knowledgeable with the process .
I .
A note that all testing will be done in accordance with AASHTO and MDOTACM procedures .
The Project Superintendent shall be named in the QCP and the responsibilities for successful implementation of the QCP shall be outlined .
The Contractor shall sample test and evaluate the full depth reclamation process in accordance with the following minimum frequencies MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL FREQUENCIES Test or Action Frequency Test Method Density per ft lane AASHTO T Air Temperature per day at even intervals Surface Temperature At the beginning and end of each days operation Yield of all materials The daily yield yield since last test and total project yield .
per ft lane The Department may view any QC test and request a QC test at any time .
The Contractor shall submit all QC test reports and summaries in writing signed by the appropriate technician to the Departments onsite representative by P.M. on the next working day except when otherwise noted in the QCP due to local restrictions .
The Contractor shall make all test results including randomly sampled densities available to the Department onsite .
The Contractor shall cease recycling operations whenever one of the following occurs A .
The computed yield differs from the mix design by percent or more .
B .
The Contractor fails to follow the approved QCP .
C. The Contractor fails to achieve percent density after corrective action has been taken .
D. The finished product is visually defective as determined by the Resident .
Recycling operations shall not resume until the Department approves the corrective action to be taken. . Test Strip The contractor shall assemble all items of equipment for the recycling operation on the first day of the recycling work .
The Contractor shall construct a test strip for the project at a location approved by the Resident .
The Responsible onsite Recycling Supervisor will work with Department personnel to determine the suitability of the mixed material cement dispersion within the mixed material moisture control within the mixed material and compaction and surface finish .
Thetest strip section is required to A .
Demonstrate that the equipment and processes produce recycled layers to meet the requirements specified requirements .
B .
Determine the effect on the gradation of the recycled material by varying the forward speed of the recycling machine and the rotation rate of the milling drum .
C. Determine the optimum moisture necessary to achieve proper compaction of the recycled layer .
D. Determine the sequence and manner of rolling necessary to obtain the compaction requirements and establish a target TMD .
The Contractor and the Department will both conduct testing with their respective gauges at this time .
The test strip shall be at least ft in length of a full lanewidth or a halfroad widthFull recycling production will not start until a passing test strip has been accomplished .
If a test strip fails to meet the requirements of this specification the Contractor will be required to repair or replace the test strip to the satisfaction of the Resident .
Any repairs replacement or duplication of the test strip will be at the Contractors expense .
After the test strip has been pulverized and the roadway brought to proper shape the Contractor shall add water until it is determined that optimum moisture has been obtained .
The test strip shall then be rolled using the specified compaction equipment as directed until the density readings show an increase in dry density of less than pcf for the final four roller passes of each roller .
The Contractor and Department will each determine a target density using their respective gauges by performing several additional density tests and averaging them .
The average of these tests will be used as the target density of the recycled material for QC and Acceptance purposes .
Following completion of the test strip compaction of the material shall continue until a density of not less than percent of the test strip target density has been achieved for the full width and depth of the layer .
During the construction and compaction of the Full Depth Recycled base should three consecutive Acceptance test results for density fail to meet a minimum of percent of the target density or exceed percent of target density a new test strip shall be constructed ..
ACCEPTANCE TEST FREQUENCY Property Frequency Test Method Inplace Density per ft lane AASHTO T . Miscellaneous No new pavement shall be placed on the full depth recycled pavement until a curing period of hours has elapsed .
If inclement weather occurs the Department reserves the right to extend the curing period .
Between and hours after compaction the finished course shall be vibrated with between and passes of a ton minimum weight steelwheel vibratory roller traveling at a speed of approximately mph and vibrating at maximum amplitude or as directed by Resident .
The section shall have percent coverage exclusive of the outside ft to induce minute cracks in the treated base course .
Additional passes may be required to achieve the desired crack pattern or section modulus as directed by the Resident . .
Method of Measurement Full Depth Recycled Pavement with Cement will be measured by the square yard . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Full Depth Recycled Asphalt Pavement with Cement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete inplace which price will be full compensation for furnishing all equipment materials and labor for pulverizing blending placing grading compacting and for all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The addition of materials to restore profile grade andor crossslope in areas shown on the plans or described in the construction notes will be paid separately under designated pay items within the contract .
No additional payment will be made for materials salvaged from the project .
Payments will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Full Depth Recycling With Cement Square Yard SECTION FOAMED ASPHALT FULL DEPTH RECYCLED PAVEMENT With Foamed Asphalt .
Description This work shall consist of pulverizing a portion of the existing roadway structure into a homogenous mass treating the pulverized material with the foamed asphalt process and placing and compacting this material to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or established by the Resident .
MATERIALS .
Pulverized Material Pulverized material shall consist of the existing asphalt pavement and one inch or more as specified of the underlying gravel pulverized and blended into a homogenous mass .
Pulverized material will be processed to percent passing a in square mesh sieve. . New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material New aggregate if required by the contract shall meet the requirements of Section .
Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course Type A .
Aggregate Subbase Course Gravel Type D processed to percent passing a inch square mesh sieve and meeting the requirements of .
Aggregate for Base and Subbase may be used in areas requiring depths greater than inches .
New aggregate required to restore grade andor crossslope shall be measured and paid for under the appropriate item .
Crusher dust required as part of the job mix shall be considered part of the item and will not be measured for payment .
Recycled material if required shall consist of salvaged asphalt material from the project or from offsite stockpiles that has been processed prior to use to percent passing a in square mesh sieve .
Recycled material shall be conditionally accepted at the source by the Resident .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris and other materials not generally considered asphalt pavement .
Recycled material generated and salvaged from the project shall be used within the roadway limits to the extent it is available as described in .. No additional payment will be made for material salvaged from the project .
Recycled material supplied from offsite stockpiles shall be paid for as described in the contract or by contract modification. . Asphalt Binder The asphalt binder used in the foamed asphalt process shall be Performance Grade or meeting the requirements of AASHTO M. . Portland Cement The Portland Cement shall be Type I or II meeting the requirements of AASHTO M. . Hydrated Lime Hydrated Lime shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M. . Crusher Dust Crusher dust if required by the mix design shall be free from friable or deleterious material including excessive mica and shall meet the following gradation requirements Sieve Size Percent Passing .
mm  in .
mm No. . Water Water shall be clean and free from deleterious concentrations of acids alkalis salts or other organic or chemical substances .
EQUIPMENT .
Pulverizer The modified milling or recycling machine shall as a minimum have the following features a .
A minimum power capability of horsepower .
b .
Two microprocessorcontrolled systems complete with independent pumping systems and spray bars to regulate the application of foamed asphalt stabilizing agent separate from water for increasing the moisture content of the recycled material in relation to the forward speed and mass of the material being recycled .
c. Two spray bars shall each be fitted with selfcleaning nozzles at a maximum spacing of one nozzle for each in width of the chamber .
d. The foamed asphalt shall be produced at the spraybar in individual expansion chambers into which both hot asphalt and water are injected under pressure through individual and separate small orifices that promote atomization .
The rate of addition of water into hot asphalt shall be kept at a constant percentage by mass of asphalt by the same microprocessor .
e. An inspection or test nozzle shall be fitted at one end of the spraybar that produces a representative sample of foamed asphalt .
f. An electrical heating system capable of maintaining the temperature of all asphalt flow components above F. g. A single asphalt feed pipe installed between the modified milling or recycling machine and the supply tanker .
Circulating systems that incorporate a return pipe to the supply tanker shall not be used .
h. The recycler shall be fitted with a front breaker bar system to ensure that the reclaimed material is broken down to the sizing outlined in .. .
Liquid Mixer Unit or Distributor Only tankers with a capacity exceeding gal shall be used to supply the recycling machine with asphalt .
Each tanker shall be fitted with two recessed pintype tow hitches one in front and the other behind thereby allowing the tanker to be pushed from behind by the recycling machine and to push a water tanker in front .
No leaking tanker will be permitted on the job site .
In addition each tanker shall be equipped with the following a .
A thermometer to show the temperature of the contents in the bottom third of the tank .
b .
A rear feed valve with a minimum internal diameter of in capable of draining the contents of the tank when fully opened .
c. Insulation to retain heat .
d. A calibrated dipstick marked at intervals of no more than gal for measuring the contents of the tank. . Cement or Lime Spreader Spreading of the Portland Cement or Hydrated Lime shall be done with a spreader truck designed to spread dry particulate such as Portland Cement or Lime or other approved means to insure a uniform distribution across the roadway and minimize fugitive dust .
Pneumatic application including through a slotted pipe will not be permitted .
Other systems that have been developed include fog systems vacuum systems etc .
Slurry applications may also be accepted .
The Department reserves the right to accept or reject the method of spreading cement .
The Contractor shall provide a method for verifying that the correct amount of cement is being applied. . Placement Equipment Placement of the full depth recycled material to the required slope and grade shall be done with an approved highway grader or by another method approved by the Resident. . Rollers The full depth recycled material shall be rolled with a vibratory pad foot roller a vibratory steel drum soil compactor and a pneumatic tire roller .
The pad foot roller drum shall have a minimum of tamping feet inches in height a minimum contact area per foot of in and a minimum width of inches .
The vibratory steel drum roller shall have a minimum inches width single drum .
The pneumatic tire roller shall meet the requirements of Section .
and the minimum allowable tire pressure shall be psi .
MIX DESIGN The Department will supply a mix design for the foamed asphalt based on test results from pavement and soil analysis taken to the design depth .
The Department will provide the following information prior to construction .
Percent of asphalt to be used . .
Percent of water to be used in the foaming process . .
Quantity if any of crusher dust to be used . .
Quantity of lime or cement to be added. . Optimum moisture content for proper compaction and dispersion of foamed asphalt. . Additional aggregate if required .
After a test strip has been completed or as the work progresses it may be necessary for the Resident to make necessary adjustments to the mix design .
Changes to compensation will be in accordance with the Mix Design Special Provision .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Pulverizing The entire depth of existing pavement shall be pulverized together with approximately inch or more of the underlying gravel into a homogenous mass .
All pulverizing shall be done with equipment that will provide a homogenous mass of pulverized material processed inplace which will pass a in square mesh sieve . .
Weather Limitations When foamed asphalt is used full depth recycled work shall be performed when a. Foaming operations will be allowed between May th and September th inclusive in Zone Areas north of US Route from Gilead to Bangor and north of Route from Bangor to Calais .
Foaming operations will be allowed between May st and September th inclusive in Zone Areas south of Zone including the US Route and Route boundaries .
b .
The atmospheric temperature as determined by an approved thermometer placed in the shade at the recycling location is F and rising .
c. When there is no standing water on the surface .
d. During generally dry conditions or when weather conditions are such that proper pulverizing adding mixing and curing can be obtained using proper procedures and when compaction can be accomplished as determined by the Resident .
e. When the surface is not frozen and when overnight temperatures are expected to be above F. f. Wind conditions as such that the spreading of lime or cement on the roadway ahead of the recycling machine will not adversely affect the operation. . Full Depth Recycling Procedure New aggregate or recycled material meeting the requirements of Section .
New Aggregate and Recycled Material shall be added as necessary to restore crossslope andor grade before initial pulverizing .
Locations will be shown on the plans or described in the construction notes the Resident may add other locations while construction of the project is in progress .
The Contractor will use recycled material to the extent it is available in lieu of new aggregate .
The material shall then be pulverized processed and blended into a homogeneous mass passing a in square mesh sieve .
Material found not pulverized down to a in size will be required to be reprocessed by the recycler with successive passes until approved by the Resident .
Should the Contractor be required to add new aggregate or recycled material to restore cross slope andor grade after the initial pulverizing process those areas will require reprocessing to blend into a homogenous mass passing a in square mesh sieve .
The resultant material from the initial pulverizing processes shall be graded and compacted to the crossslope and profile shown on the plans or as directed by the Resident .
The Contractor will also be responsible for reestablishing the existing profile grade .
The completed surface of the full depth recycled course shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  inch .
The initial pulverizing process density requirements will be the same as Section .
unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
Following completion of the initial pulverizing and blending process the dry stabilizing agents lime or cement shall be spread uniformly over the full width of roadway to be recycled prior to each pass of the foaming operation and in a continuous process by means of a mechanical spreader .
Dry stabilizing agents shall be spread at the prescribed rate of application provided by the Department .
If required by the mix design a uniform layer of crusher dust or other aggregate specified shall be spread over the full width of the roadway just prior to the foaming procedure .
Foamed asphalt shall be incorporated into the material to a depth determined by the pavement design .
These additives shall then be uniformly blended into a homogeneous mass until an apparent uniform distribution has occurred .
The Resident may adjust the rate of application as necessary .
Asphalt binder shall be added to the milling or recycling process by pumping from a mobile bulk tanker that is pushed from behind by the recycling machine .
Tankers shall be equipped with a builtin thermometer to ensure that the bituminous stabilizing agent is maintained at F F. The system employed to add the foamed asphalt to the recycling process shall conform to the equipment requirements specified in this Section .
Sufficient water shall be added through the recycler head during the recycling process to ensure thorough blending to meet the optimum moisture for compaction as specified .
Water shall be added only by means of a controlled system on the recycling machine .
Care shall be taken to prevent excessive wetting .
A second water truck may be required during recycling operations to assist in the compaction and water control efforts .
The rate of water supplied shall be kept constant unless changed due to project material changes .
The resultant material shall be graded and compacted to the crossslope and profile shown on the plans or as directed by the Resident .
The Contractor will also be responsible for re establishing the existing profile grade .
The completed surface of the full depth recycled course shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance above or below the required cross sectional shape of  in .
Areas not meeting this tolerance will be repaired as described in Section .. After compaction the roadway surface shall be treated with a light application of water and rolled with pneumatictired rollers to create a closeknit texture .
The finished layer shall be free from a .
Surface laminations .
b. Segregation of fine and coarse aggregate .
c. Corrugations centerline differential potholes or any other defects that may adversely affect the performance of the layer .
The Contractor shall protect and maintain the recycled layer until a lift of pavement is applied .
Frequent light watering shall be performed to prevent the surface from drying out .
Any damage or defects in the layer shall be repaired immediately .
An even and uniform surface shall be maintained .
The recycled surface shall be swept prior to hot mix asphalt placement . .
Repairs Repairs and maintenance of the recycled layers during and after the curing period resulting from damage caused by traffic weather or environmental conditions or resulting from damage caused by the Contractors operations or equipment shall be completed at no additional cost to the Department .
Low areas will be repaired using a hot mix asphalt shim .
Areas up to in high can be repaired by either milling the high area or shimming the low areas adjacent to the high area with hot mix asphalt .
Areas greater than in high will be repaired by shimming the low areas adjacent to the high area with hot mix asphalt .
All repair work will be done with the Residents approval at the Contractors expense .
TESTING REQUIREMENTS .
Quality Control The Contractor shall operate in accordance with the approved Quality Control Plan QCP to assure a product meeting the contract requirements .
The QCP shall meet the requirements of Section .
Quality Control and this Section .
The Contractor shall not begin recycling operations until the Department approves the QCP in writing .
Prior to performing any recycling process the Department and the Contractor shall hold a Pre recycle conference to discuss the recycling schedule type and amount of equipment to be used sequence of operations and traffic control .
A copy of the QC random numbers to be used on the project shall be provided to the Resident .
All field and plant supervisors including the responsible onsite recycling process supervisor shall attend this meeting .
The QCP shall address any items that affect the quality of the Recycling Process including but not limited to the following a .
Sources for all materials including New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material .
b .
Make and type of rollers including weight weight per inch of steel wheels and average contact pressure for pneumatic tired rollers .
c. Testing Plan .
d. Recycling operations including recycling speed yield monitoring procedures for avoiding recycling and curing in inclement weather methods to ensure that segregation is minimized procedures for mix design modification grading and compacting operations and cement and lime application procedure .
e. Methods for protecting the finished product from damage and procedures for any necessary corrective action .
f. Method of grade checks .
g. Examples of Quality Control forms .
h. Name responsibilities and qualifications of the Responsible onsite Recycling Supervisor experienced and knowledgeable with the process .
i .
A note that all testing will be done in accordance with AASHTO and MDOTACM procedures .
The Project Superintendent shall be named in the QCP and the responsibilities for successful implementation of the QCP shall be outlined .
The Contractor shall sample test and evaluate the full depth reclamation process in accordance with the following minimum frequencies MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL FREQUENCIES Test or Action Frequency Test Method Density per ft lane AASHTO T Air Temperature per day at even intervals Surface Temperature At the beginning and end of each days operation Yield of all materials The daily yield yield since last test and total project yield .
per ft lane The Department may view any QC test and request a QC test at any time .
The Contractor shall submit all QC test reports and summaries in writing signed by the appropriate technician the Departments onsite representative by P.M. on the next working day except when otherwise noted in the QCP due to local restrictions .
The Contractor shall make all test results including randomly sampled densities available to the Department onsite .
Penalties for QCP noncompliance will be in accordance with Standard Specification ..
The Contractor shall cease recycling operations whenever one of the following occurs a .
The computed yield differs from the mix design by percent or more .
b .
The Contractor fails to follow the approved QCP .
c. The Contractor fails to achieve percent density after corrective action has been taken .
d. The finished product is visually defective as determined by the Resident .
Recycling operations shall not resume until the Department approves the corrective action to be taken. . Test Strip The contractor shall assemble all items of equipment for the recycling operation on the first day of the foamed asphalt work .
The Contractor shall construct a test strip for the project at a location approved by the Resident .
The Responsible onsite Recycling Supervisor will work with Department personnel to determine the suitability of the mixed material bitumen dispersion within the mixed material moisture control within the mixed material and compaction and surface finish .
Thetest strip section is required to A .
Demonstrate that the equipment and processes produce recycled layers to meet requirements specified requirements .
B .
Determine the effect on the gradation of the recycled material by varying the forward speed of the recycling machine and the rotation rate of the milling drum .
C. Determine the sequence and manner of rolling necessary to obtain the compaction requirements and establish a target density .
The Contractor and the Department will calibrate their respective gauges at this time .
The test strip shall be at least ft in length of a full lanewidth or a halfroad width .
Full recycling production will not start until a passing test strip has been accomplished .
If a test strip fails to meet the requirements of this specification the Contractor will be required to repair or replace the test strip to the satisfaction of the Resident .
Any repairs replacement or duplication of the test strip will be at the Contractors expense .
After the test strip has been pulverized and the roadway brought to proper shape the Contractor shall add water until it is determined that optimum moisture has been obtained .
The test strip shall then be rolled using the specified compaction equipment as directed until the density readings show an increase in dry density of less than pcf for the final four roller passes of each roller .
The Contractor and Department will each determine a target density using their respective gauges by performing several additional density tests and averaging them .
The average of these tests will be used as the target density of the recycled material for QC and Acceptance purposes .
Following completion of the test strip compaction of the material shall continue until a density of not less than percent of the test strip target density has been achieved for the full width and depth of the layer .
During the construction and compaction of the Full Depth Recycled base should three consecutive Acceptance test results for density fail to meet a minimum of percent of the target density or exceed percent of target density a new test strip shall be constructed .
ACCEPTANCE TEST FREQUENCY Property Frequency Test Method Inplace Density per ft lane AASHTO T . Miscellaneous No new pavement shall be placed on the full depth recycled pavement until a curing period of hours has elapsed .
If inclement weather occurs the Department reserves the right to extend the curing period . .
Method of Measurement Full Depth recycled material with Foamed Asphalt will be measured by the yd . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Full Depth Recycled Pavement with Foamed Asphalt shall be paid for at the contract unit price per yd complete inplace to the specified limits which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all equipment and labor for pulverizing blending placing grading compacting and for all incidentals necessary to complete the work including asphalt binder water Portland Cement lime and crusher dust .
The addition of materials to restore profile grade andor crossslope in areas shown on the plans or described in the construction notes will be paid separately under designated pay items within the contract .
No additional payment will be made for materials salvaged from the project .
Payments will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Full Depth Recycled Pavement with Foamed Asphalt in depth Square Yard .
Full Depth Recycled Pavement with Foamed Asphalt in depth Square Yard SECTION PLANT MIXED RECYCLED ASPHALT PAVEMENT .
Description This work shall consist of the removal of all bituminous pavement from the existing roadway hauling the bituminous pavement to an approved location and processing as per Section ..
The gravel base of the existing roadway shall be regraded and compacted to the tolerances shown on the typicals or as directed by the Resident .
All plant mixed recycled asphalt pavement shall be placed in one or more courses on an approved base and in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades and thicknesses indicated on the plans or as established by the Resident .
Excess recycled material not used in the PMRAP process will become the property and responsibility of the contractor . .
Composition of Mixture The mixture shall be composed as directed in the job mix formula .
The recycled asphalt pavement shall be processed by the Contractor so all material will be no larger than  inch and stockpiled so as to minimize segregation .
The stockpile shall be free of any materials not generally considered to be asphalt pavement .
If additional material is required the material will be supplied by the Department or acquired from the Contractor through the Contract Modification process .
A job mix formula shall be furnished by the Department establishing the percentage of emulsified asphalt cement Portland Cement aggregate and water to be used in the mixture .
The JMF additive proportions will be verified by taking a second recycled material sample once the stockpiles have been constructed .
Emulsion water aggregate and Portland Cement shall be added in percentage by weight and verified by tank checks done in accordance with the minimum quality control frequencies .
Cement additive may be done in dry form or introduced as a cement slurry. . Emulsified Asphalt The emulsified asphalt shall be grade MS MS CSS or HFMS meeting the requirements of Section .
Emulsified Asphalt. . Portland Cement Portland Cement shall be Type I or II meeting the requirements of AASHTO M. . Water Water shall be clean and free from deleterious concentrations of acids alkalis salts or other organic or chemical substances. . New Aggregate New aggregate if required by the contract or job mix shall meet the requirements of Section .
Untreated Aggregate Surface Course. . Mixing Plant The mixing plant shall be of sufficient capacity and coordinated to adequately handle the proposed construction .
Either a continuous pugmill mixer or a continuous drum type mixing plant shall be used .
If a drum mixing plant is used it shall meet the requirements of Section ..
The mixing plant shall be capable of producing a uniform mixture meeting the requirements of the job mix formula. . Hauling Equipment Trucks used for hauling the mixture shall meet the requirements of Section .. . Pavers Pavers shall meet the requirements of Section .. . Rollers Rollers shall meet the requirements of Section ..
Mix Design The Department will supply a mix design for the PMRAP material prior to construction which includes the following information .
Percent of emulsified asphalt to be used . .
Quantity of cement to be added. . Optimum moisture content for proper compaction. . Additional aggregate if required .
After a test strip has been completed or as the work progresses it may be necessary for the Resident to make necessary adjustments to the mix design .
Changes to compensation will be in accordance with the Mix Design Special Provision. . Mixing The recycled asphalt pavement shall be delivered to the mixer at a temperature of not less than F. The emulsified asphalt shall meet the mixing temperature requirements listed in Section .
Application Temperatures .
Recycled pavement and emulsified asphalt and cement shall be proportioned and the mixing time set to produce a mixture in which uniform distribution of the emulsified asphalt and coating of the recycled pavement is obtained .
If a drum type mixing plant is used the recycled asphalt pavement may be heated prior to being mixed with the emulsified asphalt to a temperature not to exceed F. Following mixing the recycled asphalt pavement material shall be stockpiled and incorporated into the work .
The material must be stockpiled but not for longer than hours . .
Weather Limitations The plant mixed recycled asphalt pavement shall be performed when a. PMRAP operations will be allowed between May th and September th inclusive in Zone Areas north of US Route from Gilead to Bangor and north of Route from Bangor to Calais .
PMRAP will be allowed between May st and September th inclusive in Zone Areas south of Zone including the US Route and Route boundaries .
b .
The atmospheric temperature as determined by an approved thermometer placed in the shade at the recycling location is F and rising .
c. When there is no standing water on the surface .
d. During generally dry conditions or when weather conditions are such that proper pulverizing adding mixing and curing can be obtained using proper procedures and when compaction can be accomplished as determined by the Resident .
e. When the surface is not frozen and when overnight temperatures are expected to be above F. .
Spreading and Finishing The mixture shall be spread and finished in accordance with Section .. Total layer thicknesses greater than inches shall be placed in lifts. . Compaction Compaction of the mixture shall be in accordance with Section .. Rolling may be delayed to avoid lateral displacement as directed by the Resident .
See also Section .. .
Joints Joints shall be constructed in accordance with Section .. .
Surface Tolerances The surface tolerances shall be as specified in Section .
except that the maximum allowable variation shall be  inch .
The surface tolerance in existing gravel areas covered by PMRAP with no additional gravel shall be  inch. . Quality Control The Contractor shall operate in accordance with the approved Quality Control Plan QCP to assure a product meeting the contract requirements .
The QCP shall meet the requirements of Section .
Quality Control and this Section .
The Contractor shall not begin recycling operations until the Department approves the QCP in writing .
Prior to performing any recycling process the Department and the Contractor shall hold a Prerecycle conference to discuss the recycling schedule type and amount of equipment to be used sequence of operations and traffic control .
A copy of the QC random numbers to be used on the project shall be provided to the Resident .
All field and plant supervisors including the responsible onsite recycling process supervisor shall attend this meeting .
The QCP shall address any items that affect the quality of the Recycling Process including but not limited to the following a. JMFs .
b. Mixing details pugmill type production rates material processing .
c. Make and type of pavers .
d. Make and type of rollers including weight weight per inch of steel wheels and average contact pressure for pneumatic tired rollers .
e. Testing Plan .
f. Transportation including process for ensuring that truck bodies are clean and free of debris or contamination that could adversely affect the finished product type of release agent used if required g. Laydown operations including procedures for mix design modification avoiding recycling and curing in inclement weather material yield monitoring methods to ensure that segregation is minimized longitudinal joint construction procedures to determine the maximum rolling and placing speeds based on field quality control and achieving the best possible smoothness .
h. Methods for protecting the finished product from damage and procedures for any necessary corrective action .
i .
Method of grade checks .
j .
Examples of Quality Control forms .
k. Name responsibilities and qualifications of the Responsible onsite Recycling Supervisor experienced and knowledgeable with the process .
l. Method for calibrationverification of density gauge .
m. A note that all testing will be done in accordance with AASHTO and MDOTACM procedures .
n. Stockpile procedures including method of moisture control .
The Project Superintendent shall be named in the QCP and the responsibilities for successful implementation of the QCP shall be outlined .
The Contractor shall sample test and evaluate the PMRAP process in accordance with the following procedures and minimum frequencies MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL FREQUENCIES Test or Action Frequency Test Method Density per feet lane ASTM D Air Temperature per day at even intervals Surface Temperature At the beginning and end of each days operation Yield of all materials Both the daily yield and yield since last test per day at even intervals The Department may view any QC test and request a QC test at any time .
The Contractor shall submit all QC test reports and summaries in writing signed by the appropriate technician to the Departments onsite representative by P.M. on the next working day except when otherwise noted in the QCP due to local restrictions .
The Contractor shall make all test results including randomly sampled densities available to the Department onsite .
Penalties for QCP noncompliance will be in accordance with Standard Specification ..
The Contractor shall cease recycling operations whenever one of the following occurs a .
The computed yield differs from the approved Job Mix Formula by or more .
b .
The Contractor fails to follow the approved QCP .
c. The Contractor fails to achieve density after corrective action has been taken .
d. The finished product is visually defective as determined by the Resident .
Recycling operations shall not resume until the Contactor and the Department agree on the corrective action to be taken. . Test Strip The contractor shall assemble all items of equipment for the recycling operation on the first day of the recycling work .
The Contractor shall construct a test strip for the project at a location approved by the Resident .
The Responsible onsite Recycling Supervisor will work with Department personnel to determine the suitability of the mixed material moisture control within the mixed material and compaction and surface finish .
The control section is required to a .
Demonstrate that the equipment and processes can produce recycled layers to meet the specified requirements b .
Determine the effect on the grading of the recycled material by varying the forward speed of the paving machine and c. Determine the sequence and manner of rolling necessary to obtain the compaction requirements and establish a target density .
The Contractor and the Department will both conduct testing with their respective gauges at this time .
The test strip shall be at least feet in length of a full lanewidth or a halfroad width .
Full PMRAP production will not begin until an acceptable test strip has been constructed .
If a test strip fails to meet the requirements of this specification the Contractor will be required to repair or replace the control section to the satisfaction of the Resident .
Any repairs replacement or duplication of the control section will be at the Contractors expense .
The test strip shall be rolled using the specified compaction equipment as directed until the density readings show an increase in dry density of less than pcf for the final four roller passes of each roller .
The Contractor and Department will each determine a target density using their respective gauges by performing several additional density tests and averaging them .
The average of these tests will be used as the target density of the recycled material for QC and Acceptance purposes .
Following completion of the test strip compaction of the material shall continue until a density of not less than percent of the test strip target density has been achieved for the full width and depth of the layer .
During the construction and compaction of the PMRAP should three consecutive Acceptance test results for density fail to meet a minimum of percent of the target density or exceed percent of target density a new test strip shall be constructed .
ACCEPTANCE TEST FREQUENCY Property Frequency Test Method Inplace Density per ft lane ASTM D . Repairs Repairs and maintenance for the PMRAP layers during and after the curing period resulting from damage caused by traffic weather or environmental conditions or caused by the Contractors operations or equipment shall be completed at no additional cost to the Department .
Low areas will be repaired using a hot mix asphalt shim course .
Areas up to inch high can be repaired by milling or shimming with hot mix asphalt .
Areas higher than inch will be repaired using a hot mix asphalt shim .
All repair work will be done with the Residents approval at the Contractors expense. . Curing No new hot mix asphalt pavement or additional layers of PMRAP shall be placed on the recycled asphalt pavement until a curing period of four days has elapsed .
The curing period starts once the PMRAP has been placed in the roadway .
When weather conditions are unfavorable the curing period may be extended by the Resident . .
Method of Measurement Plant Mixed Recycled Asphalt Pavement shall be measured by the square yard . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Plant Mixed Recycled Asphalt Pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete inplace which price will be full compensation for furnishing all equipment and labor for removing existing pavement regrading and compacting existing gravel base processing mixing testing placing and compacting excess material relocation and for all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payments will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
inch Plant Mixed Recycled Asphalt Pavement Square Yard .
inch Plant Mixed Recycled Asphalt Pavement Square Yard .
inch Plant Mixed Recycled Asphalt Pavement Square Yard .
inch Plant Mixed Recycled Asphalt Pavement Square Yard SECTION Cold inPlace Recycled Asphalt Pavement Traveling Pugmill .
Description The Contractor shall construct a Cold Inplace Recycled Pavement base course in accordance with the Contract documents and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or as established by the Resident .
This work will consist of milling to inches of existing bituminous pavement pulverizing and sizing the millings the addition of emulsified asphalt and Portland Cement or hydrated lime to the proportions specified the mixing and placement of the mixture full width as required in the contract including shoulders and compacting the mixture as one continuous operation to the lines grades and thicknesses indicated on the plans or as established by the Resident .
Excess recycled material not used in the CIP process will become the property of the State .
MIX DESIGN .
Composition of Mixture The Contractor shall provide the Resident with a proposed mix design a minimum of two weeks prior to commencing work .
The proposed mixed design shall include the emulsified asphalt binder application percentage type and supplier the percentage of Portland Cement or hydrated lime to be added and the percentage of any supplemental aggregates to be added .
a .
The aim for air voids in the final product is to .
b .
The Contractor may add water as needed to the sized material to facilitate uniform mixing and compaction .
c. Included in the mix design will be the product information from the supplier of the asphalt emulsion binder and any product information regarding the Portland cement or hydrated lime .
d. The Contractor will be responsible for deciding and conducting investigative work to determine the properties of the existing in place bituminous mixes which the Contract documents do not describe .
Any cores or laboratory testing the contractor performs to establish the recycled mix design will be incidental to the Cold in Place Recycle pay item and not paid for separately .
A copy of all test results on the pavement samples shall be included with the mix design .
The addition of hydrated lime or Portland Cement at .
to .
by weight is required and is to be included in the mix design criteria .
Emulsion water aggregate cement shall be added in percentage by weight and verified by tank checks according to the Quality Control Plan .
Cement or lime may be added in dry form or in a slurry .
MATERIALS .
Pulverized Material Recycled bituminous pavement after milling and sizing will meet the following gradation requirements Sieve Size Passing Limits  in in .
Emulsified Asphalt The emulsified asphalt binder shall be a high float asphalt emulsion grade HFMS or a cationic slowset grade CSSH that meets the requirements of Section .. . Portland Cement The Portland Cement shall be Type or that meets the requirements of AASHTO M. . Hydrated Lime The hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M. . Added Aggregates New aggregate if required by the contract or job mix shall meet the requirements of Section .
Untreated Aggregate Surface Course. . Added Water Water shall be clean and free from deleterious concentrations of acids alkalis salts or other organic or chemical substances .
EQUIPMENT .
Equipment The existing bituminous pavement shall be recycled in a continuous operation using a recycling train consisting of the following major components .
The recycling equipment and operations may be combined onto one unit .
Mainline Cold Milling Machine The unit shall be selfpropelled with a down cutting drum or an approved upcutting drum and be automated to continuously adjust and maintain treatment depth and cross slope .
The cutting drums shall be a minimum of ft in width with the ability to add or ft extensions to the drum or have hydraulically extendable milling heads with a ft width .
Dust suppression systems are required .
The unit should be capable of recycling the pavement for the entire lane width to the required dimensions in one pass . .
Shoulder Cold Milling Machine If required the shoulder unit shall have a minimum cutting drum of .
ft in width or equal to the shoulder width to be recycled .
This unit shall precede the larger mainline milling machine to remove existing pavement off any existing paved shoulders .
The material will be placed via a lift conveyor onto the existing mainline roadway surface to be incorporated and processed by the mainline milling machine . .
Screening and Sizing Unit This unit shall be capable of reducing and sizing the recycled asphalt pavement to the specified gradations prior to mixing with the asphalt emulsion and cement or lime additives .
Oversize particles shall not be included in the final mix .
The manufacture of excessive waste through the screening process will be prohibited .
If more than of the recycled material is screened off as waste the contractor will be required at no additional compensation to reintroduce the material ahead of the train to be reprocessed. . Portable Mixing Unit The unit shall be capable of producing a uniform thoroughly mixed cold mix asphalt product .
The material feed system to the mixing unit shall be equipped with a computer controlled weigh bridge that will determine the mass of recycled material by weight being deposited into the mixing unit prior to the addition of the emulsified liquid asphalt .
The scales shall be calibrated to the manufacturers tolerance at the start of the contract and will be checked for conformance to Section ..
This mixing unit shall be of a dual shaft pugmill design equipped with a metering device which will continuously meter and maintain the amount of emulsified asphalt being added to the process to a tolerance of .
of the total by weight .
The emulsion control unit shall be equipped with a flow meter and a total delivery meter .
A positive displacement pump capable of accurately metering the required quantity of emulsion down to a rate of galmin into the recycled material is required .
The pump shall be equipped with a positive interlock system that will shut off automatically when material is not present in the mixing chamber .
Each mixing machine shall be equipped with a meter capable of registering the rate of flow and total delivery of the emulsion introduced into the mixture .
The unit shall be designed to either deposit the mixed product onto the roadway in a sized windrow or capable of depositing the product directly into a paver hopper .
Only tankers with a capacity exceeding gal shall be used to supply the recycling machine with bitumen .
No leaking tanker will be permitted on the job site .
In addition each tanker shall be equipped with the following a .
A thermometer to show the temperature of the contents in the bottom third of the tank .
b .
Insulation to retain heat .
c. A calibrated dipstick marked at intervals of no more than gal for measuring the contents of the tank . .
Placing Equipment If a pick up conveyor is to be utilized to transfer the windrow into a paver hopper the pickup conveyer machine shall be capable of removing the entire windrow down to the underlying material .
The paver utilized to place the recycled product shall conform to Section .. . Compaction Equipment Compaction equipment shall meet the requirements of Standard Specification subsection .
Rollers with the following additional requirements a .
Minimum compaction equipment shall consist of two ton double drum steel wheel vibratory rollers b. and one ton pneumatic tired roller .
The minimum allowable tire pressure shall be psi .
The Contractor shall furnish a suitable tire gauge for determining air pressure in the tires .
Additional equipment may be required in sufficient numbers and weight to obtain the required compaction .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .
Removal of Existing Pavement The existing pavement surface including cracks shall be visibly free from all foreign matter before recycling commences .
The Contractor is responsible for removing any deleterious materials or crack sealants decided to be an interference with the cold recycle process .
In areas where paved shoulders exist the shoulders will be milled just ahead of the mainline milling and removed material incorporated into the recycle process .
When areas of the pavement surface are inaccessible because of the physical constraints of the equipment the pavement shall be removed by other means and replaced by an approved source of hot mix asphalt . .
Weather and Temperature Limitations The Cold InPlace Recycled process shall be performed when a. CIP operations will be allowed between May th and September th inclusive in Zone Areas north of US Route from Gilead to Bangor and north of Route from Bangor to Calais .
CIP operations will be allowed between May st and September th inclusive in Zone Areas south of Zone including the US Route and Route boundaries .
b .
The atmospheric temperature as determined by an approved thermometer placed in the shade at the recycling location is F and rising .
c. When there is no standing water on the surface .
d. During generally dry conditions or when weather conditions are such that proper pulverizing adding mixing and curing can be obtained using proper procedures and when compaction can be accomplished as determined by the Resident .
e. When the surface is not frozen and when overnight temperatures are expected to be above F. f. Wind conditions as such that the spreading of lime or cement on the roadway ahead of the recycling machine will not adversely affect the operation. . Curing No new hot mix asphalt pavement or additional layers of CIP shall be placed on the recycled asphalt pavement until a curing period of four days has elapsed .
The curing period starts once the CIP process has been completed in the roadway .
When weather conditions are unfavorable the curing period may be extended by the Resident . .
Surface Tolerances The completed recycled pavement surface will be shaped compacted smoothed and true to required line and grade .
Deviations in the finished surface shall not exceed  in in any direction using a ft minimum straight edge .
Any repairs required to correct surface deviations are at the contractors expense using Department approved material and methods .
The Contractor shall protect the completed surface from damage caused by construction vehicles and equipment .
The recycled pavement surface shall be protected and closed to traffic until it is determined that surface damage no longer occurs when a test vehicle is passed over it .
The contactor is responsible for determining when the completed surface is suitable for traffic loading without damage .
Any repairs to correct damage will be at the contractors expense . .
Joints Joints shall be constructed in accordance with Section .. . General Procedure Mainline milling is to be accomplished full width one pass and the material will be conveyed into a sizing and crushing unit .
Once sized the material is conveyed to a mixing unit where the specified percentage of asphalt emulsion Portland Cement or lime is introduced for the coating and mixing process .
The thoroughly mixed recycled product will either be deposited a in a windrow behind the mixing unit and picked up via a conveyor or b directly conveyed into a paver hopper for laydown .
The mix will be laid full width including shoulders where paved shoulders existed to the specified grade and slope .
Water shall be used as necessary to assist the compaction effort .
TESTING REQUIREMENTS .
Quality Control The Contractor shall operate in accordance with the approved Quality Control Plan QCP to assure a product meeting the contract requirements .
The QCP shall meet the requirements of Section .
Acceptance and this Section .
The Contractor shall not begin recycling operations until the Department approves the QCP in writing .
Prior to performing any recycling process the Department and the Contractor shall hold a Pre recycle conference to discuss the recycling schedule type and amount of equipment to be used sequence of operations and traffic control .
A copy of the QC random numbers to be used on the project shall be provided to the Resident .
All field and plant supervisors including the responsible onsite recycling process supervisor shall attend this meeting .
The QCP shall address any items that affect the quality of the Recycling Process including but not limited to the following a. JMFs .
b .
Make and type of rollers including weight weight per inch of steel wheels and average contact pressure for pneumatic tired rollers .
c. Make and type of equipment in recycling train .
d. Testing Plan .
e. Laydown operations including joint construction yield monitoring procedures for avoiding recycling and curing in inclement weather methods to ensure that segregation is minimized and procedures for mix design modification .
f. Methods for protection the finished product from damage and procedures for any necessary corrective action .
g. Method of grade checks .
h. Examples of Quality Control forms .
i .
Name responsibilities and qualifications of the Responsible onsite Recycling Supervisor experienced and knowledgeable with the process .
j .
Method for calibrationverification of density gauge .
k. A note that all testing will be done in accordance with AASHTO and MDOTACM procedures .
l. Description of the Cold Inplace recycled verification procedure .
The Project Superintendent shall be named in the QCP and the responsibilities for successful implementation of the QCP shall be outlined .
The Contractor shall sample test and evaluate the cold inplace recycling process in accordance with the following minimum frequencies MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL FREQUENCIES Test or Action Frequency Test Method Density per ft lane ASTM D Air Temperature per day at even intervals Surface Temperature Beginning and end each day Yield of all materials daily per ft lane New Aggregate Gradations per day AASHTO T The Contractor shall submit all QC test reports and summaries in writing signed by the appropriate technician and present them to the Departments onsite representative by P.M. on the next working day except when otherwise noted in the QCP due to local restrictions .
The Contractor shall make all test results including randomly sampled densities available to the Department onsite .
During the Cold inplace recycling procedure the Contractor shall take verification samples of the recycled material prior to adding the emulsion at a rate of one per lane ft or a minimum of one per project .
The samples will mixed to the proportions specified in the job mix formula and tested by the Contractor for conformance to the contract specifications .
Penalties for QCP noncompliance will be in accordance with Standard Specification ..
The Contractor shall cease recycling operations whenever one of the following occurs a .
The computed yield differs from the approved Job Mix Formula by or more .
b .
The Contractor fails to follow the approved QCP .
c. The Contractor fails to achieve density after corrective action has been taken .
d. The Contractors verification samples show the air void content of the recycled product is outside the range .
e. The finished product is visually defective as determined by the Resident .
Recycling operations shall not resume until the Contactor and the Department agree on the corrective action to be taken. . Control Section The contractor shall assemble all items of equipment for the recycling operation on the first day of the recycling work .
The Contractor shall construct a control section for the project at a location approved by the Resident .
The contractor shall have on site a pavement engineer expert in CIP work to direct construction of the control section advise on suitability of mixed material bitumen dispersion within the mixed material moisture control within the mixed material compaction and surface finish .
The control section is required to a .
Demonstrate that the equipment and processes can produce recycled layers to meet the requirements specified in these special provisions .
b .
Determine the effect on the grading of the recycled material by varying the forward speed of the recycling machine and the rotation rate of the milling drum .
c. Determine the sequence and manner of rolling necessary to obtain a target TMD .
The Contractor and the Department will calibrate their respective gauges at this time .
The control section shall be at least ft in length of a full lanewidth or a halfroadway section width .
The Contractor shall repeat the control section process until parameters of the material properties conform to the requirements specified herein and as directed by the Resident .
If a control section fails to meet the requirements outlined in this Special Provision the contractor will be required to take corrective action to remedy the test strip defect to the satisfaction of the Resident at no additional cost to the Department .
The repeated process of the control section construction shall be done at the Contractors expense .
The corrective method shall be determined by the Contractor as directed by the Resident .
Quality Assurance densities of the recycled material will be determined by the Department using the nuclear method .
The test strip section will be rolled as directed until the nuclear density readings show an increase in dry density of less than pcf for the final four roller passes .
This density will be used as the target density for the recycled material .
The remaining full depth recycled material shall be compacted to a minimum density of of the target density as determined in the control section .
ACCEPTANCE TEST FREQUENCY Property Frequency Test Method Inplace Density per ft lane AASHTO T . Measurement and Payment The accepted quantity of Cold in Place Recycled Pavement will be measured and paid for by the square yard complete and in place to the limits specified in the contract documents .
The unit price shall include all materials equipment supervision and labor and tools incidental thereto .
No additional payment will be made for hot mix required to replace material that can not be compacted to the specified density or used to replace damaged or raveled sections .
The removal of existing pavement placement and compaction of any hot mix asphalt required in areas that are inaccessible due to the limitations of equipment shall be paid for as Cold in place Recycle mix per square yard .
Payment to be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
inch Cold inPlace Recycled Asphalt Pavement Square Yard .
inch Cold inPlace Recycled Asphalt Pavement Square Yard .
inch Cold inPlace Recycled Asphalt Pavement Square Yard Chapter DIVISION PAVEMENTS SECTION HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT .
Description The Contractor shall furnish a uniformly blended homogenous mixture placed as one or more courses of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement HMA on an approved base in accordance with the contract documents and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the Resident .
The Department will accept this work under Quality Assurance provisions in accordance with these specifications and the requirements of Section Quality the provisions of AASHTO M except where otherwise noted in sections and of these specifications and the MaineDOT Policies and Procedures for HMA Sampling and Testing. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in Section Materials Asphalt Cement .
Aggregates for HMA Pavement .
RAP for HMA Pavement .
HMA Mixture Composition . .
Composition of Mixtures The Contractor shall compose the Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement with aggregate Performance Graded Asphalt Binder PGAB and mineral filler if required .
HMA shall be designed and tested according to AASHTO R and the volumetric criteria in Table .
The Contractor shall size uniformly grade and combine the aggregate fractions in proportions that provide a mixture meeting the grading requirements of the Job Mix Formula JMF .
The Contractor shall submit for Department approval a JMF to the Central Laboratory in Bangor for each mixture to be supplied .
The Department may approve active design per nominal maximum size per traffic level per plant plus a .mm fine mix for shimming and where required a nonRAP design for bridge decks .
The Department shall then have calendar days in which to process a new design before approval .
The JMF shall establish a single percentage of aggregate passing each sieve size within the limits shown in section ..
The mixture shall be designed and produced including all production tolerances to comply with the allowable control points for the particular type of mixture as outlined in ..
The JMF shall state the original source gradation and percentage to be used of each portion of the aggregate including RAP when utilized and mineral filler if required .
It shall also state the proposed PGAB content the name and location of the refiner the supplier the source of PGAB submitted for approval the type of PGAB modification if applicable and the location of the terminal if applicable .
In addition the Contractor shall provide the following information with the proposed JMF Properly completed JMF indicating all mix properties Gmm VMA VFB etc .
Stockpile Gradation Summary Design Aggregate Structure Consensus Property Summary Design Aggregate Structure Trial Blend Gradation Plots .
power chart Trial Blend Test Results for at least three different asphalt contents Design Aggregate Structure for at least three trial blends Test results for the selected aggregate blend at a minimum of three binder contents Specific Gravity and temperatureviscosity charts for the PGAB to be used Recommended mixing and compaction temperatures from the PGAB supplier Material Safety Data Sheets MSDS For PGAB Asphalt Content vs. Air Voids trial blend curve Test report for Contractors Verification sample Summary of RAP test results if used including count average and standard deviation of binder content and gradation At the time of JMF submittal the Contractor shall identify and make available the stockpiles of all proposed aggregates at the plant site .
There must be a minimum of ton for stone stockpiles ton for sand stockpiles and ton of blend sand before the Department will sample .
The Department shall obtain samples for laboratory testing .
The Contractor shall also make available to the Department the PGAB proposed for use in the mix in sufficient quantity to test the properties of the asphalt and to produce samples for testing of the mixture .
Before the start of paving the Contractor and the Department shall split a production sample for evaluation .
The Contractor shall test its split of the sample and determine if the results meet the requirements of the Departments written policy for mix design verification See MaineDOT Policies and Procedures for HMA Sampling and Testing available at the Central Laboratory in Bangor .
If the results are found to be acceptable the Contractor will forward their results to the Departments Lab which will test the Departments split of the sample .
The results of the two split samples will be compared and shared between the Department and the Contractor .
If the Department finds the mixture acceptable an approved JMF will be forwarded to the Contractor and paving may commence .
The first days production shall be monitored and the approval may be withdrawn if the mixture exhibits undesirable characteristics such as checking shoving or displacement .
The Contractor shall be allowed to submit aim changes within hours of receipt of the first Acceptance test result .
Should all of the Acceptance samples of a Lot be obtained prior to the receipt of the first Acceptance result the Department will not allow the aim changes to be applied to that Lot .
Adjustments will be allowed of up to on the percent passing the .
mm sieve through the .
mm and on the percent passing the .
mm or larger sieves .
Adjustments will be allowed on the PGAB of up to ..
Adjustments will be allowed on GMM of up to ..
The Contractor shall submit a new JMF for approval each time a change in material source or materials properties is proposed .
The same approval process shall be followed .
The cold feed percentage of any aggregate may be adjusted up to percentage points from the amount listed on the JMF however no aggregate listed on the JMF shall be eliminated .
The cold feed percentage for RAP may be reduced up to percentage points from the amount listed on the JMF and shall not exceed the percentage of RAP approved in the JMF or for the specific application under any circumstances .
TABLE VOLUMETRIC DESIGN CRITERIA Design ESALs Millions Required Density Percent of Gmm Voids in the Mineral Aggregate VMAMinimum Percent Voids Filled with Binder VFB Minimum FinesEff .
Binder Ratio Nominal Maximum Aggregate Size mm Ninitial Ndesign Nmax . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . to .
to .
to For .
mm nominal maximum aggregate size mixtures the maximum VFB is .
For .
mm nominal maximum aggregate size mixtures the maximum VFB is . .
Warm Mix Technology The Contractor may place Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement produced with an accepted WMA technology if approved by the Department .
Methods or technologies shall generally be at the Contractors option but will be limited to proven Agency and Industry accepted practice .
Mixture production placement and volumetric testing details including temperatures shall be included in the project specific QCP and submitted to the Department for approval prior to any work . .
Temperature Requirements After the JMF is established the temperatures of the mixture shall conform to the following tolerances In the truck at the mixing plant allowable range to F At the Paver allowable range to F The JMF and the mix subsequently produced shall meet the requirements of Tables and Section .. .
Performance Graded Asphalt Binder Unless otherwise noted in Special Provision Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement the Contractor may utilize either a or PGAB .
The Contractor must stipulate which PGAB grading will be used to construct the entire HMA pavement structure prior to starting work .
For mixtures containing greater than percent but no more than percent RAP the PGAB shall be PG or PG when approved by the Department .
The PGAB shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO M Standard Specification for PGAB .
Polymermodified PGAB shall meet the applicable requirements of AASHTO MP .
The Contractor shall provide the Department with an approved copy of the Quality Control Plan for PGAB in accordance with AASHTO R Certifying Suppliers of PGAB .
The Contractor shall request approval from the Department for a change in PGAB supplier or source by submitting documentation stating the new supplier or source a minimum of hours prior to the change .
In the event that the PGAB supplier or source is changed the Contractor shall make efforts to minimize the occurrence of PGAB comingling . .
Weather and Seasonal Limitations The State is divided into two paving zones as follows a .
Zone Areas north of US Route from Gilead to Bangor and north of Route from Bangor to Calais .
b .
Zone Areas south of Zone including the US Route and Route boundaries .
The Contractor may place Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement for use other than a traveled way wearing course in either Zone between the dates of April th and November th provided that the air temperature as determined by an approved thermometer placed in the shade at the paving location is F or higher .
The Contractor may place Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement produced with an accepted WMA technology for any base intermediate base or shim course in either Zone between the dates of April th and November th provided that the air temperature as determined by an approved thermometer placed in the shade at the paving location is F or higher and the area to be paved is not frozen .
The Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement produced with an approved WMA technology shall meet the requirements of section .
Temperature Requirements unless otherwise approved by the Department .
The Contractor may place Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement as traveled way wearing course in Zone between the dates of May st and the Saturday following October st and in Zone between the dates of April th and the Saturday following October th provided the air temperature determined as above is F or higher .
For the purposes of this Section the traveled way includes truck lanes ramps approach roads and auxiliary lanes .
The atmospheric temperature for all courses on bridge decks shall be F or higher .
Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement used for curb driveways sidewalks islands or other incidentals is not subject to seasonal limitations except that conditions shall be satisfactory for proper handling and finishing of the mixture .
All mixtures used for curb driveways sidewalks islands or other incidentals shall conform to section .
Temperature Requirements .
Unless otherwise specified the Contractor shall not place Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement on a wet or frozen surface and the air temperature shall be F or higher .
On all sections of overlay with wearing courses less than in thick the wearing course for the travelway and adjacent shoulders shall be placed between the dates of May th and the Saturday following September th .
On all sections of overlay with wearing courses less than inch thick the wearing course for the travelway and adjacent shoulders shall be placed between the dates of June st and the Saturday following September st if the work is to be performed either by contract requirement or Contractor option during conditions defined as night work . .
Hot Mix Asphalt Plant .
General Requirements HMA plants shall conform to AASHTO M. a .
Truck Scales When the hot mix asphalt is to be weighed on scales meeting the requirements of Section Payment the scales shall be inspected and sealed by the State Sealer as often as the Department deems necessary to verify their accuracy .
Plant scales shall be checked prior to the start of the paving season and each time a plant is moved to a new location .
Subsequent checks will be made as determined by the Resident .
The Contractor will have at least ten pound masses for scale testing . .
Automation of Batching Batch plants shall be automated for weighing recycling and monitoring the system .
In the case of a malfunction of the printing system the requirements of Section .
c. of this specification will apply .
The batch plant shall accurately proportion the various materials in the proper order by weight .
The entire batching and mixing cycle shall be continuous and shall not require any manual operations .
The batch plant shall use auxiliary interlock circuits to trigger an audible alarm whenever an error exceeding the acceptable tolerance occurs .
Along with the alarm the printer shall print an asterisk on the delivery slip in the same row containing the outoftolerance weight .
The automatic proportioning system shall be capable of consistently delivering material within the full range of batch sizes .
When RAP is being used the plant must be capable of automatically compensating for the moisture content of the RAP .
All plants shall be equipped with an approved digital recording device .
The delivery slip load ticket shall contain information required under Section ..
Provisions Relating to Certain Measurements Mass and paragraphs a b and c of Section . . Automatic Ticket Printer System on Automatic HMA Plant An approved automatic ticket printer system shall be used with all approved automatic HMA plants .
The requirements for delivery slips for payment of materials measured by weight as given in the following Sections shall be waived .. a .
.. b .
.. c. and .. d. The automatic printed ticket will be considered as the Weight Certificate .
The requirements of Section .. f. Delivery Slips shall be met by the weigh slip or ticket printed by the automatic system which accompanies each truckload except for the following changes a .
The quantity information required shall be individual weights of each batch or total net weight of each truckload .
b. Signatures legible initials acceptable of Weighmaster required only in the event of a malfunction as described in .
c .. c. The MaineDOT designation for the JMF . .
Weight Checks on Automatic HMA Plant At least twice during each days of production either of the following checks will be performed a .
A loaded truck may be intercepted and weighed on a platform scale that has been sealed by the State Sealer of Weights and Measures within the past months .
The inspector will notify the producer to take corrective action on any discrepancy over ..
The producer may continue to operate for hours under the following conditions . .
If the discrepancy does not exceed .
payment will still be governed by the printed ticket . .
If the discrepancy exceeds .
the plant will be allowed to operate as long as payment is determined by truck platform scale net weight .
If after hours the discrepancy has not been addressed and reduced below .
than plant operations will cease .
Plant operation may resume after the discrepancy has been brought within .. b .
Where platform scales are not readily available a check will be made to verify the accuracy and sensitivity of each scale within the normal weighing range and to assure that the interlocking devices and automatic printer system are functioning properly .
c. In the event of a malfunction of the automatic printer system production may be continued without the use of platform truck scales for a period not to exceed the next two working days providing total weights of each batch are recorded on weight tickets and certified by a Licensed Public Weighmaster. . Hauling Equipment Trucks for hauling Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement shall have tight clean and smooth metal dump bodies which have been thinly coated with a small amount of approved release agent to prevent the mixture from adhering to the bodies .
Solvent based agents developed to strip asphalts from aggregates will not be allowed as release agents .
All truck dump bodies shall have a cover of canvas or other water repellent material capable of heat retention which completely covers the mixture .
The cover shall be securely fastened on the truck unless unloading .
All truck bodies shall have an opening on both sides which will accommodate a thermometer stem .
The opening shall be located near the midpoint of the body at least inches above the bed. . Pavers Pavers shall be selfcontained selfpropelled units with an activated screed heated if necessary capable of placing courses of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement in full lane widths specified in the contract on the main line shoulder or similar construction .
On projects with no price adjustment for smoothness pavers shall be of sufficient class and size to place Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement over the full width of the mainline travel way with a ft minimum main screed with activated extensions .
The Contractor shall place Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement on the main line with a paver using an automatic grade and slope controlled screed unless otherwise authorized by the Department .
The controls shall automatically adjust the screed and increase or decrease the layer thickness to compensate for irregularities in the preceding course .
The controls shall maintain the proper transverse slope and be readily adjustable so that transitions and superelevated curves can be properly paved .
The controls shall operate from a fixed or moving reference such as a grade wire or ski type device floating beam with a minimum length of ft a noncontact grade control with a minimum span of ft except that a ft reference shall be used on Expressway projects .
The Contractor shall operate the paver in such a manner as to produce a visually uniform surface texture and a thickness within the requirements of Section .
Surface Tolerances .
The paver shall have a receiving hopper with sufficient capacity for a uniform spreading operation and a distribution system to place the mixture uniformly without segregation in front of the screed .
The screed assembly shall produce a finished surface of the required evenness and texture without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture .
Pavers with extendible screeds shall have auger extensions and tunnel extenders as per the manufacturers recommendations a copy of which shall be available if requested .
The Contractor shall have the paver at the project site sufficiently before the start of paving operations to be inspected and approved by the Department .
The Contractor shall repair or replace any paver found worn or defective either before or during placement to the satisfaction of the Department .
Pavers that produce an unevenly textured or nonuniform mat will be repaired or replaced before continuing to place HMA on MaineDOT projects .
On a daily basis the Contractor shall perform density testing across the mat being placed prior to being compacted by equipment at in intervals .
If the density values vary by more than .
from the mean the Contractor shall make adjustments to the screed until the inconsistencies are remedied .
Failure to replace or repair defective placement equipment may result in a letter of suspension of work and notification of a quality control violation resulting in possible monetary penalties as governed by Section Quality .
Rollers Rollers shall be static steel pneumatic tire oscillatory or approved vibrator type .
Rollers shall be in good mechanical condition capable of starting and stopping smoothly and be free from backlash when reversing direction .
Rollers shall be equipped and operated in such a way as to prevent the picking up of hot mixed material by the roller surface .
The use of rollers which result in crushing of the aggregate or in displacement of the HMA will not be permitted .
Any Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement that becomes loose broken contaminated shows an excess or deficiency of Performance Graded Asphalt Binder or is in any other way defective shall be removed and replaced at no additional cost with fresh Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement which shall be immediately compacted to conform to the adjacent area .
The Contractor shall repair or replace any roller found to be worn or defective either before or during placement to the satisfaction of the Department .
Rollers that produce grooved unevenly textured or nonuniform mat will be repaired or replaced before continuing to place HMA on MaineDOT projects .
The type of rollers to be used and their relative position in the compaction sequence shall generally be the Contractors option provided specification densities are attained and with the following requirements a .
On variabledepth courses the first lift of pavement over gravel reclaimed pavement on irregular or milled surfaces or on bridges at least one roller shall be ton pneumatictired .
Unless otherwise allowed by the Resident pneumatictired rollers shall be equipped with skirting to minimize the pickup of HMA materials from the paved surface .
When required by the Resident the roller shall be ballasted to ton .
b. Compaction with a vibratory or steel wheel roller shall precede pneumatictired rolling unless otherwise authorized by the Department .
c. Vibratory rollers shall not be operated in the vibratory mode when checking or cracking of the mat occurs or on bridge decks .
d. Any method which results in cracking or checking of the mat will be discontinued and corrective action taken .
e. The use of an oscillating steel roller shall be required to compact all mixtures placed on bridge decks .
The maximum operating speed for a steel wheel or pneumatic roller shall not exceed the manufacturers recommendations a copy of which shall be available if requested . .
Surface Tolerances The Department will check surface tolerance utilizing the following methods a .
A ft straightedge or string line placed directly on the surface parallel to the centerline of pavement .
b .
A ft straightedge or string line placed directly on the surface transverse to the centerline of pavement .
The Contractor shall correct variations exceeding  in by removing defective work and replacing it with new material as directed by the Department .
The Contractor shall furnish a foot straightedge for the Departments use . .
Preparation of Existing Surface The Contractor shall thoroughly clean the surface upon which Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement is to be placed of all objectionable material .
When the surface of the existing base or pavement is irregular the Contractor shall bring it to uniform grade and cross section .
All surfaces shall have a tack coat applied prior to placing any new HMA course .
Tack coat shall conform to the requirements of Section Bituminous Tack Coat Section Bituminous Material and all applicable sections of the contract . .
Hot Mix Asphalt Documentation The Contractor and the Department shall agree on the amount of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement that has been placed each day .
All delivery slips shall conform to the requirements of .. .
Preparation of Aggregates The Contractor shall dry and heat the aggregates for the HMA to the required temperature .
The Contractor shall properly adjust flames to avoid physical damage to the aggregate and to avoid depositing soot on the aggregate. . Mixing The Contractor shall combine the dried aggregate in the mixer in the amount of each fraction of aggregate required to meet the JMF .
The Contractor shall measure the amount of PGAB and introduce it into the mixer in the amount specified by the JMF .
The Contractor shall produce the HMA at the temperature established by the JMF .
The Contractor shall dry the aggregate sufficiently so that the HMA will not flush foam excessively or displace excessively under the action of the rollers .
The Contractor shall introduce the aggregate into the mixer at a temperature of not more than F above the temperature at which the viscosity of the PGAB being used is .
Pa s. The Contractor shall store and introduce into the mixer the Performance Graded Asphalt Binder at a uniformly maintained temperature at which the viscosity of the PGAB is between .
Pa s and .
Pa s. The aggregate shall be coated completely and uniformly with a thorough distribution of the PGAB .
The Contractor shall determine the wet mixing time for each plant and for each type of aggregate used .
The resultant material shall be a uniformly blended homogenous HMA mixture . .
Spreading and Finishing On areas where irregularities or unavoidable obstacles make the use of mechanical spreading and finishing equipment impracticable the Contractor shall spread rake and lute the HMA with hand tools to provide the required compacted thickness .
Solvent based agents developed to strip asphalts from aggregates will not be allowed as release agents .
On roadways with adjoining lanes carrying traffic the Contractor shall place each course over the full width of the traveled way section being paved that day unless otherwise noted by the Department in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement .
In addition hot mix asphalt pavement placed on bridges shall also conform to Section .
and the following requirements .
a .
The bottom course shall be placed with an approved rubber mounted paver of such type and operated in such a manner that the membrane waterproofing will not be damaged in any way .
b .
The top course shall not be placed until the bottom course has cooled sufficiently to provide stability .
c. The Contractor will not be required to cut sample cores from the compacted pavement on the bridge deck unless otherwise directed by Special Provision .
d. After the top course has been placed the shoulder areas shall be sealed ft wide with two applications of an emulsified bituminous sealer meeting the requirements of Section .
Sealing and Section .
Emulsified Bituminous Sealing Compound .
The first application shall be premixed with fine sharp sand similar to mortar sand as needed to fill all voids in the mix in the area being sealed .
The second application may be applied without sand .
The sealer shall be carried to the curb at the gutter line in sufficient quantity to leave a bead or fillet of material at the face of the curb .
The area to be sealed shall be clean dry and the surface shall be at ambient temperature .
e. The furnishing and applying of the required quantity of sealer for the bridge shoulder areas shall be incidental to placing the hot mix asphalt pavement .
f. The atmospheric temperature for all courses placed on bridge decks shall be F or higher. . Compaction Immediately after the Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement has been spread struck off and any surface irregularities adjusted the Contractor shall thoroughly and uniformly compact the HMA by rolling .
The Contractor shall roll the surface when the mixture is in the proper condition and when the rolling does not cause undue displacement cracking or shoving .
The Contractor shall prevent adhesion of the HMA to the rollers or vibrating compactors without the use of fuel oil or other petroleum based release agents .
Solvents designed to strip asphalt binders from aggregates will not be permitted as release agents on equipment tools or pavement surfaces .
The Contractor shall immediately correct any displacement occurring as a result of the reversing of the direction of a roller or from other causes to the satisfaction of the Department .
Any operation other than placement of variable depth shim course that results in breakdown of the aggregate shall be discontinued .
Any new pavement that shows obvious cracking checking or displacement shall be removed and replaced for the full lane width as directed by the Resident at no cost to the Department .
Along forms curbs headers walls and other places not accessible to the rollers the Contractor shall thoroughly compact the HMA with mechanical vibrating compactors .
The Contractor shall only use hand tamping in areas inaccessible to all other compaction equipment .
On depressed areas the Contractor may use a trench roller or cleated compression strips under a roller to transmit compression to the depressed area .
Any HMA that becomes unacceptable due to cooling cracking checking segregation or deformation as a result of an interruption in mix delivery shall be removed and replaced with material that meets contract specifications at no cost to the Department . .
Joints The Contractor shall construct wearing course transverse and longitudinal joints in such a manner that minimum tolerances shown in Section .
Surface Tolerances are met when measured with a straightedge .
The paver shall maintain a uniform head of HMA during transverse and longitudinal joint construction .
The HMA shall be free of segregation and meet temperature requirements outlined in section .. Transverse joints of the wearing course shall be straight and neatly trimmed .
The Contractor may form a vertical face exposing the full depth of the course by inserting a header by breaking the bond with the underlying course or by cutting back with hand tools .
The Department may allow feathered or lap joints on lower base courses or when matching existing base type pavements .
Longitudinal joints shall be generally straight to the line of travel and constructed in a manner that best ensure joint integrity .
Methods or activities that prove detrimental to the construction of straight sound longitudinal joints will be discontinued .
The Contractor shall apply a coating of emulsified asphalt immediately before paving all joints to the vertical face and in of the adjacent portion of any pavement being overlaid except those formed by pavers operating in echelon .
The Contractor shall use an approved spray apparatus designed for covering a narrow surface .
The Department may approve application by a brush for small surfaces or in the event of a malfunction of the spray apparatus but for a period of not more than one working day .
Where pavement under this contract joins an existing pavement or when the Department directs the Contractor shall cut the existing pavement along a smooth line producing a neat even vertical joint .
The Department will not permit broken or raveled edges .
The cost of all work necessary for the preparation of joints is incidental to related contract pay items. . Quality Control Method A B C The Contractor shall operate in accordance with the approved Quality Control Plan QCP to assure a product meeting the contract requirements .
The QCP shall meet the requirements of Section .
Acceptance and this Section .
The Contractor shall not begin paving operations until the Department approves the QCP in writing .
Prior to placing any mix the Department and the Contractor shall hold a Prepaving conference to discuss the paving schedule source of mix type and amount of equipment to be used sequence of paving pattern rate of mix supply random sampling project lots and sublots and traffic control .
A copy of the QC random numbers to be used on the project shall be provided to The Resident .
The Departments random numbers for Acceptance testing shall be generated and on file with the Resident and the Project Manager .
All personnel of the Department and the Contractor who have significant information relevant to the paving items shall attend including the responsible onsite paving supervisor for the Contractor .
The Resident will prepare minutes of the conference and distribute them to all attendees .
Any requests to revise the minutes must be made to the Resident within Days of Receipt .
These minutes will constitute the final record of the Prepaving conference .
The QCP shall address any items that affect the quality of the Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement including but not limited to the following a. JMFs b .
Hot mix asphalt plant details c. Stockpile Management to include provisions for a minimum day stockpile d. Make and type of pavers e. Make and type of rollers including weight weight per inch of steel wheels and average contact pressure for pneumatic tired rollers f. Name of QCP Administrator and certification number g. Name of Process Control Technicians and certification numbers h. Name of Quality Control Technicianss and certification numbers i. Mixing transportation including process for ensuring that truck bodies are clean and free of debris or contamination that could adversely affect the finished pavement j .
Testing Plan k. Laydown operations including longitudinal joint construction procedures for avoiding paving in inclement weather type of release agent to be used on trucks tools and rollers compaction of shoulders tacking of all joints methods to ensure that segregation is minimized procedures to determine the maximum rolling and paving speeds based on best engineering practices as well as past experience in achieving the best possible smoothness of the pavement .
Solvent based agents developed to strip asphalts from aggregates will not be allowed as release agents .
l. Examples of Quality Control forms including a daily plant report daily paving report and delivery slip template for any plant to be utilized .
m. Silo management and details can show storage for use on project of up to hours n. Provisions for varying mix temperature due to extraordinary conditions or production limitations .
If a warmmix technology is utilized a proposed target production temperature range not to exceed F will be provided for each mix design .
o .
Name and responsibilities of the Responsible onsite Paving Supervisor .
p. Method for calibrationverification of Density Gauge q .
A note that all testing will be done in accordance with AASHTO and the MaineDOT Policies and Procedures for HMA Sampling and Testing .
r. A detailed description of RAP processing stockpiling and introduction into the plant as well as a note detailing conditions under which the percent of RAP will vary from that specified on the JMF .
s. A detailed procedure outlining when production will be halted due to QC or Acceptance testing results .
t. A plan to address the change in PGAB source or supplier and the potential comingling of differing PGABs .
u .
A procedure to take immediate possession of acceptance samples once released by MaineDOT and deliver said samples to the designated acceptance laboratory .
v. Provisions for how the QCP will be communicated to the Contractors field personnel The QCP shall include the following technicians together with following minimum requirements a. QCP Administrator A qualified individual shall administer the QCP .
The QCP Administrator must be a fulltime employee of or a consultant engaged by the Contractor or paving subcontractor .
The QCP Administrator shall have full authority to institute any and all actions necessary for the successful operation of the QCP .
The QCP Administrator or its designee in the QCP Administrators absence shall be available to communicate with the Department at all times .
The QCP Administrator shall be certified as a Quality Assurance Technologist certified by the New England Transportation Technician Certification Program NETTCP .
b .
Process Control Technicians PCT shall utilize test results and other quality control practices to assure the quality of aggregates and other mix components and control proportioning to meet the JMFs .
The PCT shall inspect all equipment used in mixing to assure it is operating properly and that mixing conforms to the mix designs and other Contract requirements and that delivery slips and plant recordation accurately reflects the mix being produced with all the required information .
The QCP shall detail how these duties and responsibilities are to be accomplished and documented and whether more than one PCT is required .
The Plan shall include the criteria to be utilized by the PCT to correct or reject unsatisfactory materials .
The PCT shall be certified as a Plant Technician by the NETTCP .
c. Quality Control Technicians QCT shall perform and utilize quality control tests at the job site to assure that delivered materials meet the requirements of the JMFs .
The QCT shall inspect all equipment utilized in transporting laydown and compacting to assure it is operating properly and that all laydown and compaction conform to the Contract requirements .
The QCP shall detail how these duties and responsibilities are to be accomplished and documented and whether more than one QCT is required .
The QCP shall include the criteria utilized by the QCT to correct or reject unsatisfactory materials .
The QCT shall be certified as a Paving Inspector by the NETTCP .
The QCP shall detail the coordination of the activities of the Plan Administrator the PCT and the QCT .
The Project Superintendent shall be named in the QCP and the responsibilities for successful implementation of the QCP shall be outlined .
The Contractor shall sample test and evaluate Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement in accordance with the following minimum frequencies TABLE MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL FREQUENCIES Test or Action Frequency Test Method Temperature of mix per day at street and plant Temperature of mat per day TMD Surface per ton As noted in QC Plan ASTM D TMD Base per ton As noted in QC Plan AASHTO T Fines Effective Binder per ton AASHTO T Gradation per ton AASHTO T PGAB content per ton AASHTO T or T Voids at Ndesign per ton AASHTO T Voids in Mineral Aggregate at Ndesign per ton AASHTO T Rice Specific Gravity per ton AASHTO T Coarse Aggregate Angularity per ton ASTM D Flat and Elongated Particles Per ton ASTM D Fine Aggregate Angularity Per ton AASHTO T Method A and B only The Contractor may utilize innovative equipment or techniques not addressed by the Contract documents to produce or monitor the production of the mix subject to approval by the Department .
The Contractor shall submit all Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement plant test reports inspection reports and updated pay factors in writing signed by the appropriate technician and present them to the Department by P.M. on the next working day except when otherwise noted in the QCP due to local restrictions .
The Contractor shall also retain splits of the previous QC tests with QC results enclosed for random selection and testing by The Department during QA inspections of the HMA production facility .
Test results of splits that do not meet the Dispute Resolution Variance Limits in Table shall trigger an investigation by the MaineDOT Independent Assurance Unit and may result in that lab losing NETTCP certification and the ability to request a dispute Section .
Process for Dispute Resolution Methods A B and C only .
The Contractor shall make density test results including randomly sampled densities available to the Department onsite .
Summaries of each days results including a daily paving report shall be recorded and signed by the QCT and presented to the Department by p.m. the next working day .
The Contractor shall have a testing lab at the plant site equipped with all testing equipment necessary to complete the tests in Table .
The Contractor shall locate an approved Gyratory Compactor at the plant testing lab or within minutes of the plant site .
The Contractor shall fill all holes in the pavement resulting from cutting cores by the Contractor or the Department with a properly compacted acceptable mixture no later than the following working day .
Before filling the Contractor shall carefully clean the holes and apply a coating of emulsified asphalt .
On surface courses cores shall not be cut except for Verification of the Nuclear Density Gauge at a rate not to exceed per day or per ton placed .
The Contractor shall monitor plant production using running average of three control charts as specified in Section Quality .
Control limits shall be as noted in Table below .
The UCL and LCL shall not exceed the allowable gradation control points for the particular type of mixture as outlined in Table of section .. TABLE Control Limits Property UCL and LCL Passing .
mm and larger sieves Target .
Passing .
mm sieve Target .
Passing .
mm sieve Target .
PGAB Content Target .
Voids in the Mineral Aggregate LCL LSL .
Voids at Ndesign JMF Target .
Based on AASHTO T The Contractor shall cease paving operations whenever one of the following occurs on a lot in progress a .
Method A The Pay Factor for VMA Voids Nd Percent PGAB composite gradation VFB fines to effective binder or density using all Acceptance or all Quality Control tests for the current lot is less than .. b .
Method B The Pay Factor for VMA Voids Nd Percent PGAB composite gradation VFB fines to effective binder or density using all Acceptance or all Quality Control tests for the current lot is less than .. c. Method C The Pay Factor for VMA Voids Nd Percent PGAB percent passing the nominal maximum sieve percent passing .
mm sieve percent passing .
mm sieve percent passing .
mm sieve or density using all Acceptance or all available Quality Control tests for the current lot is less than .. d. The Coarse Aggregate Angularity or Fine Aggregate Angularity value falls below the requirements of Table Aggregate Consensus Properties Criteria in Section .
for the design traffic level .
e. Each of the first control tests for a Method A or B lot fall outside the upper or lower limits for VMA Voids Nd or Percent PGAB or under Method C each of the first control tests for the lot fall outside the upper or lower limits for the nominal maximum .
mm .
mm or .
mm sieves or percent PGAB .
f. The Flat and Elongated Particles value exceeds by ASTM D. g. There is any visible damage to the aggregate due to overdensification other than on variable depth shim courses .
h. The Contractor fails to follow the approved QCP .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident in writing as to the reason for shutdown as well as the proposed corrective action by the end of the work day .
Failure to do so will be treated as a second incident under .. QCP Noncompliance .
The Department will consider corrective action acceptable if the pay factor for the failing property increases based on samples already in transit or a verification sample is tested and the property falls within the specification limits .
In cases where the corrective action can be accomplished immediately such as batch weight or cold feed changes the Contractor may elect to resume production once the corrective action is completed .
Additional QC testing shall be performed to verify the effectiveness of the corrective action .
Subsequent occurrences of shutdown for the same property in a Lot in progress will require paving operations to cease .
Paving operations shall not resume until the Contactor and the Department determines that material meeting the Contract requirements will be produced .
The Department may allow the Contractor to resume production based upon a passing QC sample with a split of the sample being sent to the Department for verification testing .
If the submitted verification sample test results fall outside the specification limits the Contractor shall cease production until a verification sample is submitted to the Department has been tested by the Department and found to be within specification limits .
If the Contractors control chart shows the process to be out of control defined as a single point outside of the control limits on the running average of three chart on any property listed in Table Control Limits the Contractor shall notify the Resident in writing of any proposed corrective action by PM the next working day .
The Department retains the exclusive right with the exception of the first days production of a new JMF to determine whether the resumption of production involves a significant change to the production process .
If the Department so determines then the current lot will be terminated a pay factor established and a new lot will begin. . Quality Control Method D For Items covered under Method D the Contractor shall submit a modified QC Plan detailing how the mix is to be placed what equipment is to be used and what HMA plant is to be used .
All mix designs JMF shall be approved and verified by MaineDOT prior to use .
Certified QC personnel shall not be required .
The Contractor shall certify the mix and the test results for each item by a Certificate of Compliance . .
Acceptance Method A B C These methods utilizes Quality Level Analysis and pay factor specifications .
For Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement designated for acceptance under Quality Assurance provisions the Department will sample once per sublot on a statistically random basis test and evaluate in accordance with the following Acceptance Criteria TABLE ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA PROPERTIES POINT OF SAMPLING TEST METHOD Gradation Paver Hopper AASHTO T PGAB Content Paver Hopper AASHTO T TMD Surface Mat behind all Rollers AASHTO T TMD Base or Binder Mat behind all Rollers AASHTO T Air Voids at Nd Paver Hopper AASHTO T VMA at Nd Paver Hopper AASHTO T Fines to Effective Binder Paver Hopper AASHTO T VFB Paver Hopper AASHTO T In the event the Department terminates a Lot prematurely but fails to obtain the required number of acceptance samples to calculate the volumetric property pay factor under the test method specified in the contract the pay factor shall be calculated using the number of samples actually obtained from the contract .
Should the number of acceptance samples taken total less than three the resulting pay factor shall be .
for volumetric properties .
A minimum of three cores will be used for a density pay factor using the contracts specified Acceptance method if applicable for quantities placed to date .
Should the Contractor request a termination of the Lot in progress prior to three acceptance samples being obtained and the Department agrees to terminate the Lot then the pay factor for mixture properties shall be .. A minimum of three cores will be used to determine a density pay factor using the contracts specified Acceptance method if applicable for quantities placed to date .
Lot Size For purposes of evaluating all acceptance test properties a lot shall consist of the total quantity represented by each item listed under the lot size heading .
Sublot size Refer to section . . and .
for minimum size and number of sublots .
The quantity represented by each sample will constitute a sublot .
If there is less than onehalf of a sublot remaining at the end then it shall be combined with the previous sublot .
If there is more than onehalf sublot remaining at the end then it shall constitute the last sublot and shall be represented by test results .
If it becomes apparent partway through a Lot that due to an underrun there will be insufficient mix quantity to obtain the minimum number of sublots needed the Resident may adjust the size of the remaining sublots and select new sample locations based on the estimated quantity of material remaining in the Lot .
Acceptance Testing The Department will obtain samples of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement in conformance with AASHTO T Sampling Bituminous Paving Mixtures and the MaineDOT Policies and Procedures for HMA Sampling and Testing which will then be transported by the Contractor to the designated MaineDOT Laboratory within hours except when otherwise noted in the project specific QCP due to local restrictions as directed by MaineDOT in approved transport containers to be provided by the Department unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
Failure to deliver an acceptance sample to the designated acceptance laboratory will be considered the second incident under .. QCP Non Compliance .
The Department will take the sample randomly within each sublot .
Target values shall be as specified in the JMF .
The Department will use Table for calculating pay factors for gradation PGAB Content Air Voids at Ndesign VMA Fines to Effective Binder and VFB .
The Department will withhold reporting of the test results for the Acceptance sample until AM on the second working day of receipt of the sample or after receipt of the Contractors results of the Acceptance sample split .
Upon conclusion of each lot where there is a minimum of four sublots results shall be examined for statistical outliers as stated in Section .. Statistical Outliers .
Isolated Areas During the course of inspection should it appear that there is an isolated area that is not representative of the lot based on a lack of observed compactive effort excessive segregation a change in process or any other questionable practice that area may be isolated and tested separately .
An area so isolated that has a calculated pay factor below .
for Method A and C or below .
for Method B based on three random tests shall be removed and replaced at the expense of the Contractor for the full lane width and a length not to be less than ft. Pavement Density The Department will measure pavement density using core samples tested according to AASHTO T. The Department will randomly determine core locations .
The Contractor shall cut inch diameter cores at no additional cost to the Department by the end of the working day following the day the pavement is placed and immediately give them to the Department .
Cores for Acceptance testing shall be cut such that the nearest edge is never within inches of any joint .
The cores will be placed in a transport container provided by the Department and transported by the Contractor to the designated MaineDOT Lab as directed by the Department .
Pretesting of the cores will not be allowed .
At the time of sampling the Contractor and the Department shall mutually determine if a core is damaged .
If it is determined that the cores is damaged the Contractor shall cut new cores at the same offset and within ft of the initial sample .
At the time the core is cut the Contractor and the Department will mutually determine if saw cutting of the core is needed and will mark the core at the point where sawing is needed .
The core may be saw cut by the Contractor in the Departments presence onsite or in an MaineDOT Lab by The Department without disturbing the layer being tested to remove lower layers of Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement gravel or RAP .
No recuts are allowed at a test location after the core has been tested .
Upon conclusion of each lot density results shall be examined for statistical outliers as stated in Section On all sections of overlay with wearing courses designed to be in or less in thickness there shall be no pay adjustment for density otherwise noted in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement .
For overlays designed to be in or less in thickness density shall be obtained by the same rolling train and methods as used on mainline travelway surface courses with a pay adjustments for density unless otherwise directed by the Department .
There shall be no pay adjustment for density on shoulders unless otherwise noted in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement .
Density for shoulders shall be obtained by the same rolling train and methods as used on mainline travelway unless otherwise directed by the Department .
Efforts to obtain optimum compaction will not be waived by the Department unless it is apparent during construction that local conditions make densification to this point detrimental to the finished pavement surface course .
For .
mm HMA mixtures the following pay adjustment shall also apply The average percent passing for the .
mm sieve shall be evaluated for each Lot .
If the average is greater than .
a pay adjustment according to TABLE A below shall apply in addition to the other pay adjustments for the given method of testing .
TABLE A . mm SIEVE PAY ADJUSTMENT AVERAGE PERCENT PASSING .
MM SIEVE PAY ADJUSTMENT . . Pay Adjustment .
Pay Adjustment The Department shall notify the Contractor whenever the average of at least three samples in a given Lot is greater than .. Disputes on the .
mm sieve values shall not be allowed for Method A or Method B Lots . .
Method A Lot Size will be the entire production per JMF for the project or if so agreed at the Prepaving Conference equal lots of up to tons with unanticipated overruns of up to ton rolled into the last lot .
Sublot sizes shall be ton for mixture properties ton for base or binder densities and ton for surface densities .
The minimum number of sublots for mixture properties shall be and the minimum number of sublots for density shall be five .
TABLE METHOD A ACCEPTANCE LIMITS Property USL and LSL Passing .
mm and larger sieves Target Passing .
mm to .
mm sieves Target Passing .
mm Target Passing .
mm to .
mm sieve Target PGAB Content Target .
Air Voids . .
Fines to Effective Binder . . Voids in the Mineral Aggregate LSL Only from Table Voids Filled with Binder Table values plus a production tolerance for USL only TMD In place density .
. .
Method B Lot Size will be the entire production per JMF for the project and shall be divided into equal sublots for Mixture Properties and equal sublots for density .
TABLE METHOD B ACCEPTANCE LIMITS Property USL and LSL Percent Passing .
mm and larger sieves Target Percent Passing .
mm to .
mm sieves Target Percent Passing .
mm Target Percent Passing .
mm to .
mm sieve Target PGAB Content Target .
Air Voids . .
Fines to Effective Binder . . Voids in the Mineral Aggregate LSL from Table Voids Filled with Binder Table plus a production tolerance for USL .
TMD Inplace Density .
. .
Method C Lot Size will be the entire production per JMF for the project or if so agreed at the Prepaving Conference equal lots of up to tons with unanticipated overruns of up to ton rolled into the last lot .
Sublot sizes shall be ton for mixture properties ton for base or binder densities and ton for surface densities .
The minimum number of sublots for mixture properties shall be and the minimum number of sublots for density shall be five .
TABLE METHOD C ACCEPTANCE LIMITS Property USL and LSL Passing .
mm and larger sieves Target Passing .
mm to .
mm sieves Target Passing .
mm Target Passing .
mm to .
mm sieve Target PGAB Content Target .
Air Voids . .
Fines to Effective Binder . . Voids in the Mineral Aggregate LSL Only from Table Voids Filled with Binder Table values plus a production tolerance for USL only TMD In place density .
. .
Method D For hot mix asphalt items designated as Method D in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement one sample will be taken from the paver hopper or the truck body per ton per pay item .
The mix will be tested for gradation and PGAB content .
Disputes will not be allowed .
If the mix is within the tolerances listed in Table Method D Acceptance Limits the Department will pay the contract unit price .
Contractor shall cut two in cores which shall be tested for percent TMD per AASHTO T unless otherwise noted in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement .
If the average for the two tests falls below .
the disincentive shall apply .
If the test results for each ton increment are outside these limits the following deductions Table b shall apply to the HMA quantity represented by the test .
TABLE METHOD D ACCEPTANCE LIMITS Property USL and LSL Percent Passing .
mm and larger sieves Target Percent Passing .
mm to .
mm sieves Target Percent Passing .
mm Target Percent Passing .
mm to .
mm sieve Target PGAB Content Target .
TMD Inplace Density . . TABLE b Method D Price Adjustments PGAB Content .
mm sieve .
mm sieve .
mm sieve Density .
Method of Measurement The Department will measure Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement by the ton in accordance with Section .
Measurement of Quantities for Payment . .
Basis of Payment The Department will pay for the work in place and accepted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Section for each type of HMA specified .
The Department will pay for the work specified in Section .
for the HMA used except that cleaning objectionable material from the pavement and furnishing and applying bituminous material to joints and contact surfaces is incidental .
Payment for this work under the appropriate pay items shall be full compensation for all labor equipment materials and incidentals necessary to meet all related contract requirements including design of the JMF implementation of the QCP obtaining core samples transporting cores and samples filling core holes applying emulsified asphalt to joints and providing testing facilities and equipment .
The Department will make a pay adjustment for quality as specified below. . Pay Adjustment The Department will sample test and evaluate Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement in accordance with Section Quality and Section .
Acceptance of this Specification. . Pay Factor PF The Department will use the following criteria for pay adjustment using the pay adjustment factors under Section .
Quality Level Analysis Density If the pay factor for Density falls below .
for Method A or C or .
for Method B all of the cores will be randomly recut by Sublot .
A new pay factor will be calculated that combines all initial and retest results .
If the resulting pay factor is below .
for Method A or C or below .
for Method B the entire Lot shall be removed and replaced with material meeting the specifications at no additional cost to the Department except that the Department may when it appears that there is a distinct pattern of defective material isolate any defective material by investigating each mix sample sublot and require removal of defective mix sample sublots only leaving any acceptable material in place if it is found to be free of defective material .
Pay factors equal to or greater than the reject level will be paid accordingly .
Gradation For HMA evaluated under Acceptance Method A or B the Department will determine a composite pay factor CPF using applicable price adjustment factors f from Table Table of Gradation Composite f Factors and Acceptance limits from Table Method A Acceptance Limits for Method A or Table Method B Acceptance Limits for Method B .
The Department will not make price adjustments for gradation on Methods A and B but will monitor them as shutdown criteria .
TABLE TABLE OF GRADATION COMPOSITE f FACTORS Methods A and B For HMA evaluated under Acceptance Method C the Department will determine a pay factor using acceptance limits from Table Method C Acceptance Limits .
VMA Air Voids VFB and Fines to Effective Binder The Department will determine a pay factor PF using the applicable Acceptance Limits .
The following variables will be used for pay adjustment PA Pay Adjustment Q Quantity represented by PF in ton P Contract price per ton PF Pay Factor Pay Adjustment Method A Constituent f Factor mm .
mm .
mm .
mm Gradation mm mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm The Department will use the following criteria for pay adjustment density Performance Graded Asphalt Binder content voids Nd VMA VFB FBeff and the screen sizes listed in Table for the type of HMA represented in the JMF .
If any single pay factor for PGAB Content VMA or Air Voids falls below .
then the composite pay factor for PGAB Content VMA and Air Voids shall be .. Density For mixes having a density requirement the Department will determine a pay factor using Table Method A Acceptance Limits PA density PF .QPx .
PGAB Content VMA and Air Voids The Department will determine a pay adjustment using Table Method A Acceptance Limits as follows PA voids Nd PF .QPx .
VMA Nd PF .QPx .
PGAB PF .QPx .
VFB and Fines to Effective Binder The Department will determine a pay factor PF using Table Method A Acceptance Limits .
The Department will not make price adjustments for VFB or Fines to Effective Binder but will monitor them as shutdown criteria .
Pay Adjustment Method B The Department will use the following criteria for pay adjustment density Performance Graded Asphalt Binder content voids Nd VMA VFB FBeff and the screen sizes listed in Table for the type of HMA represented in the JMF .
If any single pay factor for PGAB Content VMA or Air Voids falls below .
then the composite pay factor for PGAB Content VMA and Air Voids shall be .. Density For mixes having a density requirement the Department will determine a pay factor using Table Method B Acceptance Limits PA density PF .QPx .
PGAB Content VMA and Air Voids The Department will determine a pay adjustment using Table Method B Acceptance Limits as follows PA voids Nd PF .QPx .
VMA Nd PF .QPx .
PGAB PF .QPx .
VFB and Fines to Effective Binder The Department will determine a pay factor PF using Table Method B Acceptance Limits .
The Department will not make price adjustments for VFB or Fines to Effective Binder but will monitor them as shutdown criteria .
Pay Adjustment Method C The Department will use density Performance Graded Asphalt Binder content and the percent passing the nominal maximum .
mm .
mm and .
mm sieves for the type of HMA represented in the JMF .
If the PGAB content falls below .
then the PGAB pay factor shall be .. Density For mixes having a density requirement the Department will determine a pay factor using Table Method C Acceptance Limits PA density PF .QPx .
PGAB Content and Gradation The Department will determine a pay factor using Table Method C Acceptance Limits .
The Department will calculate the price adjustment for Mixture Properties as follows PA Passing Nom .
Max PF.QPX .
passing .
mm PF .QPX.passing .
mm PF.QPX.passing .
mm PF.QPX.PGAB PF.QPX .
VMA Air Voids VFB and Fines to Effective Binder The Department will determine a pay factor PF using Table Method C Acceptance Limits .
The Department will not make price adjustments for VMA Air Voids VFB or Fines to Effective Binder but will monitor them as shutdown criteria .
Pay Adjustment Method D The Department will use density Performance Graded Asphalt Binder content and the screen sizes listed in Table b for the type of HMA represented in the JMF .
If test results do not meet the Table requirements deducts as shown in Table b shall be applied to the quantity of mix represented by the test . .
Process for Dispute Resolution Methods A B C only a .
Dispute Resolution sampling At the time of HotMix Asphalt sampling the Department will obtain a split sample of each Acceptance test random sample for possible dispute resolution testing .
The Contractor shall also obtain a split sample of the HMA at this same time .
If the Contractor wishes to retain the option of requesting dispute testing of the initial Acceptance sample the Contractor will test their split of the Acceptance sample and shall report their results to the Resident with a copy to the QA Engineer by AM on the second working day from time of QA sampling otherwise dispute resolution will not be initiated .
The Departments dispute resolution split sample will be properly labeled and stored for a period of at least two weeks or until the sample is tested .
b. Disputing Acceptance results The Contractor may dispute the Departments Acceptance results and request Methods A B C that the dispute resolution split sample be tested by notifying the Departments Resident and the QA Engineer in writing within two working days after receiving the results of the Acceptance test .
The following shall be provided in the request Acceptance sample reference number The specific test results or propertyies being disputed and The complete signed report of the Contractors testing In a lab certified by the NETTCP and MaineDOT of their split of the Acceptance sample indicating that the variances in Table Dispute Resolution Variance Limits for the specific test results or propertyies were exceeded .
c. Disputable Items The Contractor may dispute any or all of the following Method A or B test results when the difference between the Departments value and the Contractors value for that test equals or exceeds the corresponding allowable variation in Table Dispute Resolution Variance Limits PGAB content Gmb and Gmm .
In addition if the allowable variation for the Gmb or Gmm is not met or exceeded the Contractor may dispute either or both of the following material properties provided the difference between results for them equals or exceeds the corresponding allowable variation in Table Voids at Ndesign and VMA .
For Method C only The results for PGAB content and the screen sizes used for pay adjustment may be disputed .
d. Outcome The value of any disputed result or property reported for the initial Acceptance sample shall stand if the value reported for the dispute resolution sample is not closer to the value the Contractor reported for their split sample than to the value reported for the initial Acceptance sample .
If the value reported for the dispute resolution falls precisely halfway between the other two values the value reported for the dispute resolution will replace the original acceptance value .
Otherwise the value reported for the dispute resolution sample will replace the value reported for the initial Acceptance sample and will be used to recalculate any other affected results or properties .
TABLE DISPUTE RESOLUTION VARIANCE LIMITS SECTION PAVEMENT SMOOTHNESS .
Smoothness Projects Projects to have their pavement smoothness analyzed in accordance with this Specification will be so noted in Special Provision Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement .
Pavement Smoothness The final pavement surface shall be evaluated for smoothness using a Class I or Class II profiler as defined by ASTM E . Smoothness measurements will be expressed in terms of the International Roughness Index IRI as defined by the World Bank in units of inchesmile . .
Lot Size Lot size for smoothness will be lanefeet .
A sublot will consist of lanefeet .
Partial lots will be included in the previous lot if less than onehalf the size of a normal lot .
If equal to or greater than onehalf the normal lot size it will be tested as a separate lot . .
Acceptance Testing The Department will conduct Acceptance testing following completion of the surface course .
Sections to be excluded from testing include the following Bridge decks and joints no smoothness measurements will be taken within ft of bridge joints Acceleration and deceleration lanes Shoulders and ramps Side streets and roads Within ft of transverse joints at the beginning and end of the project Within ft of railroad crossings Urban areas with speed limits of mph or lower Each lot shall have measurements made in each wheel path .
The average of the measurements will determine the smoothness for that lot .
PGAB Content .
Gmb .
Gmm .
Voids Nd .
VMA .
Passing .
mm and larger sieves .
Passing .
mm to .
mm sieves .
Passing .
mm to .
. . mm sieve .
The smoothness measurements will be statistically evaluated for pay factors as described in Subsection .
Quality Level Analysis using the specification limits shown below .
ACCEPTANCE LIMITS Level USL I inmile II inmile III inmile Computation of Smoothness Pay Adjustment PA PF.QP where Q Quantity of surface course in the Lot excluding shoulders side streets bridge decks ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes PF smoothness pay factor for the Lot P Contract unit price for surface pavement PA pay adjustment .
Unacceptable Work In the event that any Lot is found to have a pay factor less than .
the Contractor shall take whatever remedial action is required to correct the pavement surface in that Lot at no additional expense to the Department .
Such remedial action may include but is not limited to removal and replacement of the unacceptable pavement .
In the event remedial action is necessary the Contractor shall submit a written plan to the Resident outlining the scope of the remedial work .
The Resident must approve this plan before the remedial work can begin .
Following remedial work the Lot shall be retested and will be subject to the specification limits listed above .
The resulting pay factor if within the acceptable range will be used in the final pay adjustment .
The Contractor shall pay the cost of retesting the pavement following corrective action .
Localized surface tolerance defects will be subject to the provisions outlined in Section .
Surface Tolerances .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
IncentiveDisincentive Pavement Smoothness Lump Sum SECTION HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT .
Description This work shall consist of constructing one or more courses of Hot Mix Asphalt pavement on an approved base in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established .
The HMA pavement shall be composed of a mixture of aggregate filler if required and asphalt material. . General The materials and their use shall conform to the requirements of Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement. . Construction The construction requirements shall be as specified in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement . .
Method of Measurement Hot mix asphalt pavement will be measured as specified in Section .
Method of Measurement . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of hot mix asphalt pavement will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton for the mixtures including hot mix asphalt material complete in place .
Method A Method B Method C and Method D shall be used for acceptance as specified in Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavements .
See Complementary Notes Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement for Method location .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement for Special Areas Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Polymer Modified Ton .
Asphalt Rich Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Asphalt Rich Base and Intermediate course Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Polymer Modified Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Polymer Modified Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size sidewalks drives islands incidentals Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Polymer Modified Ton .
Asphalt Rich Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Asphalt Rich Intermediate course Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Surface Treatment Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Shimming Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Shimming Polymer Modified Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Shimming Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Base and Intermediate Base course Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Base and Intermediate Base course Polymer Modified Ton .
Asphalt Rich Hot Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Base and Intermediate Base course Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
mm Nominal Maximum Size Base and Intermediate Base course Ton .
Hot Mix Asphalt .
Nominal Maximum Size Surface Treatment Ton .
Warm Mix Asphalt .
Nominal Maximum Size Surface Treatment Ton SECTION VACANT SECTION BITUMINOUS TACK COAT .
Description This work consists of furnishing and applying one uniform application of liquid bituminous material on an approved surface in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines shown on the plans or established. . Bituminous Material The type and grade of bituminous material will be specified in the contract .
The bituminous material shall meet the applicable requirements of Section Bituminous Materials .
The bituminous material may be conditionally accepted at the source . .
Weather Limitations Bituminous material shall not be applied on a wet or frozen surface or when weather conditions are otherwise unfavorable to proper construction procedures .
Unless otherwise specified in the contract the use of rapid set emulsions shall be required after sunset or before sunrise when the atmospheric temperature is below F but above F in a shaded area at the job site. . Equipment The Contractor shall provide necessary equipment to properly and uniformly apply the bituminous material .
All distributors shall be equipped with accurate volume measuring devices or a calibrated tank and measuring stick thermometer for measuring temperatures of tank contents power unit for the pump capable of full circulation and able to heat the contents to application temperatures .
Approved fog type nozzles will be required .
Truck mounted distributors will be required for use on all roadway sections considered as traveled way ramps side roads and shoulders .
Spray bars on truck mounted distributors shall be adjustable laterally and vertically .
Truck mounted distributors shall be designed equipped maintained and operated so that bituminous material at constant temperature may be applied uniformly on variable widths of surface up to ft at readily determined and controlled rates from .
to .
galyd with uniform pressure and with an allowable variation from any specified rate not to exceed .
galyd .
In areas not accessible to a truck mounted distributors or if project conditions warrant the Department may allow the use of trailer mounted pressurized tank distributors equipped with pressurized spray bars .
Spray nozzles tank pressure and travel speed shall be adjusted to achieve proper application rate and coverage .
All liquid bituminous material bulk delivery vehicles truck mounted distributors or pressurized tank distributors shall be equipped with an acceptable sampling valve .
On bulk delivery vehicles the valve shall be located in an accessible area in the lower half of the front or rear bulkhead .
The valve shall be similarly located on distributors except that it may be installed in a circulating line having a rising flow . .
Preparation of Surface before application of the bituminous tack coat the surface shall be thoroughly cleaned of all loose and objectionable material .
Preparation of the surface shall be considered incidental to the contract . .
Application of Bituminous Material Bituminous material shall be applied by a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread over the area to be treated and within the temperature range specified in Section .
Application Temperatures .
The rate of application and areas to be treated will be specified in the contract .
When traffic is maintained oneway passage of vehicles will be maintained on the untreated portion of the roadway .
Bituminous tack coat shall not be placed on any surface where traffic will be forced to travel upon the uncovered tack coat .
All tack coat shall be covered on the day it is applied .
Care shall be taken so that the application of the bituminous tack coat at the junction of spreads is not in excess of the specified amount .
Skipped areas and deficiencies shall be corrected as directed . .
Method of Measurement Unless otherwise specified bituminous tack coat will be measured by the gallon .
All quantity determinations will be made in accordance with Section Payment . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of bituminous tack coat will be paid for at the contract unit price per gallon for the designated type of material complete in place .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bituminous Tack Coat Applied Gallon SECTION BITUMINOUS SURFACE TREATMENT Reserved SECTION UNTREATED AGGREGATE SURFACE COURSE .
Description This work shall consist of constructing a surface course or leveling course of untreated aggregate or crushed stone on an approved base in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades thickness and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established . .
Aggregate Aggregates for untreated aggregate surface course shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course .
Aggregates for crushed stone surface shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Aggregate for Crushed Stone Surface . .
Placing The surface course material shall be spread evenly in one layer upon the prepared base course to a depth that will insure the required depth after being compacted .
The aggregate when spread shall be well graded with no pockets of fine or coarse material and shall be bladed and shaped with a power grader. . Compaction Compacting shall be done with rollers heavy construction equipment or any combination capable of satisfactorily compacting the course .
The Contractor shall maintain the moisture content of the material to attain the required compaction .
When the aggregate surface material lacks sufficient fines to obtain compaction binder material of an approved quality shall be added .
The binder material shall be uniformly incorporated into the surface material by means of harrowing or by other methods capable of obtaining satisfactory results .
The amount added shall not increase the total fines in the mixture to exceed the limits specified . .
Surface Tolerance The entire surface shall be shaped and maintained to a tolerance of  in above or  in below the required cross sectional shape . .
Leveling Course When Aggregate Leveling Course for fine grading aggregate base and subbase course is called for it shall be placed measured and paid for under the contract item for Untreated Aggregate Surface Course . .
Method of Measurement Untreated aggregate surface course will be measured by the cubic yard in place unless designated by pay item to be measured by truck measure .
When measured in place the width and thickness for measurement will be the width and thickness of aggregate surface as shown on the plans or as modified .
The length will be along the centerline .
All measurements will be in accordance with Section Payment .
When designated by pay item to be measured by truck measure the measurement will be in vehicles at the point of delivery as shown on delivery slips in accordance with Section .. f. Aggregate surface course designated by pay item to be measured in place and used for driveways and other locations difficult to accurately measure in place may be measured in vehicles at of the number of cubic yards accepted and used at the point of delivery as shown by delivery slips in accordance with Section .. f. The quantity so measured shall not exceed yd per contract .
Aggregate for crushed stone surface will be measured by the ton in accordance with Section Payment .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of untreated aggregate surface course of the type specified will be paid for at the respective contract price per cubic yard .
Payment shall include purchasing material stripping pits excavating crushing and screening when necessary hauling placing compacting and other necessary processes which are required to furnish acceptable material under this item .
Water added or fines added or both added to the material to aid compaction and to prevent raveling will be at the Contractors expense .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Untreated Aggregate Surface Course Cubic Yard .
Untreated Aggregate Surface Course Truck Measure Cubic Yard .
Crushed Stone Surface Ton SECTIONS VACANT SECTION SAWING AND SEALING JOINTS IN BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT Reserved SECTION PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE PAVEMENT Reserved SECTIONS THROUGH VACANT SECTION CRACK SEAL Reserved SECTION RECYCLED BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT Reserved SECTIONS THROUGH VACANT SECTION HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT FOR SPECIAL AREAS Reserved SECTION LIGHT CAPITAL PAVEMENT SECTION MICROSURFACING Reserved Chapter DIVISION STRUCTURES SECTION FOUNDATION PILES .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and driving piles of the types and dimensions specified on the Contract Plans .
Piles shall conform to and be installed as detailed in these specifications to the lines grades locations and required resistances shown on the Plans or as authorized by the Resident .
Work under this item shall also consist of any pile testing specified by the project Contract Plans and described in these specifications. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections of Divisions Structures and Materials Structural Concrete Class A .
Reinforcing Steel .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric .
Steel Pipe Piles Splices and Tips .
HBeam Piles Splices and Tips .
Steel casings shall conform to the material requirements of Section .
Steel Pipe Piles Splices and Tips .
Mill test reports will be required for Steel Pipe Piles and HBeam Piles .
Notch toughness tests will not be required. . Quality Control Plan The Contractor shall control the quality of the foundation piles through testing inspection and practices which shall be described in the Quality Control Plan QCP sufficient to assure a product meeting the Contract requirements .
The QCP shall meet the requirements of Section Quality and this specification .
The Department will use criteria established in the approved QCP to accept the work provided in this Section .
No work under this item shall proceed until the QCP or amendments to the QCP is submitted to and approved by the Resident .
The QCP shall address all elements that affect the quality of the foundation piles including but not limited to the following A .
Driving Equipment B .
Wave Equation Analysis C. Static Load Testing Apparatus D. Driving Procedures E. Number of Pile Splices Locations and Details F. Tolerances G. Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form The Contractors Schedule of Work shall allow time for the review of the QCP or amendments to the QCP as noted in Section B Approval. . Construction Requirements .
Ordering Piles The Contractor shall order all pilings from an itemized list of order lengths provided by the Resident .
When additional lengths of piles are necessary the additional lengths will be ordered by the Contractor from a written list provided by the Resident. . Equipment for Driving Piles Hammers Piles shall be driven with approved poweractuated impact hammers powered with steamair diesel fuel or hydraulics hereinafter referred to as power hammers .
Gravity drop hammers hereinafter referred to as drop hammers except as noted on the Plans shall only be used to drive timber piles .
When drop hammers are used to drive timber piles the ram shall be between and pounds and the height of drop shall not exceed feet .
In no case shall the ram weight be less than the combined weight of the drive head and pile .
All drop hammers shall be equipped with hammer guides to insure concentric impact on the drive head .
Airsteam hammers shall be operated and maintained within the manufacturers specified ranges .
The plant and equipment furnished for airsteam hammers shall have sufficient capacity to maintain at the hammer under working conditions the volume and pressure specified by the manufacturer .
The plant and equipment shall be equipped with accurate pressure gauges that are easily accessible to the Resident .
The weight of the striking parts of air and steam power hammers shall not be less than the weight of drive head and pile being driven and in no case shall the striking parts weigh less than pounds .
Openend single acting diesel hammers shall be equipped with a device such as rings on the ram or a scale jump stick extending above the ram cylinder to permit the Resident to visually determine hammer stroke at all times during pile driving operations .
The Contractor shall provide the Resident with a chart from the hammer manufacturer equating stroke and blows per minute to energy imparted for the openend diesel hammer to be used .
Closedend double acting diesel hammers shall be equipped with a bounce chamber pressure gauge in good working order mounted near ground level to be easily read by the Resident .
The Contractor shall provide the Resident with a chart calibrated within days of use of actual hammer performance equating bounce chamber pressure to either equivalent energy or stroke for the closedend diesel hammer to be used .
Doubleacting hydraulic hammers shall have a power plant with sufficient capacity to maintain the volume and pressure specified by the manufacturer under working conditions .
The power plant and equipment shall be equipped with digital readouts easily accessible to the Resident showing pertinent system criteria including but not limited to energy imparted to the pile to enable the Resident to visually determine whether or not the refusal criteria has been met .
In addition the Contractor shall provide the Resident with a chart calibrated within days of use of actual hammer performance .
Approval of Pile Driving Equipment All pile driving equipment shall be sized such that the specified piles can be driven to the required resistance without damage as indicated on the Plans .
Approval of the pile driving equipment by the Department will be based on the wave equation analysis and a completed Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form as shown on Figure of this Section .
The wave equation analysis prepared by the Contractor shall include a proposed stopping criterion where the number of blows per inch for a number of inch driving intervals at a specified hammerstroke and fuel setting is clearly defined .
The criteria that the Department will use to evaluate the driving equipment will be based on the approved wave equation analysis utilizing the information provided in the completed Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form .
For the driving system to be acceptable the number of hammer blows at the required resistance indicated by the wave equation analysis shall be between and blows per inch and the driving stresses shall not exceed of the specified yield stress of the pile material .
For timber piles the compressive driving stress shall not exceed .
times the base resistance of the wood in compression parallel to the grain .
The stopping criteria used for pile driving operations shall be approved by the Department .
If the wave equation analyses show that the driving system is unacceptable the Contractor shall modify or replace the proposed driving equipment in an amendment to the QCP at its expense until subsequent wave equation analyses indicate the piles can be driven to the required resistance without damage or excessive blows .
Department review times of a revised wave equation analysis and Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form will be per Section B .
During pile driving operations the Contractor shall use the approved system .
No variations in the driving system will be permitted without an amendment to the QCP and a revised wave equation analysis and Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form .
Acceptance of the pile driving equipment does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility to properly install the piling .
The hammer acceptance and driving criteria will be based on commonly accepted hammer efficiencies component properties and soil parameters .
Local soil conditions and the actual driving system will affect the driving .
If in the opinion of the Resident the accepted driving system fails to perform satisfactorily during actual driving the Department reserves the right to revise the driving criteria .
Drive System Components and Accessories Leads Pile driver leads shall be constructed in such a manner as to afford freedom of movement of the hammer while maintaining alignment of the hammer and the pile to insure concentric impact for each blow .
Followers Followers when used must be included in the QCP .
In cases where a follower is permitted the first pile in each group and every tenth pile driven thereafter shall be driven full length without a follower to verify that adequate pile length is being attained to develop the required pile resistance .
The follower and pile shall be held and maintained in equal and proper alignment during driving .
The follower shall be of such material and dimensions to permit the piles to be driven to the length determined necessary from the driving of the fulllength piles .
The final position and alignment of the first two piles installed with followers in each substructure unit shall be verified in accordance with location tolerances .
Hammer Cushion All power pile driving equipment shall be equipped with a suitable thickness of hammer cushion material to prevent damage to the hammer and pile and to insure uniform driving behavior .
Hammer cushions shall be made of durable manufactured materials provided in accordance with the hammer manufacturers guidelines except that all wood wire rope and asbestos hammer cushions are specifically disallowed and shall not be used .
A striker plate as recommended by the hammer manufacturer shall be placed on the hammer cushion to insure uniform compression of the cushion material .
The hammer cushion shall be inspected in the presence of the Resident when beginning pile driving at each pile group or after each hours of pile driving whichever is less .
Any hammer cushion thickness measuring less than of the original thickness shall be replaced by the Contractor before driving is permitted to continue .
Helmet Piles driven with power hammers require an adequate drive head to distribute the hammer blow to the pile head .
The helmet shall be axially aligned with the hammer and the pile .
The helmet shall be guided by the leads and not be freeswinging .
The helmet shall fit around the pile head in such a manner as to prevent transfer of torsional forces during driving while maintaining proper alignment of hammer and pile .
For special types of piles appropriate driving heads mandrels or other devices shall be provided in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations so that the piles may be driven without damage. . Driving Procedures and Tolerances The sequence of driving piles in any substructure unit shall be included in the QCP .
The ground surface shall be brought to the bottom of the footing elevation before driving the piles .
The Contractor shall furnish all assistance required to make any observations and measurements .
Prior to placing any pile section in the leads the Contractor shall make the pile section available for foot and inch marking by the Resident .
When pile sections are placed in the leads prior to marking by the Resident the Contractor shall mark the pile in foot and inch increments or provide reasonable means of access to the pile for foot and inch marking .
The order of placing individual piles in pile groups shall be either starting from the center of the group and proceeding outwards in both directions or starting at the outside row and proceeding progressively across the group .
When driving is interrupted before final penetration is reached data for the bearing resistance of the pile shall not be taken until at least inches of pile penetration is attained after driving has been resumed or pile refusal has been attained .
The heads of all piles shall be plane and perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the pile before the helmet is attached .
Approval of the hammer relative to driving stress damage shall not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for piles damaged because of misalignment of the leads failure of cushion materials failure of splices malfunction of the pile hammer or improper construction methods .
Piles damaged for such reasons shall be rejected and replaced at the Contractors expense when the Resident determines that the damage impairs the strength of the pile .
Jetting Jetting shall be done only with the permission of the Resident and must be addressed in the Contractors Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Plan SEWPCP .
When water jets are used the number of jets and the volume and pressure of the water at the nozzles shall be sufficient to erode freely the material adjacent to the piles .
The plant shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at all times at least pounds per square inch pressure at two  inch jet nozzles .
Before the desired penetration is reached the jets shall be withdrawn and the piles shall be driven with the hammer to the required penetration or bearing capacity .
Vibratory Hammers When approved nondisplacement piles may be initially driven with a poweractuated vibratory hammer powered with electricity or hydraulics hereinafter referred to as vibratory hammers .
Vibratory hammers shall not be used for precast concrete piles due to pile damage and bending stress considerations .
Vibratory hammers shall not be used to set piles which develop resistance primarily from friction with the surrounding soils through the pile length .
Piles permitted to be initially driven using a vibratory hammer shall be subsequently driven to the required capacity in accordance with the approved stopping criteria and the QCP using a power hammer .
Vibratory hammers when permitted may only be used to initially set a pile up to a distance of feet above the expected tip elevation at which point a power hammer shall be employed .
Vibratory hammers will only be permitted to initially set production piles after the pile tip elevation is established by load testing andor piles driven with an impact hammer and the ultimate pile resistance is verified .
If the pile penetration rate is inches or less per minute the use of a vibratory hammer shall be discontinued and a power hammer employed .
When a battered pile is initially set using a vibratory hammer the hammer shall be mounted in a set of leads andor kept in alignment using a driving frametemplate .
Preaugering When necessary to clear obstructions or to obtain the specified pile penetration as approved by the Resident the Contractor may preauger .
When specified in the Contract documents the Contractor shall preauger holes at pile locations and to the depths shown on the Plans .
Preaugered holes shall be of a size smaller than the diameter of the diagonal of the pile cross section .
If subsurface obstructions such as boulders or rock layers are encountered the hole diameter may be increased to the least dimension needed for pile installation .
Any void space remaining around any type pile after driving shall be completely filled with sand or other approved material .
The use of spuds which are driven and removed to make a hole for inserting a pile shall not be permitted in lieu of preaugering .
Preexcavation When necessary to clear subsurface obstructions such as boulders or rock layers or to obtain the specified pile penetration the Contractor may preexcavate with the approval of the Resident .
Heaved Piles Piles that have heaved more than  inch during the driving of other piles in a group shall be reseated to the required penetration or bearing capacity at the Contractors expense .
Location and Alignment Tolerance The Contractor will be responsible to hold the piles in place to allowable tolerances .
Piles shall be driven with a variation of not more than  inch per foot from the vertical or from the batter shown on the Plans .
For piles that can not be inspected for axial alignment internally after installation an alignment check shall be made before installing the last feet of pile or after installation is completed provided the exposed portion of the piles is not less than feet in length .
The Resident may require that driving be stopped in order to check the pile alignment .
Pulling laterally on piles to correct misalignment or splicing a properly aligned section of a misaligned section shall not be permitted .
The cutoff elevation of piles for trestle bents and pile bent piers shall not be out of position by more than inches from the dimensions shown on the Plans .
The cutoff elevation of piles for integral abutments shall not be out of position from the dimensions shown on the Plans by more than inches in any direction .
The cutoff elevation of piles other than for trestle bents and integral abutments shall not be out of position by more than inches .
Actual embedment of the piles in the concrete shall be within inches of that shown on the Plans .
The asdriven centroid of load of any group at cutoff elevation shall be within percent of the Plan location of the designated centroid of load .
No pile shall be nearer than inches from any edge of the pile cap .
Any increase in size of the pile cap to meet this edge distance requirement shall be at the Contractors expense. . Special Requirements for Steel Pipe Piles and Steel Casings Pipe piles shall be driven closed ended unless otherwise specified .
When openended pipe piles are specified or when the ends are not completely closed ended when driven the inside of the pile shall be thoroughly cleaned out and the inside walls cleaned by jetting or other means approved by the Resident .
The sediment control required for the cleaning operations shall be covered in the Contractors SEWPCP .
Pipe piles shall be inspected and approved by the Resident immediately before concrete is placed in them .
They shall be free from rupture and undue deformation and shall be free from water unless the Resident determines that the concrete can be placed without damage to the pile and such that the discharged water will be contained .
The Contractor shall provide lights and other equipment necessary to enable the Resident to inspect each pipe pile .
Portland cement concrete for filling the pipe piles shall be placed in one continuous operation to fill the pile completely without causing water contamination .
An internal type vibrator shall be used in the top feet .
Pile heads shall be protected and cured in accordance with Section Structural Concrete .
The placing of concrete and the driving of piles shall be scheduled so that fresh and setting concrete will not be injured by the pile driving .
Concrete shall not be placed in pipe piles until pile driving has progressed beyond a radius of feet from the pile to be concreted .
If pile heave is detected for pipe piles that have been filled with concrete the piles shall be redriven to the original position after the concrete has attained sufficient strength and a proper hammerpile cushion system is in place and is satisfactory to the Resident .
When a reinforcing steel cage is specified it shall be placed inside the piles to allow for a minimum of inches of concrete cover and the piles shall be filled with concrete to the elevation shown on the Plans .
Fulllength pipe piles and steel casings shall be used wherever practicable however splicing may be permitted when approved by the Resident .
The method of splicing shall be as follows a .
Steel pipe piles and steel casings shall be spliced by full penetration butt joint welds .
b .
When the pipe piles and steel casings are to be spliced while in a vertical position splicing shall be accomplished utilizing singlebevel groove welds with the use of backup rings .
When the pipe piles and steel casings are to be spliced while in a horizontal position splicing shall be accomplished utilizing singlevee groove welds with the use of backup rings .
c. Welded joints shall conform to the Standard Details .
Welding including welder qualifications shall comply with the requirements of AWS D. Structural Welding Code Steel .
All welding and welder qualifications shall be in conformance with Section .
parts d and e. .
Defective Piles and Corrective Measures Pile driving activities shall not result in damage to or deformation of the piles .
Any pile damaged due to internal defects improper driving or driven below cutoff elevation shall be considered defective and shall be corrected by and at the expense of the Contractor by a method approved by the Resident . .
Driven Pile Resistance Pile Testing and Acceptance Pile testing will be required as shown on the Plans .
Pile testing will be required to confirm that piles attain the required resistance and that the stresses in the piles do not exceed allowable limits during driving .
A dynamic load test consists of mounting instruments on the pile and accurately recording the output during driving using dynamic pile load test equipment meeting the requirements of ASTM D. The stresses in steel piles during driving shall not exceed of the yield stress as determined by wave equation analyses or dynamic pile load testing .
Piles which have been overstressed per wave equation or dynamic pile load testing shall be replaced by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Department .
A static load test consists of the application of a known load to the pile or group of piles and the accurate measurement of the resulting displacement .
The Contractor shall furnish all labor and equipment for static load testing .
In the case of concrete filled steel pipe piles no load shall be placed on the pile for at least days after the concrete has been placed in the pile .
On completion of either static or dynamic load testing any test or anchor piling not a part of the finished structure shall be removed or cut off at least foot below either the bottom of the footing or the finished ground elevation whichever is lower .
Driven Pile Capacity Wave Equation The piles shall be driven to the required resistance using the approved stopping criteria .
The pile acceptance will be based on obtaining the blow count and hammer stroke from the approved stopping criteria at the required resistance .
When the wave equation is used in conjunction with dynamic or static pile load testing the stopping criteria shall be amended based on correlation with the testing method results as determined by the Resident .
Adequate pile penetration shall be considered to be obtained when the specified wave equation resistance criteria approved stopping criteria is achieved within feet of the pile toe elevation based on Contract lengths .
Piles not achieving the specified required resistance within these limits shall be driven to penetration established by the Resident .
The wave equation resistance criteria will not be considered valid under any of the following conditions a .
The hammer or striking part does not have a free fall .
b .
The head of the pile becomes broomed or crushed .
c. The penetration is not reasonably quick and uniform .
d. There is an appreciable bounce after a blow .
e. The hammer is operated outside the parameters recommended by the manufacturer .
Static Load Test When a static load test is specified in the Contract documents load tests shall be performed by procedures set forth in ASTM D using the quick load test method except that the test shall be taken to plunging failure or the capacity of the loading system .
Testing equipment and measuring systems shall conform to ASTM D except that the loading system shall be capable of applying of the nominal pile resistance or kips whichever is less and that a load cell and spherical bearing plate shall be used .
The Contractor shall submit in the QCP detailed plans prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer of the proposed loading apparatus .
The apparatus shall be constructed to allow the various increments of the load to be placed gradually without causing vibration to the test pile .
When the approved method requires the use of tension anchor piles such tension piles shall be of the same type and diameter as the production piles and shall be driven in the location of permanent piles when feasible except that timber or tapered piles installed in permanent locations shall not be used as tension piles .
The design load shall be defined as of the failure load .
The failure load for a pile shall be defined as follows For piles inches or less in diameter or width the failure load of a pile tested under axial compressive load is that load which produces a settlement at failure of the pile head equal to sf .
.b Where sf Settlement at failure in inches b Pile diameter or width in inches Elastic deformation of total unsupported pile length in inches For piles greater than inches in diameter or width sf b The top elevation of the test pile shall be determined immediately after driving and again just before load testing to check for heave .
Any pile that heaves more than  inch shall be redriven or jacked to the original elevation before testing .
Unless otherwise specified in the Contract a minimum day waiting period shall be observed between the driving of any anchor piles or the load test pile and the commencement of the load test .
Dynamic Pile Tests When dynamic load tests are specified in the Contract dynamic measurements will be taken by the Contractor using procedures set forth in ASTM D. Dynamic testing shall be completed during the driving of piles designated on the Plans or as designated by the Resident .
Dynamic load tests will be performed for the full length of the test pile during initial drive .
The Contractors representative performing the dynamic tests shall be an experienced pile testing engineer and have attained the dynamic pile load test Signatory Advanced level on the Foundation QA High Strain Dynamic Pile Testing Examination or equivalent level of certification or training or be a licensed Professional Engineer .
The same Contractors representative conducting the wave equation analysis shall perform the dynamic load tests .
Each test shall also include a numerical evaluation of static axial pile resistance using field dynamic measurements obtained per ASTM D also known as signal matching .
The Contractors representative shall be experienced in the use of dynamic pile load test equipment and its purpose related to pile capacity determinations .
Dynamic measurements shall be reported to the Resident and include items specified in Section of ASTM D. Before placement of the pile in the leads the Contractor shall make the designated pile available for obtaining wave speed measurements and for predrilling the required instrument attachment holes .
The Contractor shall mark the designated pile in foot and inch markings .
The Contractor shall make provisions in ordered lengths of pile to account for an additional pile length equal to three pile diameters or feet whichever is greater for instrumentation attachment .
Predriving wave speed measurements will not be required for steel piles .
When wave speed measurements are made the piling shall be in a horizontal position and not in contact with other piling .
The Contractor will furnish the equipment materials and labor necessary for drilling holes in the piles for mounting the instruments .
The instruments will be attached near the head of the pile with bolts placed through drilled holes on the steel piles or with wood screws for timber piles .
The Contractor shall provide the Contractors dynamic testing technician with reasonable means of access to the pile for attaching instrumentation after the pile is placed in the leads .
The Contractor shall furnish electric power for the dynamic test equipment .
The power supply at the outlet shall be amp volt cycle A.C. only .
Field generators used as the power source shall be equipped with functioning meters for monitoring voltage and frequency levels .
With the dynamic testing equipment attached the Contractor shall drive the pile to the depth at which the dynamic test equipment indicates that the required nominal resistance has been achieved or to the minimum tip elevation whichever results in the greatest depth as called for on the Plans or as directed otherwise by the Resident .
The stresses in the piles will be monitored during driving with the dynamic test equipment to ensure that the values determined do not exceed the allowable values specified in this Section .
If necessary the Contractor shall reduce the driving energy transmitted to the pile by using additional cushions or reducing the energy output of the hammer in order to maintain stresses at or below the allowable values .
If nonaxial driving is indicated by dynamic test equipment measurements the Contractor shall immediately realign the driving system .
When directed to restrike by the Resident the Contractor shall wait a minimum of hours or as otherwise specified on the Contract Plans and after the instruments are reattached restrike the dynamic load test pile .
A cold hammer shall not be used for the restrike .
The hammer shall be warmed up before restrike begins by applying at least blows to another pile .
The maximum amount of penetration required during restrike shall be inches or the maximum total number of hammer blows required will be whichever occurs first .
After restriking the Resident will either accept the redriven pile or specify additional pile penetration and testing .
The Contractor shall supply the Resident with a report of the test results of each dynamically tested pile numerical evaluations of static axial pile resistance using dynamic field measurements signal matching and a driving criteria within Working Days of the completion of testing .
When directed by the Resident or required by the Contract Plans numerical evaluations of static pile capacity using the field dynamic measurements and a driving criteria shall be supplied to the Resident within hours of completing the testing .
Hammer Performance If at any time during pile driving operations or dynamic testing the performance or efficiency of the power hammer is not in accordance with the Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form the wave equation analyses or the dynamicstatic testing results as determined by the Resident the Contractor shall repair or replace the driving system .
This may include but not be limited to rebuilding the hammer or replacing the hammer with another hammer .
All costs and time associated with replacing the driving system including additional wave equation analyses and dynamicstatic testing as determined by the Department shall be borne by the Contractor .
Required Pile Resistance Piles shall be driven by the Contractor to the penetration depth shown on the Plans or to a greater depth if necessary to obtain the required pile resistance .
The required pile resistance shall be determined by the approved wave equation analysis or by the results of dynamic testing and numerical evaluations of static pile resistance using dynamic field measurements signal matching .
Piles shall not be driven to the required nominal pile resistance with a vibratory hammer. . Splicing Piles Fulllength piles shall always be used wherever practicable .
When fulllength piles can not be used the number of splices locations and details shall be noted in the QCP .
Piles fabricated from multiple pieces will be acceptable only if they comply with the following HBeam Piles a Pipe Piles ab Lengths Maximum No .
Field Splices Lengths Maximum No .
Field Splices Less than ft. Less than ft. Over ft. Over ft. Over ft. Over ft. Over ft. per ft. Over ft. Over ft. per ft. a Pile lengths less than feet will not be spliced except as the final top section of the pile .
b Where pipe piles are used for pile bent piers no splices will be allowed in the length of pile from the cutoff elevation to feet below the channel bottom .
When preplanned splicing is approved the pile piece of lesser length shall be placed at the tip of the pile the first part of the pile that enters the ground .
When splicing is approved piles shall be spliced as follows a .
Damaged material shall be removed from the end of the driven pile .
Lifting holes in Hpiles shall be repaired or trimmed off .
Lifting holes in pipe piles shall be trimmed off .
The ends of both pieces to be spliced shall be cut off square with the longitudinal axis of the pile and beveled per the Standard Details .
Except for minor trimming all cutting shall be done with the use of a mechanical guide .
b .
The Contractor shall use an approved mechanical splicer or a full penetration butt weld for the entire cross section of the pile .
c. Evaluation of mechanical splicers will be based on the submission of data demonstrating the capability of transferring the full pile strength in compression and tension and developing the bending moment capacity of the pile in both the xx and yy axes .
The splicers shall be installed and welded as recommended by the manufacturer with the additional requirements in d. and e. below .
d. All welding shall comply with the requirements of Section Structural Steel except as modified hereinafter. . Welding shall not be done when the temperature in the immediate vicinity of the weld is below F when the surfaces are damp or exposed to rain snow or high wind or when the welders or welding operators are exposed to inclement conditions . .
The pile shall be preheated to and maintained at F minimum within inches from the weld during welding . .
Written welding procedures do not need to be submitted .
e. Welders shall be prequalified in accordance with Section Structural Steel. . Prefabricated Pile Tips Steel Hbeam piles tips shall be attached to the pile with a inch groove weld along each flange or as specified by the manufacturers product data sheet welding requirements .
Welding shall be done using lowhydrogen electrodes and the base metal shall be preheated to F minimum .
Unless otherwise shown on the Plans steel pipe piles shall have pointed cast steel pile tips .
All welding and welder qualifications shall be in conformance with Section .
parts d and e. Pile tips for both Hbeam and pipe piles shall be approved by the Resident .
Pile tips may be welded to the piles either by the supplier of the piles or in the field by the Contractor at its option . .
Method of Measurement a .
Equipment Mobilization A lump sum price bid for mobilization shall include the cost of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary for the transporting erecting dismantling and removing all pile driving equipment .
b. Piles Furnished The unit of measurement for furnishing Hpiles pipe piles and steel casings shall be the linear foot .
The quantity to be paid for will be the sum of the lengths in feet of the piles of the types and lengths ordered in writing by the Resident .
No allowance will be made for the length of piles including test piles furnished by the Contractor to replace piles that were previously accepted by the Resident but are subsequently damaged prior to completion of the Contract .
When additional lengths of piles are necessary the additional length ordered in writing by the Resident will be included in the length of piling furnished .
All piles must be cutoff at the cutoff elevation shown on the Plans .
c. Piles in Place Initiation of pile installation by use of a vibratory hammer preaugering jetting or other methods used for facilitating pile driving procedures will not be measured and payment shall be considered included in the unit price bid for the Piles In Place pay item .
The quantity of Hbeam pipe pile or casings to be paid for will be the actual number of linear feet of Hpile steel pipe piles or casings driven and left in place in the completed and accepted work .
Measurements will be made from the tip of the Hbeam pile steel pipe pile or casing to the cutoff elevation as shown on the Plans .
Unused pile cutoffs feet or more in length except those required to accommodate the Contractors construction method as discussed herein will remain the property of the Department and will be stored at a bridge maintenance yard nearest the project .
Hauling and unloading of piles will be done by the Contractor or by the Department depending upon availability of services .
When hauling and unloading is done by the Contractor payment will be made under the provisions of Section Changes .
There will be no separate payment to load piles at the project site loading will be considered an incidental cost to the item .
No separate measurement will be made for reinforcing steel excavation preexcavation drilling cleaning of drilled holes cleaning out of pipe piles drilling fluids sealing materials concrete required casing and other items required to complete the Work .
d. Pile Tips Pile Tips will be measured by the number of tips authorized and satisfactorily installed .
e. Pile Splices Pile splices will be measured by the number of splices authorized and satisfactorily completed to drive the piles in excess of the ordered length furnished and approved by the Resident .
f. Static Load Tests Static load tests will be measured by the number of unit tests authorized and satisfactorily made .
g. Dynamic Load Tests Dynamic load tests will be measured by the number of dynamic pile tests authorized and satisfactorily made .
One dynamic test includes all data collected on one pile during both the initial pile driving and a restrike done a minimum of hours after the initial driving and numerical evaluation of static axial pile resistance using dynamic field measurements signal matching . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of piles and casings will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per linear foot delivered and complete in place .
Such payment will include full compensation for any necessary excavation or backfilling required after driving to bring the foundation area to the correct elevation .
Pile cutoffs and concrete for pipe piles and casings will not be paid for separately but will be considered as incidental to related Pay Items .
Damaged pile lengths removed for pile splicing will be considered incidental to related Pay Items .
Payment for all Work related to the following will not be made directly but will be considered incidental to related Pay Items Jetting preaugering preexcavation providing special driving tips or heavier sections for steel piles or other work necessary to obtain the specified penetration and bearing resistance of the piles reseating of piles excavating and cleaning within steel pipe piles and steel casings furnishing and placing reinforcing steel and steel templates in steel pipe piles disposing of material resulting from cleaning out pipe piles all excavation and backfilling involved in installing piles installation and removal of temporary falsework and driving frames and development of an approved QCP and amendments as required .
Wave equation analyses and any subsequent wave equation analyses resubmittals required to demonstrate the appropriateness of the driving system will be considered incidental to the related Pay Items .
Payment for pile tips and pile splices will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price each .
Payment for dynamic and static pile tests will be paid at the Contract Unit Price per pile tested .
The price shall be full compensation for satisfactory completion of all Work associated with performing and collecting measurements from initial dynamic tests restrike tests numerical evaluations of static pile resistance using dynamic measurements signal matching all sensors and wiring monitoring equipment setup time reaction piles and frame load cells jacking equipment survey tiein monitoring personnel as applicable and costs associated with the Contractors down time during regular working hours while setting up equipment performing tests and taking measurements .
Payment will be made under Pay Items Pay Unit .
Static Loading Test Each .
Dynamic Loading Test Each .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Hbeam Piles lbft in place Linear Foot .
Steel Pipe Piles delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Pipe Piles in place Linear Foot .
Steel Casings delivered Linear Foot .
Steel Casings in place Linear Foot .
Pile Tips Each .
Pile Splices Each .
Pile Driving Equipment Mobilization Lump Sum Figure Pile and Driving Equipment Data Form .
Form can be found on MaineDOT Website ProjectBridge______________________________________ Town___________________________ WIN__________________ Fed .
Proj .
No_______________________ Bridge No________________ Contractor___________________________ Pile Driving Sub_________________________________ Manufacturer______________________ Model_______________ Hammer Type_____________________ Serial No_____________ Max Energy_______________ftlbs Stroke Length________ft Ram Weight_____________lbs Modifications____________________________________________ _______________________________________________________ _______________________________________________________ ______________________________________________________ Material_______________________________________________ Thickness________________in .
Area__________________in .
Modulus of Elasticity E_______________________________psi Coefficient of Restitution e________________________________ Weight____________________lbs Material_______________________ Thickness____________in .
Modulus of Elasticity E_______________________________psi Coefficient of Restitution e________________________________ Pile Type_______________________________________________ Length in Leads______________________________________ft WeightLength_____________lbsft Diameter_____________in .
Wall Thickness__________in .
XSection Area____________in .
Maximum Factored Load______________________________kips Required Resistance_________________________________kips Splice Description________________________________________ Pile Tip Description_______________________________________ Submitted by________________________ Date_______________ Telephone ___________________ Fax ____________________ RAM ANVIL HAMMER HAMMER CUSHION DRIVE HEAD PILE CUSHION PILE HAMMER COMPONENTS Helmet Bonnet Anvil Block Pile Cap SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing Portland Cement Concrete for structures and incidental construction in accordance with these Specifications and in conformity with the lines grades and dimensions shown on the Plans or established or for placing concrete fill for foundations where called for on the Plans .
For Method A Statistical Acceptance or Method B Statistical Acceptance the work shall conform to the Contractors approved Quality Control QC Plan and Quality Assurance QA provisions in accordance with these Specifications and the requirements of Section Quality .
For Method C the work shall conform to the Contractors Quality Control Plan QCP the requirements of this specification and Section Quality . .
Classification The Portland Cement Concrete shall be the class indicated on the Plans. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Portland Cement and Portland Pozzolan Cement .
Water .
Air Entraining Admixtures .
Water Reducing Admixtures .
High Range Water Reducing Admixture .
Set Retarding Admixtures .
Curing Materials .
Water stops .
Smooth Surfaced Asphalt Roll Roofing .
Fly Ash .
Calcium Nitrite Solution .
Silica Fume .
Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete .
Alkali Silica Reactive Aggregates .
Preformed Expansion Joint Filler .
Bridge Drains . .
Shipping and Storage The cement shall be completely protected from rain and moisture .
Any cement damaged by moisture or which fails to meet any of the specified requirements shall be rejected and removed from the site .
Fly ash and Slag shall be stored in weather tight silos .
All silos shall be completely empty and clean before material is deposited therein unless the silo already contains material of the same type and properties .
Fly ash or Slag remaining in bulk storage at the batch plant for a period greater than one year after completion of tests will be resampled and retested by the Department before use .
Handling shipping and stockpiling of aggregates shall be done in such a way as to minimize segregation and breakage .
Fine aggregate and each size of coarse aggregate shall be stored in completely separate stockpiles on prepared bases constructed of the same material as that to be stockpiled with a minimum thickness of foot .
The ground under the prepared bases shall be reasonably graded to drain away from the stockpile and shall be free of brush or other harmful vegetation .
The base shall be left in place undisturbed for the duration of the use of the stockpile .
Prepared bases can be salvaged for reuse provided this material is reprocessed .
Wood metal or other approved hard surfaces shall be considered acceptable alternates for the prepared bases described above . .
Testing Equipment The Contractor shall provide test equipment and materials as specified below for use by the Resident or their representative exclusively .
The equipment shall be available and acceptable to the Resident one week prior to placing any concrete .
All costs associated with providing and maintaining testing equipment shall be considered incidental to the Work and no additional payment will be made .
The Resident will maintain the test equipment in reasonable condition .
However the Contractor shall replace any equipment that becomes unusable due to normal wear and tear or which is stolen or damaged from other than the Residents neglect or mistreatment .
All such replacement costs shall be considered incidental to the work and no additional payment will be made .
A .
Pressure Air Meter meeting requirements of AASHTO T Type B and all accessory items required for use with the particular design of apparatus .
This shall include one inch mason trowel one metal scoop inches long x inches wide one tamping rod conforming to AASHTO T one rubber mallet as described in AASHTO T one strike off bar flat straight bar of steel .
The air meter shall be functional and shall bear a current calibration certificate issued by a recognized testing laboratory .
Current shall mean within the calendar year .
B .
Two thermometers meeting the requirements of AASHTO T. C. Contractors rubber tired wheelbarrow .
D. Two Dhandle square end shovels  inches wide .
E. Two pair heavy duty long cuff rubber gloves .
F. Miscellaneous equipment ounce plastic squeeze bottle gallon bucket scrub brush paper towels folding rule and rubber syringe .
G. Small rod one tamping rod conforming to AASHTO T. .
Composition and Proportioning Concrete shall be composed of a homogeneous mixture of Portland cement or Portland cement with Fly Ash Silica Fume or Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag fine aggregate coarse aggregate water and admixtures proportioned according to these Specifications and shall conform to the requirements of Table .
All material shall be approved by the Department prior to use .
TABLE Concrete CLASS Minimum Compressive Strength PSI Maximum Permeability COULOMB S Entrained Air Notes LSL USL S NA NA NA A . . P . . LP . .
Fill NA . .
NOTE Permeability testing for all concrete mixes excluding those containing fly ash at percent or greater pozzolan cement replacement will be done at days .
Permeability testing for concrete mixes containing fly ash at percent or greater pozzolan cement replacement will be done at days .
Concrete expected to be exposed to deicing salts prior to the test date shall be sealed with a protective coating in accordance with Standard Specification Section .
Protective Coating for Concrete Surfaces and per the manufacturers recommendations at no additional cost to the Department .
NOTE Calcium Nitrite shall be added at the rate of gallons per cubic yard .
NOTE Strength and permeability requirements for precast concrete will be shown on the Plans .
Permeability testing will only be done on precast concrete when the Plans include permeability requirements .
NOTE Compressive strength testing for all concrete mixes excluding those containing fly ash at percent or greater pozzolan cement replacement will be done at days .
Compressive strength testing for concrete mixes containing fly ash at percent or greater pozzolan cement replacement will be done at days .
NOTE Coarse aggregate for concrete shall meet the requirements of Section .
for Class A or AA or with Department approval SP or SP refer to Standard Specification Section Structural Concrete Repair .
Each concrete mix design shall be submitted by the Contractor to the Department for approval .
No concrete shall be placed on a project until the concrete mix design is approved by the Department .
For the first time use of a concrete batch plant or a change in pozzolan source or type the Contractor shall conduct a trial batch at the concrete plant utilizing transit mixers .
The Contractor shall submit four clearly identified inch diameter x inch high cylinders to the Department at least days prior to the first placement for permeability testing .
Full documentation shall be submitted with the cylinders and must include actual batch weights and all concrete test properties .
The cylinders shall be submitted between the ages of and days .
The mix design submitted by the Contractor shall include the following information A .
Description of individual coarse aggregate stockpiles original source bulk specific gravity absorption gradation and alkali silica reactivity test results .
A combined coarse aggregate blended gradation shall be provided including the percentage of each coarse aggregate used .
B .
Description of fine aggregate original source bulk specific gravity absorption colorimetric gradation Fineness Modulus F.M .
base F.M .
alkalisilica reactivity and sand equivalent test .
C. Description and original source and amount of cement and pozzolanic material .
D. Target water cement ratio .
E. Target water content by volume .
F. Target strength .
G. Target air content slump and concrete temperature .
H. Target concrete unit weight .
I .
Type manufacturer and dosages of air entraining and chemical admixtures .
J .
Target Coulomb Value .
Approval by the Department will be contingent upon the ability of the mix design proportions to meet concrete strength and permeability requirements and other factors that affect durability .
Concrete mix designs shall contain not more than percent fly ash or percent slag pozzolan cement replacement by weight .
Castinplace concrete shall contain not more than lbsyd of cement and not more than lbsyd of cementitious material .
Pozzolans are included as cementitious material .
Under water concrete shall contain a minimum of lbs yd of cementitious material .
All concrete mixes must be designed in accordance with the criteria of this Section .
The design proportions with the fine aggregates designated as a percent of the total aggregate must be stated in terms of aggregates in a saturated surface dry condition and the batch weights will be adjusted by the Contractor for the actual moisture of the aggregate at the time of use .
Selfconsolidating concrete SCC may be used for Class A LP or P mixes when approved by the Resident .
SCC shall meet the requirements for strength entrained air and permeability for the respective concrete Class .
SCC shall be tested for slump flow in accordance with ASTM C the visual stability index VSI shall be or .
No change in the source proportions or character of the mix ingredients may be made without notice to the Department and no new mix ingredients shall be used until the Department has approved such ingredients and new mix proportions if they change .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident of any changes to the coarse aggregate blend prior to supplying concrete to the project. . Batching Measuring and batching of materials for Structural Concrete shall be performed at an approved batching plant .
The plant shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M . Batching plants will be inspected annually for approval by either the Department or by the National Ready Mixed Concrete Association .
The Contractor shall provide a Certificate of Compliance for each truckload of concrete to the Department at the time of the load placement .
The Certificate of Compliance shall be a form acceptable to the Department and shall include Contract Name and Number Bridge Name Manufacturing Plant Batching Facility Name of Contractor Prime Contractor Date Time BatchedTime Discharged Truck Number Quantity Quantity Batched this Load Type of Concrete by Class and Department Mix Design Number Cement Brand or Type and Shipment Certification Number Temperature of Concrete at Discharge Target Weights per cubic yard and Actual Batched Weights for .
Cement .
Pozzolanic Additives including Fly Ash Slag and Silica Fume .
Coarse Concrete Aggregate .
Fine Concrete Aggregate .
Water including free moisture in aggregates batch water held out at the plant and water added at the project .
Admixtures Brand Names and Quantities fluid ouncescubic yard Placement Location .
Mixing and Delivery A .
All transit mixers used in the production and delivery of Structural Concrete shall be inspected annually by the Department .
Delivery and discharge of the concrete from the mixer shall be completed within a maximum of minutes from the time the cement is added to the aggregate except that in hot weather when the concrete mix temperature exceeds F or under other conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete delivery and discharge from the mixer shall be completed within minutes .
When approved by the Resident the use of a retarding admixture Type D may be used for increasing the minutes discharge time to minutes provided concrete temperatures are kept below F and conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete are not present .
With prior approval of the Resident an approved hydration stabilizing admixture may be used to increase the discharge time .
Use of hydration stabilizing admixtures will not be allowed for the sole purpose of increasing the discharge time limits .
B .
Concrete which has been rejected for any reason shall be removed immediately from the job site and disposed of properly .
C. Concrete temperature prior to discharge shall not exceed F. .
Cold Weather Concrete Concrete shall not be placed against frozen surfaces .
All frost ice and snow shall be removed from all material that will be in contact with fresh concrete .
Unless authorized by the Resident the mixing and placing of concrete shall be discontinued when the atmospheric temperature is below F in the shade and dropping and shall not be resumed until the atmospheric temperature is as high as F in the shade and rising .
If authorization is granted for the mixing and placing of concrete under atmospheric conditions different from those specified above the water shall be heated to a temperature not exceeding F. When either the aggregate or water is heated to above F they are to be combined first in the mixer before the cement is added .
If the atmospheric temperature is below F the aggregate shall also be heated .
Materials containing frost or lumps of frozen material shall not be used .
Stockpiled aggregates may be heated by the use of dry heat or steam .
Aggregates shall not be heated directly by gas or oil flame or on sheet metal over a fire .
When aggregates are heated in bins steam coil or water coil heating or other methods that will not be detrimental to the aggregates may be used .
The heating apparatus shall be capable of heating the mass uniformly and preventing the occurrence of spots of overheated material .
The minimum temperature of the mixed concrete shall be in accordance with Table when it is placed in the forms .
Salt other chlorides or other unapproved chemicals shall not be added to the concrete for any reason whatsoever .
TABLE COLD WEATHER TEMPERATURE TABLE MINIMUM FORM DIMENSION SIZE Less than inch to inch to inch Greater than inch F F F F MINIMUM CONCRETE TEMPERATURE AS PLACED When permitted by the Resident footings may be protected by completely submerging them by admitting water inside the cofferdam .
Until submersion takes place the temperature of the concrete and its surface shall be controlled as specified above .
Submersion shall proceed slowly and the temperature of the air or water shall be maintained sufficient to prevent ice from forming within the cofferdam for a period of days after the placing of the concrete .
When depositing concrete under water there shall be no ice inside the cofferdam .
Permission given to place concrete under the conditions mentioned above and as described in the Contractors QCP shall not relieve the Contractor of its responsibility for obtaining satisfactory results .
The Contractor shall be wholly responsible for the protection of concrete during cold weather operations and any concrete injured by frost action or overheating shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense. . Forms and False work A .
Construction of Forms All forms shall be well built substantial and unyielding securely braced strutted and tied to prevent motion and distortion while concrete is being placed in them .
The forms shall be strong enough to safely support the weight of the concrete and all superimposed loads such as runways concrete buggy loads workers scaffolding etc .
placed upon them .
Forms shall be built to conform to the dimensions location contours and details shown on the Plans .
The faces of forms against which the concrete is to be placed shall be dressed smooth and uniform and shall be free from winds twists buckles and other irregularities .
Stayinplace forms of any type will not be permitted for any part of slab structures unless otherwise indicated on the Plans .
The placing of concrete in excavated pits and trenches without forms will not be permitted .
All corners within the forms shall be fitted with chamfer strips mitered at their intersections except that chamfer strips will not be required as follows on corners of slab blocking of interior steel beams and the inside of exterior steel beams on corners constructed transversely at the underside of the slab of superstructures which consist of a concrete slab on steel beams on footings not exposed to view and on all structures when more than feet below the final finished grade line .
Chamfer strips shall have a width across the diagonal face between  and  inch .
The size to be adopted for a given portion of the work shall depend upon the general dimensions .
Except where special size chamfer strips are shown on the Plans the size of chamfer strips shall be uniform on individual projects .
Provision shall be made for the chamfering of the top edges of abutment bridge seats and wing walls tops of piers and retaining walls tops of through girders roadway curbs etc .
by nailing chamfer strips inside the forms .
Unless otherwise provided all chamfer strips shall produce plain flat surfaces on the concrete .
The forms for beams girders and spandrel arches shall be so constructed as to permit the sides to be removed without disturbing the supports .
All foreign matter within the forms shall be removed before depositing concrete in them .
In all cases where metal or composite anchorages or ties within or through the face forms are required to hold the forms in their correct position such anchorages or ties shall be of ample strength and shall be so constructed that the metalcomposite work can be removed to a depth of not less than inch from the face and back surfaces of the concrete without damaging such surfaces .
Elevations will be taken on the top flanges of structural beams and girders for the purpose of determining the depth of blocking necessary for the construction of the forms for the concrete slab after the following conditions have been satisfied .
The satisfactory erection of the superstructure structural beams or girders including any required flooring beams stringers and intermediate diaphragms unless an alternative plan is submitted by the Contractor and approved by the Department. . All bolt tightening operations must be complete. . No foreign loads supported by the beams or girders are present .
The Contractor shall submit working drawings for approval of the proposed forms and false work supporting the overhanging portion of the superstructure slab in accordance with Section ..
The working drawings shall show the size and location of the supporting members the proposed loads and the weight of concrete forms to be carried by the members .
In the construction of forms and false work for the portion of superstructure slabs overhanging the exterior members of beam and girder spans forms and supporting devices resulting in point loadings on the exterior members shall not be used .
Loads resulting from supporting devices shall be distributed directly to the flanges by means of brackets or braces .
All forms shall be inspected and approved by the Department before the placing of any concrete within them .
B .
Surface Treatment of Forms The inside surfaces of forms shall be uniformly coated with form oil or other approved surface treatment .
Form surfaces shall be treated before placing the reinforcing steel .
C. Construction of False work All false work used for supporting reinforced concrete superstructures shall be comprised of members having ample structural sections to resist all loads imposed upon them with deformations less than Span Length .
When the vertical members of false work consist of piles or when framed or other false work is supported upon piles the piles shall be driven to secure a safe load resistance .
When false work is supported upon mud sills the foundation pressures resulting from the imposed loads upon the mud sills false work forms fresh concrete scaffolding etc .
shall not exceed the capacity of the onsite soils .
All false work systems shall be designed to support all vertical loading and any differential settlement forces all horizontal and longitudinal forces and shall account for any temporary unbalanced loading due to the placement sequence of the concrete .
Sufficient redundancy shall be designed into false work systems so that the failure of any member shall not cause a collapse .
False work systems adjacent to andor over traveled ways shall additionally be designed to resist any vibration forces due to traffic and shall incorporate sufficient protection against impact by errant vehicles .
False work shall be so constructed that the forms will have a camber the amount of which will depend upon the deflection anticipated in the design .
Forms supported upon false work shall be provided with a satisfactory means for their adjustment in the event of settlement or deformation of the false work due to overloading or other causes .
Provisions shall be made for the gradual lowering of false work and rendering the supported structure selfsupporting .
All false work system computations plans and working drawings shall be designed and sealed by the Contractors Professional Engineer who must be licensed in accordance with the laws of the State of Maine .
Prior to concrete placement the Contractors Professional Engineer responsible for the design of the false work system shall after false work inspection provide a sealed certification that the system was erected in conformance with the Professional Engineers plans and design details .
This Professional Engineer may be directly employed or otherwise retained by the Contractor .
No concrete shall be placed until the sealed design computations plans and working drawings package and the sealed certification of erection of the false work have been submitted to the Resident .
The Department shall have no obligation to review or comment on any design construction maintenance or removal of false work .
No review or comment by the Department or any lack of review or comment by the Department shall relieve the Contractor of its responsibility to properly design construct maintain in good condition and remove false work in accordance with the Contract or shall shift any responsibility to the Department .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all damages resulting from the failure of false work .
The torsional effect of the false work on permanent structural members which results from supporting cantilevered concrete sections shall be analyzed by the Department .
In the event that the Department finds that the torsional stresses imposed on any permanent structural member due to the false work is unacceptable the Contractor shall redesign the false work in order to reduce the stresses to an acceptable level at no additional cost to the Department .
D. Removal of Forms and False work .
Location weather conditions cementitious materials used and the character of the structure involved shall be considered in determining the time for the removal of forms and false work .
Forms and false work shall not be removed until concrete cylinders cured with the structure establish that the concrete has developed a minimum of percent of design strength .
The Contractor shall cast and break a sufficient number of cylinders to ensure that all concrete associated with the forms and Falsework to be removed has reached the minimum required strength the test results from these cylinder breaks shall be furnished to the Resident before removal of the forms and false work .
When approved by the Resident the vertical forms and false work of footings walls columns and sides of beams and slabs may be removed hours after completion of placement of concrete exclusive of the time the ambient air temperature is below F and provided the following conditions are met Immediately after or as otherwise allowed by the Resident the forms are removed defects in the concrete surface shall be repaired in accordance with Section .
and the repaired area thoroughly dampened with water .
The surfaces of exposed concrete shall be cured for the remainder of the day curing period by the application of a curing compound listed on the Departments Qualified Products List .
The curing compound shall be applied continuously by approved mechanical pressure spraying or distributing equipment at a rate necessary to obtain an even continuous membrane meeting the manufacturers recommendations but at a rate of not less than gallon per ft of surface .
At a minimum two coats shall be applied using a pressurized sprayer with the second coat being applied within minutes and at right angles to the first .
Handpump sprayers rollers or brushes shall not be used. . Forms and false work including blocks and bracing shall not be removed without the consent of the Resident .
The Residents consent shall not relieve the Contractor of its responsibility for the safety of the Work .
In no case shall any portion of wood forms be left in the concrete .
As the forms are removed all projecting metal or composite devices that have been used for holding the forms in place shall be removed in accordance with Section .A .
The holes shall be filled as required in Section .. .
Placing Concrete A .
General Concrete shall not be placed until forms and reinforcing steel have been checked and approved by the Resident .
The forms shall be clean of all debris .
The method and sequence of placing the concrete shall be approved before any concrete is placed .
All concrete shall be placed before it has taken its initial set and in any case as specified in Section ..
Concrete shall be placed in horizontal layers in such a manner as to avoid separation and segregation .
A sufficient number of workers for the proper handling tamping and operation of vibrators shall be provided to compact each layer before the succeeding layer is placed and to prevent the formation of cold joints between layers .
Concrete shall not be placed against any surface coated with curing compound unless the curing compound has been removed .
Care shall be taken to prevent mortar from spattering on structural steel reinforcing steel and forms .
Any concrete or mortar that becomes dried on the structural steel reinforcing steel or forms shall be thoroughly cleaned off before the final covering with concrete .
Following the placing of the concrete all exposed surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned as required with care not to injure any surfaces .
Concrete shall not come in direct contact with seawater during placing and for a period of hours thereafter except as follows .
Concrete seals that are located entirely below low tide . .
Concrete footings constructed in the dry and located entirely below low tide or final ground elevation . .
Concrete Fill placed under water .
Concrete in any section of a structure shall be placed in approximately horizontal layers of such thickness that the entire surface shall be covered by a succeeding layer before the underlying layer has taken its initial set .
Layers shall not exceed inches in thickness and be compacted to become an integral part of the layer below .
Should the placement be unavoidably delayed long enough to allow the underlying layer to take initial set or produce a socalled cold joint the following steps shall be taken An incomplete horizontal layer shall be bulkheaded off to produce a vertical joint .
Horizontal joints shall be treated as required in Section .F .
The concrete in superstructures shall be placed monolithically except when construction joints are shown on the Plans or are authorized in accordance with approved details submitted by the Contractor .
If the concrete in the stems of Tbeams is to be placed independent of the slab section the construction joint shall be located at the underside of the slab and the bond between stem and slab shall be a mechanical one .
The bond shall be produced by embedding inch by inch wooden blocks having a length approximately inches less than the width of the stem and placed horizontally at right angles to the centerline of the beam in the top surface of the concrete immediately following the completion of the concrete placement .
To provide for the uniform spacing of the blocks and their ready removal when the concrete has taken a set sufficient to hold its form the blocks shall be firmly nailed upon a board at a distance of foot center to center .
The blocks shall be thoroughly oiled to facilitate their ready removal from the concrete .
In arch spans the order of construction or sequence of the work as shown on the Plans shall be followed in the placing of concrete .
In no case shall the work on any section or layer be stopped or temporarily discontinued within inches below the top of any face unless the Plans provide for a coping having a thickness less than inches in which case at the option of the Resident the construction joint may be made at the underside of the coping .
Concrete in columns shall be placed in one continuous operation unless otherwise directed .
If SCC has been approved for use it shall be placed from a single discharge point to build hydraulic head and allow the SCC to progressively flow forward until the form is filled .
The discharge point shall be moved as the SCC reaches the full height being cast while maintaining a hydraulic head as the cast progresses .
If subsequent loads of SCC are placed on top of a previous layer a minimal amount of internal vibrating must be introduced to ensure the top layer blends with the previous layer .
Fresh concrete threatened with rain damage shall be protected by approved means .
Sufficient material for covering the work expected to be done in one day shall be on hand at all times for emergency use .
The covering shall be supported above the surface of the concrete .
Concrete Fill shall be placed at least to the pay limits shown on the Plans .
Forms may be omitted at the Contractors option .
Vibration of concrete will not be required .
The Contractor has the option of placing Concrete Fill under water or in the dry .
B. Chutes Troughs Pipes and Buckets Sectional drop chutes or short chutes troughs pipes and buckets when used as aids in placing concrete shall be arranged and used in such a manner that the ingredients of the concrete do not become separated or segregated .
Wood and aluminum chutes troughs pipes or buckets shall not be used .
Dropping the concrete a distance of more than feet unless confined by closed chutes or pipe will not be permitted .
The concrete shall be deposited at or as near as possible to its final position .
C. Vibrating Mechanical high frequency internal vibrators shall be used operating within the concrete for compacting the concrete in all structures and precast and castinplace piles with the exception of concrete placed under water .
The vibrators shall have a frequency of between and vibrations per minute and shall be visibly capable of properly consolidating the designed mixture .
For each type of vibrator used a spare vibrator shall be available on the project at all times during the placing of concrete .
Sufficient vibrators shall be used to consolidate the incoming concrete within minutes after placing .
Vibrators shall neither be held against forms or reinforcing steel nor shall they be used for flowing the concrete or spreading it into place .
Overvibrating shall not be allowed .
D. Dewatering Forms All forms shall be dewatered before concrete is placed in them .
Pumping will not be permitted from the inside of forms while concrete is being placed .
Moving water shall not be permitted to be exposed to fresh concrete .
E. Depositing Concrete under Water No concrete shall be deposited under water except for cofferdam seals .
Pumping will not be allowed within the cofferdam while concrete is being placed .
The concrete shall be placed carefully in a compact mass in its final position by means of a tremie or by other approved means and shall not be disturbed after being deposited .
Bottom dump buckets will not be permitted .
Special care must be exercised to maintain still water at the point of deposit .
Concrete shall not be placed in running water .
The method of depositing concrete shall be so regulated as to produce approximate horizontal surfaces .
Each seal shall be placed in one continuous operation .
When a tremie is used it shall consist of a tube not less than inches in diameter .
The means of supporting the tremie shall be such as to permit free movement of the discharge end over the entire seal and to permit its being lowered rapidly when necessary to choke off or retard flow .
The tremie shall be filled by a method that will prevent washing of the concrete .
The discharge end shall be completely submerged in concrete at all times and the tremie tube shall be kept full to the bottom of the hopper .
The flow shall be regulated by raising or lowering the tremie .
When the horizontal area of the tremie seal is large several tremie hoppers shall be provided and positioned strategically to allow placement of concrete near the point where it is needed to avoid moving concrete horizontally through the water .
The number of tremie hoppers and the work plan shall be approved by the Resident .
All laitance or other unsatisfactory material shall be removed from the surface of the seal before placing additional concrete .
The surface shall be cleaned by scraping chipping or other means that will not injure the concrete .
The placing and dewatering of seal concrete within cofferdams shall be in accordance with Section Cofferdams .
F. Construction Joints Construction joints shall be located where shown on the Plans or permitted by the Resident .
When the concrete is in seawater no horizontal construction joint will be permitted between extreme low tide and extreme high tide elevations with the exception of concrete cores for stone masonry .
At horizontal construction joints temporary gage strips having a minimum thickness of  inches shall be placed horizontally inside the forms along all exposed faces to give the joints straight lines .
The joint shall be so constructed that the surface of the concrete will not be less than  inch above the bottom of the gage strip .
Before placing fresh concrete the temporary gage strip shall be removed the surfaces of construction joints shall be thoroughly cleaned drenched with water until saturated and kept saturated until the new concrete is placed .
Immediately prior to placing new concrete the forms shall be drawn tight against the concrete already in place .
Concrete in substructures shall be placed in such a manner that all horizontal joints will be horizontal and if possible in locations such that they will not be exposed to view in the finished structure .
Where vertical construction joints are necessary reinforcing bars shall extend across the joint in such a manner as to make the structure monolithic .
Construction joints through paneled wing walls or other large surfaces which are to be treated architecturally will not be allowed except as shown on the Plans .
All vertical construction joints in abutments and retaining walls shall contain water stops as shown on the Plans .
The water stops shall be one continuous piece at each location .
All horizontal construction joints in abutments and retaining walls shall be constructed using a joint cover as shown on the Plans .
Construction joints in the wearing surface shall be located where called for on the Plans .
No other construction joints will be allowed .
All joints shall be formed in the manner detailed on the Plans .
The forms shall not be treated with oil or any other bond breaking material that will adhere to the concrete .
Sealing slots shall be provided at all joints in the wearing surface that are located directly over a slab construction joint .
Construction joints in the wearing surface not receiving a sealing slot shall be brushed with a neat cement paste immediately prior to making the adjacent concrete placement .
After the concrete has been cured sealing slots when required shall be sandblasted or highpressure minimum of psi water cleaned to remove all laitance and foreign material on the surfaces of the slots .
The bottom of the sealing slots shall receive an approved bond breaker .
The joint shall then be filled within  inch of the surface with an elastomeric concrete product listed on the Departments Qualified Products List in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
G. Bonding of CastInPlace Concrete Slabs Concrete wearing surface slabs placed on castinplace superstructure slabs concrete wearing surface slabs placed on precast concrete superstructure elements structural concrete slabs placed on precast concrete superstructure elements or concrete leveling slabs placed on precast concrete superstructure elements shall be permanently bonded .
Precast concrete superstructure elements include but are not limited to deck slabs voided slabs box beams bulb tee girders and Northeast Extreme Tee NEXT beams .
The structure supporting the castinplace slab shall be cleaned to remove all laitance dust dirt debris oil grease bituminous material paint and other foreign matter .
When the supporting structure is composed of castinplace concrete the Contractor shall scabble the entire surface of the structure and then sandblast or high pressure minimum of psi typical water clean the entire supporting structure .
When the supporting structure is comprised of precast elements the Contractor shall sandblast or high pressure water clean the entire surface of the supporting surface elements .
The final cleaning of the supporting structure shall be performed within the hour period preceding the placement of the castinplace slab .
All debris resulting from the cleaning operation shall be thoroughly removed using compressed dry air from the cleaned surfaces and adjacent areas .
Air lines shall be equipped with effective oil traps .
Prepared areas of the supporting structure that have not received the castinplace slab within hours of being cleaned shall be recleaned .
No surface preparation of a new supporting structure shall begin before completion of the specified curing period .
After cleaning of the structure supporting the castinplace slab has been satisfactorily completed the supporting structure and all porous surfaces to be in contact with the new slab shall be thoroughly saturated with water for a minimum of hours prior to placement of the slab .
Remove all standing water immediately prior to placement with oilfree compressed air and protect the supporting structure from drying so that the concrete remains in a saturated surface dry condition .
The following is further required when placing concrete wearing surface slabs In addition to the cleaning prescribed above for the supporting structure the faces of curb and barrier walls or other median devices up to a height of one inch above the top elevation of the wearing surface shall be cleaned to remove all curing compound laitance dust dirt debris oil grease bituminous material paint and all other foreign matter .
The cleaning shall be performed by dry sand blasting or high pressure water cleaning .
Bonding grout for wearing surface slabs .
All horizontal surfaces in contact with the wearing surface shall receive a coating of bonding grout .
The vertical faces in contact with the wearing surface shall be broomed up to the elevation of the top of the wearing surface with bonding grout .
Stiff bristled street brooms shall be used to brush the grout onto the surface .
The coating shall not exceed  inch in thickness .
The rate of progress in applying grout shall be limited so that the grout does not become dry before it is covered with new concrete .
During delays in the surfacing operations should the surface of the grout indicate an extensive amount of drying the grout shall be removed by methods approved by the Resident and the area shall be regrouted .
The bonding grout shall have Portland cement and fine aggregate proportioned to respectively by volume .
The grout mix design shall be included in the QCP .
The fine aggregate from which the material larger than  inch has been removed shall be the same source as used in the concrete .
The cement and fine aggregate shall be measured separately in appropriately sized containers .
The fine aggregate shall be deposited in an approved mechanical mortar mixer before adding cement .
Water shall be added in sufficient quantity to allow flow of the grout without segregation of the grout ingredients .
No water shall be added to the bonding grout after initial mixing .
The grout shall not be allowed to separate before placement .
The cement to water contact time of the grout shall not exceed minutes before it is placed .
Any grout that has dried or become unworkable before application as determined by the Resident shall not be incorporated into the work .
The use of retarding admixtures for increasing the discharge time limits will be allowed .
The Resident may approve the batching of bonding grout at an approved commercial concrete batch plant .
In this case mixing and delivery shall be in transit truck mixers .
H. Concrete Slab Surface Evaporation Limitations No placement of structural concrete slab structures including but not limited to concrete deck slabs wearing surfaces simple slab spans and slabs on precast superstructures shall be commenced if the combination of ambient air temperature relative humidity wind speed and plastic concrete temperature result in a surface moisture evaporation rate theoretically equal to or greater than .
lbfthr of exposed surface Refer to the Rate of Evaporation from Concrete Surface Chart .
If the surface moisture evaporation rate rises to .
lbfthr of exposed surface the Contractor shall implement the remedial action described in the approved QCP .
The temperature of the concrete shall not exceed F at the time the concrete is placed in its final position .
The maximum temperature of the surface on which concrete will be placed shall be F. The Contractor shall provide all equipment and perform all measurements and calculations in the presence of the Resident to determine the rate of evaporation the cost of which shall be incidental to related items . .
Expansion and Contraction Joints Expansion and contraction joints shall be located and constructed as shown on the Plans .
Water stops shall be one continuous piece at each location .
Joint cover as shown on the Plans shall be applied to all joints where water stops can not physically be installed as determined by the Resident . .
Repairing Defects and Filling Form Tie Holes in Concrete Surfaces After the forms are removed all surface defects and holes left by the form ties shall be repaired .
All fins and irregular projections shall be removed from the following Surfaces which are visible in the completed work surfaces to be waterproofed and the portion of vertical surfaces of substructure units which is below the final ground surface to a depth of inches not including underwater surfaces .
In patching surface defects all coarse or fractured material shall be chipped away until a dense uniform surface exposing solid coarse aggregate is obtained .
Feathered edges shall be saw cut away to form faces having a minimum depth of inch perpendicular to the surface .
All surfaces of the cavity shall be saturated thoroughly with water after which a thin layer of neat cement paste shall be applied .
The cavity shall then be filled with thick reasonably stiff mortar not more than minutes old composed of material of the same type and quality and of the same proportions as that used in the concrete being repaired .
The surface of this mortar shall be floated before initial set takes place and shall be neat in appearance .
The patch shall be water cured for a period of five days .
The holes left by form ties shall be filled with a mortar similar to that described above but with the addition of a nonshrink additive .
If the removal of defective concrete materially impairs the soundness or strength of the structure as determined by the Resident the affected unit shall be removed and replaced by the Contractor at its expense .
The holes left by form ties on the portions of substructure concrete that are to be permanently covered in the finished work may be filled with an acceptable grade of plastic roofing cement .
Holes in the bottom of slabs caused by supporting hangers need not be filled. . Finishing Concrete Surfaces Neat cement paste dry cement powder or the use of mortar for topping or plastering of concrete surfaces will not be permitted .
A .
Float Finish A float finish for horizontal surfaces shall be achieved by placing an excess of concrete in the form and removing or striking off the excess with a template or screed forcing the coarse aggregate below the surface .
Creation of concave surfaces shall be avoided .
After the concrete has been struck off the surface shall be thoroughly floated to the finished grade with a suitable floating tool .
Aluminum and steel floats are not allowed .
Float finish unless otherwise required shall be given to all horizontal surfaces except those intended to carry vehicular traffic and those of sidewalks .
B .
Structural Concrete Slab Structures Structural concrete slab structures include but are not limited to structural concrete deck slabs wearing surfaces slabs on precast superstructures top and bottom slabs of box culverts approach slabs rigid frame structures and simple slab spans as applicable .
Screed rails shall be set entirely above the finished surface of the concrete and shall be supported in a manner approved by the Resident .
Where shear connector studs are available welding to the studs will be permitted .
No welding will be permitted directly on the stringer flanges to attach either screed rail supports or form supports of any type .
Screed rail supports set in the concrete shall be so designed that they may be removed to at least inches below the surface of the concrete .
Voids created by removal of the upper part of the screed rail supports shall be filled with mortar having the same proportions of sand and cement as that of the slab or wearing surface .
The mortar shall contain an approved additive in sufficient proportions to produce nonshrink or slightly expansive characteristics .
The rate of placing concrete shall be limited to that which can be finished without undue delay and shall not be placed more than feet ahead of strikeoff .
The Contractor shall furnish a minimum of two work bridges behind the finishing operation supported on the screed rails each of which shall be capable of spanning the entire width of the deck and supporting at least a pound load without deflection to the concrete surface .
These work bridges shall be used by the Contractor for touchup and curing cover application and shall be available for inspection purposes .
When the overall length of the structure is feet or less only one work bridge will be required .
An approved bridge deck finishing machine complying with the following requirements shall be used except as otherwise specified for finishing structural concrete slab structures .
The finishing machine shall have the necessary adjustments built in by the manufacturer to produce the required cross section line and grade .
The supporting frame shall span the section being cast in a transverse direction without intermediate support .
The finishing machine shall be selfpropelled and capable of forward and reverse movement under positive control .
Provisions shall be made for raising all screeds to clear the screeded surface for traveling in reverse .
The screed device shall be provided with positive control of the vertical position .
The finishing machine shall be selfpropelled with one or more oscillating screeds or one or more rotating cylinder screeds .
An oscillating screed shall oscillate in a direction parallel to the centerline of the structure and travel in a transverse direction .
A rotating cylinder screed shall rotate in a transverse direction while also traveling in the same direction .
Either type of screed shall be operated transversely in overlapping strips in the longitudinal direction not to exceed inches .
One or more powered augers shall be operated in advance of the screeds and a drag pan type float shall follow the screeds .
For concrete placements less than inches in depth vibratory pans having a minimum of vibrationsminute shall be operated between the oscillating screeds or rotating cylinder screeds and the power augers .
For concrete placed in excess of  inches in depth handoperated spud vibrators shall be used in addition to the machine vibratory pans .
The transversely operated rotating cylinders of the bridge deck finishing machine shall be rotated such that the direction of the rotation of the cylinders at the surface of the concrete is in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Concrete immediately in front of the power augers of a bridge deck finishing machine shall be placed or cut to a depth that is in close proximity to the center of the rotating augers .
The advance augers shall strike off the concrete to approximately  inch above the final grade .
The concrete shall then be consolidated with the vibrating pans and then finished to final grade .
If the drag float does not seal the surface of the concrete an additional float finish shall be applied immediately following strikeoff .
A small handheld pan vibrator shall be required at edges and adjacent to joint bulkheads .
In lieu of the handheld pan vibrator equipment the Resident may approve small spud vibrators .
Lightweight vibrating screeds may be used on slab structures which are more than inches below the roadway finish grade or have a length of feet or less or where concrete placements are specified to be less than feet in width and shall have the following features .
It shall be portable and easily moved relocated or adjusted . .
The power unit shall be operable without disturbing the screeded concrete . .
It shall be selfpropelled with controls that will allow a uniform rate of travel and by which the rate of travel can be increased decreased or stopped . .
It shall have controlled uniform variable frequency vibration end to end . .
It shall be fully adjustable for flats crowns or valleys . .
The screed length shall be adjustable to accommodate the available work area .
When a lightweight vibrating screed is utilized the concrete shall be placed or cut to no more than  inch above the finished grade in front of the front screed .
The screed shall be operated such that at least three feet of concrete is in position in front of the screed .
Supporting slabs for bituminous wearing surfaces shall be finished in accordance with the recommendations of the waterproofing membrane manufacturer .
On all concrete wearing surfaces a one foot wide margin shall be finished adjacent to curbs and permanent barriers with a magnesium float .
Immediately after screeding and floating the surface of the concrete shall be tested for trueness by the Contractor with a foot straightedge and all irregularities corrected at once in order to provide a final surface within the tolerance required in Table .
The surface shall be checked both transversely and longitudinally .
The straightedges shall be furnished and maintained by the Contractor .
They shall be fitted with a handle and all parts shall be made of aluminum or other lightweight metal .
The straightedges shall be made available for use by the Resident when requested .
In the event of a delay during a concrete placement all concrete that can not receive the final curing cover shall be covered with wet burlap .
No vehicles will be allowed either directly or indirectly on reinforcing steel before concrete placement .
C. Curb and Sidewalk Finish on Bridges Curbs and sidewalks shall receive a float finish .
Sidewalks shall additionally receive a light broom finish perpendicular to the sidewalk .
When a concrete curb is monolithic with a sidewalk a inch wide smooth margin shall be made along the top of the curb with a magnesium float .
Unless shown on the Plans the sidewalk area shall not be divided into sections by transverse grooves .
At all transverse construction and expansion joints except where steel expansion dams are used the edges of the joints on the surface of the sidewalk shall be finished with a sidewalk edging tool inches in width with a  inch radius lip .
Finishing shall be completed within minutes of concrete placement .
D. Form Surface Finish The character of the materials used and the care with which forms are constructed and concrete placed shall be considered in determining the amount of rubbing required .
If concrete surfaces are obtained that are satisfactory to the Resident then the Contractor may be relieved in part from the requirement of rubbing . .
Ordinary Finish An Ordinary Finish is defined as the finish left on a surface after the removal of the forms the filling of all holes and the repairing of all defects .
The surface shall be true and even free from stone pockets and depressions or projections and of uniform texture .
All formed concrete surfaces shall be given an ordinary finish unless otherwise specified .
Repaired areas that do not meet the above requirements or areas that can not be satisfactorily repaired to meet the requirements for ordinary finish shall be given a rubbed finish .
When a rubbed finish is required on any part of a surface the entire surface shall be given a rubbed finish . .
Rubbed Finish After removal of forms the rubbing of concrete shall be started as soon as its condition will permit .
Immediately before starting this work the concrete shall be thoroughly saturated with water .
Sufficient time shall have elapsed before wetting down to allow the mortar used in ordinary finish to become thoroughly set .
Surfaces to be finished shall be rubbed with a medium coarse carborundum stone using a small amount of mortar on its face .
The mortar shall be composed of cement and fine sand mixed in proportions as used in the concrete being finished .
Rubbing shall be continued until all form marks projections and irregularities have been removed all voids filled and a uniform surface has been obtained .
A thin layer of paste produced by this rubbing shall be left on the surfaces .
After all concrete above the surface being treated has been cast the final finish shall be obtained by a second rubbing with a fine carborundum stone using only water .
This rubbing shall be continued until the entire surface is of a smooth texture and uniform color .
The paste produced by this second rubbing shall be carefully spread with a moist whitewash brush to form a very thin uniform coating upon the surface of the concrete .
After the final rubbing is completed and the surface has dried it shall be rubbed lightly with clean dry burlap to remove excess loose powder and shall be left free from all unsound patches paste powder and objectionable marks .
This finish shall result in a surface of smooth texture and uniform color .
No surface finishing shall be done in freezing weather or when the concrete contains frost .
In cold weather the preliminary rubbing necessary to remove the inert sand and cement materials and the surface irregularities may be done without the application of water to the concrete surfaces .
The following portions of concrete roadway grade separation structures shall be given a rubbed finish unless otherwise indicated in the Contract a Retaining walls and the breast and wing walls of abutmentsface surfaces to inches below the finished ground line .
b PiersAll vertical surfaces and the underside of overhanging portions of caps except that for overpass structures the piers beyond the outside limits of the roadway pavement the vertical surfaces on the back which are not visible from the roadway or sidewalk will not require a rubbed finish .
If in the opinion of the Resident the general appearance of a concrete structure due to the excellence of workmanship can not be improved by a rubbed finish this requirement may be waived .
E. Surface Finish After the concrete has cured the surface shall be tested with a foot straightedge or a lightweight profiler .
The straightedge shall be furnished and maintained by the Contractor .
It shall be fitted with a handle and all parts shall be made of aluminum or other lightweight metal .
The straightedges shall be made available for use by the Resident when requested .
The lightweight profiler will be furnished by the Department .
Areas found to not comply with the tolerance of Table shall be brought into conformity by methods proposed by the Contractor and approved by the Resident at no additional cost to the Department .
TABLE SURFACE TOLERANCE LIMITS Type of Surface Maximum deviation of surface in inches below a foot straightedge Concrete Wearing Surfaces Curbs Sidewalks and Barriers  inch Concrete Slab Surfaces to be Covered by Membrane Waterproofing or Concrete Wearing Surfaces  inch Concrete Slab Surfaces with Integral Concrete Wearing Surface  inch Concrete Slab Surfaces to be Covered By Earth or Gravel  inch Concrete Surface of Box Culvert Bottom Slabs  inch Concrete Surface of Abutments Piers Pier  inch Shafts Footings and Walls Allowance shall be made for crown camber and vertical curve .
F. Transverse Saw Cut Grooving of Concrete Wearing Surfaces A transverse saw cut grooved finish shall be applied to concrete wearing surfaces .
This work shall be performed using a multibladed diamond wet saw using circular saw blades .
The Resident may allow the use of a single blade circular saw tool where it is determined that such equipment is necessary to complete the work as required .
The equipment the Contractor proposes to use will be subject to the approval of the Resident prior to use .
Saw cutting may begin only after the specified curing period has elapsed .
Transverse grooves shall be cut perpendicular to the centerline of the roadway using a single pass .
Cut all grooves in a rectangular shape conforming to the following dimensions Width inch inch Depth inch inch Terminate grooves inches away from the vertical face of curbs or parapets .
The grooves shall be randomly spaced .
The random spacing shall range from inches to inches with percent of the spacings being less than or equal to inches .
The Contractor shall submit a spacing pattern to the Resident for approval .
An example of an acceptable random pattern is and with all spaces measured in inches .
Spacings should not be based solely on multiples of inch because the result will not be truly random e.g .
do not use a pattern such as etc .. During the grooving operations the Resident will verify at random that the minimum grooved depth is being achieved .
If the Resident determines that the minimum groove depth is not being achieved then the Contractor shall stop grooving operations and make all adjustments necessary as well as any repairs as required by the Resident .
The Contractor shall supply the Resident with two accurate easily readable gauges with which to verify groove depth .
Deliver the gauges and applicable manufacturers instructions for use no later than Days prior to the anticipated start of grooving operations .
Slurry or debris from the grooving operation will not be allowed to accumulate or harden and shall be prevented from flowing into drains onto the roadway slopes or water bodies below or adjacent to the bridge .
Residue shall be continuously removed .
The slurry or debris shall be disposed of properly by the Contractor. . Curing Concrete All concrete surfaces shall be kept wet with clean fresh water for a curing period of at least days after concrete placing with the exception of vertical surfaces as provided for in Section .D Removal of Forms and False work and sidewalks as provided for in this section .
For concrete wearing surfaces and all concrete containing fly ash or slag the temperature of the concrete shall be kept above F for the entire seven day period .
All other concrete and its surfaces shall be kept above F for the first four days of the curing period and above F for the remainder of the period .
In the hours following the end of the curing period the temperature of the concrete shall be decreased on a gradual basis not to exceed a total change of F for moderate sections such as abutments and pier bents and F for mass sections such as massive piers .
All slabs and wearing surfaces shall be water cured and kept continuously wet for the entire curing period by covering with one of the following systems A. layers of wet burlap B. layers of wet cotton mats C. layer of wet burlap and either a polyethylene sheet or a polyethylene coated burlap blanket D. layer of wet cotton mats and either a polyethylene sheet or a polyethylene coated burlap blanket .
Except as otherwise specified curing protection for slabs and wearing surfaces shall be applied within minutes after the concrete is screeded and before the surface of the concrete has lost its surface wetness or sheen appearance .
The burlap or the cotton mats shall be pre soaked prior to being applied .
Polyethylene sheets shall not be placed directly on the concrete but may be placed over the fabric cover to prevent drying .
The covering of concrete wearing surfaces decks curbs and sidewalks shall be kept continuously wet for the entire curing period by the use of a continuous wetting system and shall be located to insure a completely wet concrete surface for the entire curing period except as noted below .
The finished surfaces of sidewalks may be cured using a curing compound listed on the Departments Qualified Products List .
The curing compound shall be applied continuously by approved mechanical pressure spraying or distributing equipment at a rate necessary to obtain an even continuous membrane meeting the manufacturers recommendations but at a rate of not less than gallon per ft of surface .
At a minimum two coats shall be applied using a pressurized sprayer with the first coat being applied within minutes after finishing is complete and the second coat being applied within minutes of and at right angles to the first .
Handpump sprayers rollers or brushes shall not be used .
All other surfaces if not protected by forms shall be kept thoroughly wet either by sprinkling or by the use of wet burlap cotton mats or other suitable fabric until the end of the curing period except as provided for in Section .D Removal of Forms and False work .
Polyethylene sheets shall not be placed directly on the concrete but may be placed over the fabric cover to prevent drying .
Use of evaporation retardants finishing aids or water to finish any concrete surfaces shall not be allowed. . Loading Structures and Opening to Traffic No superstructure concentrated loads such as structural steel beams girders and trusses shall be placed upon finished concrete substructures until the concrete has reached its design strength .
No load or work will be permitted on concrete superstructure slabs or rigid frame structures until concrete cylinders cured with the slab establish that design strength has been reached .
However after a shorter period of time the Resident may permit handwork for form construction and setting stone bridge curb .
No curbing or other materials shall be stored on the bridge during the day curing period except that if handwork is permitted curb stones may be stored in a line near their final location until ready to be set .
Neither traffic nor fill material shall be allowed on superstructures of concrete bridges or culverts until concrete cylinders cured with the slab establish that design strength has been reached dependent upon conditions as specified in Section .
and with the approval of the Resident .
No traffic will be allowed on the cured concrete of a concrete wearing surface until hours after the completion of the application of protective coating for concrete surfaces .
Concrete approach slabs at the end of structures may be opened to traffic or backfilled if buried when the design strength has been reached .
Foundations for light bases traffic signals and overhead signs must reach design strength prior to loading. . Bridge Drains and Incidental Drainage All drains shall be accurately placed at the locations shown on the Plans or authorized and adequate means provided for securely holding them in the required positions during the placing of concrete .
Bridge drains shall be galvanized in accordance with Section .
Bridge Drains .
The Contractor shall furnish an insulator between surfaces of galvanized and weathering steels when erecting the bridge drain support assembly .
Epoxycoated washers shall be used when the support assembly attaches to weathering steel beam webs .
Drains or weep holes through abutments and retaining walls shall be pipe of the size and shape shown on the Plans and shall be of Schedule PVC pipe .
For the purpose of providing drainage for any moisture that may collect between the deck slab and the hot mix asphalt roadway surface approved one inch inside diameter plastic tube drains shall be installed at the low points of the slab surface adjacent to the end dam or dams .
The exact location will be determined in the field by the Resident and the discharge from them shall be such as to clear the bridge seats and any other portion of the structure in their proximity .
The tops of the drains shall be depressed  inch below the surface of the slab and the outlets shall project inches below the underside of the slab .
Care shall be exercised such that the drains are open after the installation of the membrane waterproofing when it is installed. . Quality Control Method A and B The Contractor shall control the quality of the concrete through testing inspection and practices which shall be described in the QCP sufficient to assure a product meeting the Contract requirements .
The QCP shall meet the requirements of Section Quality and this specification .
No work under this item shall proceed until the QCP is submitted to and approved by the Department .
The QCP shall address all elements that affect the quality of the structural concrete including but not limited to the following A .
Mix Designs B .
Aggregate Production C. Quality of Components D. Stockpile Management E. Proportioning including Added Water F. Mix and Transportation including Time from Batching to Completion of Delivery G. Initial and asDelivered Mix Properties including Temperature Air Content Consistency and WaterCement Ratio H. Process QC Testing I .
Placement and Consolidation J. Permeability K. Compressive Strength L. Finishing and Curing M. Hot and Cold Weather Concreting Procedures including curing and form removal The QCP shall include the names and specific qualifications of the individuals meeting these requirements and qualifications A. QCP Administrator meeting one of the following qualifications .
Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine with one year of concrete experience acceptable to the Department. . EngineerinTraining certified by the State of Maine with two years of concrete experience acceptable to the Department. . An individual with three years concrete experience acceptable to the Department and with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Civil Engineering or a related Civil Engineering Technology discipline. . Certified Quality Assurance Technologist certified by the NorthEast Transportation Training and Certification Program NETTCP .
B .
Process Control Technicians PCT shall utilize test results and other quality control practices to assure the quality of aggregates and other mix components and control proportioning to meet the mix designs .
The QCP shall detail the frequency of sampling and testing corrective actions to be taken and documentation .
The PCT shall periodically inspect all equipment utilized in proportioning and mixing to assure it is operating properly and that proportioning and mixing conforms to the mix designs and other Contract requirements .
The QCP shall detail how these duties and responsibilities are to be accomplished and documented and whether more than one PCT is required .
The QCP shall include the criteria utilized by the PCT to correct or reject unsatisfactory materials .
The PCT shall be a MCTCB certified Concrete Plant Technician or a NETTCP certified Concrete Technician .
C. Quality Control Technicians QCT shall perform quality control tests and inspection at the job site to assure that materials meet the requirements of the mix designs and specifications .
The QCP shall detail frequency of sampling and testing inspection procedures corrective actions to be taken and documentation .
The QCP shall detail how these duties and responsibilities are to be accomplished and documented and whether more than one QCT is required .
The QCP shall include the criteria utilized by the QCT to reject unsatisfactory materials .
The QCT shall be an ACI certified Concrete Field Testing Technician Grade I or a NETTCP certified Concrete Technician .
D. The Plan shall detail the coordination of the activities of the QCP Administrator the PCT and the QCT .
The Contractor shall maintain records of all QC tests and calculations .
The gradation test data and results shall be reported to the Department before the placement they represent .
The Contractor or supplier shall retain split samples of the most recent QC gradations for possible Verification testing by the Department .
In addition the Department will sample the aggregates at the plant on a monthly basis to determine specification compliance .
If the Departments gradation tests determine that the aggregate does not meet the specified gradation limits corrective action shall be required before additional concrete may be supplied to the project .
The compressive strength test results shall be reported to the Department by A.M. of the first working day following the test .
All QC test data shall be signed by the person who performed the test .
The Contractor shall record all onsite QC test data and calculations at the time of the placement and present this information on a form acceptable to the Department to the Department by A.M. of the first working day following the concrete placement .
All Method A and B QC testing shall meet the minimum requirements found in Table .
TABLE METHOD A B MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL TESTING REQUIREMENTS TEST TEST METHOD SAMPLING LOCATION FREQUENCY Gradation AASHTO T T Stockpile One set per mix before production .
One set every yd Min .
set per month Organic Impurities AASHTO T Stockpile One set per each FA gradation Absorption AASHTO T T Stockpile Once per aggregate per months Specific Gravity AASHTO T T Stockpile Once per aggregate per months Total Moisture in Agg .
AASHTO T Stockpile One set per days production Free Water and Agg .
Wt .
NA One per days production Entrained Air AASHTO T On Project On first two loads and every third load thereafter provided consistent results are achieved Compressive Strength AASHTO T On Project One set per sublot Compressive Strength AASHTO T days On Project One set per sublot Additional QC testing will be required any time a process change occurs during a placement including changes in type or dosage of admixture. . Quality Control Method C The Contractor shall submit a QCP listing the mix designs to be used the name and location of the production facility a brief description of the placement and curing process and the name and qualifications of any QCT to be used .
A QCT will be required .
The Contractor shall provide a Certificate of Compliance for each truckload of concrete to the Department at the time of the load placement . .
Acceptance Methods A and B The Department will determine the acceptability of the concrete through a quality assurance program .
The Department will take Acceptance samples a minimum of once per sublot on a statistically random basis .
Samples will be taken at the discharge point with pumped concrete sampling taken at the discharge end of the pump line .
Acceptance tests will include compressive strength air content and chloride permeability .
Lot Size A lot size shall consist of the total quantity represented by each class of concrete in the Contract .
A lot shall consist of a minimum of and a maximum of sublots .
If a lot is comprised of more than sublots sized in accordance with Table then this quantity shall be divided equally into or more lots such that there is a minimum of and a maximum of sublots per lot .
If there is insufficient quantity in a lot to meet the recommended minimum sublot size then the lot shall be divided into equal sublots .
Sublot Size General The size of each sublot shall be determined in accordance with Table .
The Resident may vary sublot sizes based on placement sizes and sequence .
Sublot Size Unit Price Items Sublot sizes will initially be determined from estimated quantities .
When the actual final quantity of concrete is determined If there is less than one half the estimated sublot quantity in the remaining quantity then this quantity shall be combined with the previous sublot and no further Acceptance testing will be performed if there is more than onehalf the estimated sublot quantity in the remaining quantity then this quantity shall constitute the last sublot and shall be represented by Acceptance test results .
If it becomes apparent part way through a lot that due to an underrun in quantity there will be an insufficient quantity of concrete to comprise three sublots then the Resident may adjust the sizes of the remaining sublots and select new sample locations based on the revised estimated quantity of concrete remaining in the lot .
Sublot Size Lump Sum Items Each lot shall be divided into sublots of equal size based on the estimated quantity of concrete .
TABLE Quantity CY Recommended Sublot Size CY or greater Determination of the concrete cover over reinforcing steel for structural concrete shall be made prior to concrete being placed in the forms .
Bar supports chairs slab bolsters and side form spacers shall meet the requirements of the Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute CRSI Manual of Standard Practice Chapter Section .. Class Section .. Class A or Section .
AllPlastic Bar Supports .
All supports shall meet the requirements for type and spacing as stated in the CRSI Manual of Standard Practice Chapter .
Concrete will not be placed until the placing of the reinforcing steel and supports have been approved by the Resident .
If the Contractor fails to secure Department approval prior to placement the Contractors failure shall be cause for removal and replacement at the Contractors expense .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident at least hours prior to the placement when the reinforcing steel will be ready for checking .
Sufficient time must be allowed for the checking process and any needed repairs .
Compressive strength tests will be completed by the Department in accordance with AASHTOT and T at days except that no slump will be taken .
Two inch x inch cylinders will be cast per sublot placed .
The average of two concrete cylinders per sublot will constitute a test result and this average will be used to determine the compressive strength for pay adjustment computations .
Testing for Entrained Air in concrete at the rate of one test per sublot shall be in accordance with AASHTO T. Rapid Chloride Permeability specimens will be tested by the Department in accordance with AASHTO T at an age days .
Two inch x inch cylinders will be cast per sublot placed .
The average of two concrete specimens per sublot will constitute a test result and this average will be used to determine the permeability for pay adjustment computations .
Surface Tolerance Alignment and Trueness Plumb and Batter Finish The Resident will measure the properties of surface tolerance alignment and trueness plumb and batter and finish to ensure they conform to the following criteria .
If the concrete fails to meet any of these requirements and the Contractor fails to repair or mitigate the identified defects to the satisfaction of the Resident then there shall be no positive Quality Assurance Acceptance incentive payments on the respective lots .
A .
Surface Tolerance Surface tolerance of exposed horizontal and sloping portions of the substructure superstructure slabs wearing surface sidewalks barriers and wingwalls will be measured with a foot straightedge .
Surface tolerance limits are given in Table Section .E .
The Contractor shall furnish the foot straightedge .
B. Alignment and Trueness Alignment and trueness will be measured longitudinally along any vertical surface of any portion of the structure and shall not exceed a deviation of  inch in feet for structures up to feet in length .
Structures in excess of feet in length will be subject to a maximum tolerance of inches .
C. Plumb and Batter Columns and other vertical surfaces that will remain exposed will be measured to determine actual batter and degree of verticality .
Measurements will be taken subsequent to every placement .
Vertical faces of columns will be measured at a minimum of two faces at right angles to each other .
Other vertical surfaces will be measured once every feet along the face of longitudinal walls .
All measurements will be made on a per placement basis and will be subject to a tolerance of  inch in feet .
D. Finish Surface finish of concrete surfaces will be evaluated and repaired in accordance with Sections . . and .
for each placement .
Rejection by Resident For material represented by an Acceptance test with test results failing to meet the criteria specified in Table the Department will at its sole discretion A .
Require the Contractor to remove and replace the entire affected placement with concrete meeting the Contract requirements at no additional expense to the Department or B .
Accept the material at a reduced payment as determined by the appropriate Quality Level Analysis specification formula . .
Acceptance Method A A lot size shall consist of the total quantity represented by each class of concrete in the Contract .
A lot shall consist of a minimum of and a maximum of sublots . .
Acceptance Method B A lot size shall consist of the total quantity represented by each class of concrete in the Contract .
A lot shall consist of a minimum of sublots . .
Acceptance Method C The Department will determine the acceptability of the concrete through Acceptance testing .
The Department reserves the right to waive tests at times deemed appropriate by the Resident .
Acceptance tests will include compressive strength air content and permeability .
Method C concrete not meeting the requirements listed in Table shall be removed and replaced at no cost to the Department .
At the Departments sole discretion material not meeting requirements may be left in place and paid for at a reduced price as described in Section .. .
Resolution of Disputed Acceptance Test Results The Contractor shall work cooperatively with the Resident in maintaining Control Charts as outlined in Subsection .. in order to identify potential issues with any test results and take appropriate actions to address these issues before they become disputed issues .
In cases where the Department may determine that removal of the affected placement is warranted or that the material is marginally acceptable and may remain in place and paid for at a reduced rate in accordance with Section .
Acceptance Methods A and B this Subsection provides recourse for the Contractor to contest the Departments Acceptance test results as follows at no additional cost to the Department A. Compressive Strength There may be cases where the Departments test results indicate that concrete must be removed and replaced or that the material is maginally acceptable and my remain in place and paid for at a reduced rate .
In these cases and providing that the Contractors QC test results from a NETTCP certified laboratory for the same load are more than psi higher than that of the Departments test results the following procedure concerning compressive strength may be undertaken by the Contractor and witnessed by the Department within days of the placement date within days of the placement date in the case where fly ash at or greater pozzolan cement replacement is used in the concrete mix .
Drilled core specimens shall be retrieved from the concrete in question in accordance with the requirements of ASTM CCM Standard Test Method for Obtaining and Testing Drilled Cores and Sawed Beams of Concrete .
The core strength acceptance and evaluation criteria included in ACI shall not apply. . Three drilled core specimens shall be taken from each sublot in question from randomly selected locations to be representative of the entire volume of the sublot .
The Resident and the Contractors representative shall agree on the sample locations prior to drilling .
The specimens shall have a minimum diameter of inches and a minimum length of inches . .
The concrete cores shall be taken directly from the Project to the nearest MaineDOT laboratory for processing for testing .
The cores shall be protected from drying during transport .
The Contractor shall make arrangements with the appropriate MaineDOT laboratory for testing prior to beginning the coring process . .
Core test results will be evaluated by the Department .
The test results of the three cored cylinders shall be averaged and then divided by a factor of ..
The resulting compressive strength shall be used by the Department in the final determination of the acceptability of the material in question and shall replace the contested test result in computing pay adjustments for the Lot in question .
If coring is not done within the day time limit or day time limit as applicable the Department will not allow dispute testing of the sublot . .
If the Department concludes that the strength of the structural element in question is adequate as a result of the above procedure then the concrete shall remain in place and payment will be adjusted using the test results from the above procedure .
If the Department concludes that the strength of the structural element in question is unsatisfactory as a result of the above procedure the original acceptance test result will remain in the lot and the Department will direct the Contractor to take appropriate actions as determined by the Department and at no additional cost to the Department .
B .
Rapid Chloride Permeability In cases where the Departments test results indicate that the material is subject to removal and replacement according to section .
the following procedure concerning permeability may be undertaken by the Contractor and witnessed by the Department within four calendar days of the receipt of the results .
Drilled core specimens shall be retrieved from the concrete in question in accordance with the requirements of ASTM CCM Standard Test Method for Obtaining and Testing Drilled Cores and Sawed Beams of Concrete .
Specimens shall have a diameter of inches and a minimum length of inches. . Three drilled core specimens shall be taken from a location that would be from the same load as the original Department specimen for each sublot in question . .
The concrete cores shall be taken directly from the Project to the nearest MaineDOT laboratory for processing for testing .
The cores shall be protected from drying during transport .
The Contractor shall make arrangements with the appropriate MaineDOT laboratory for testing prior to beginning the coring process . .
The cored cylinders will be tested by the Department in accordance with AASHTO T. The resulting permeability value shall be used by the Department in the final determination of the acceptability of the material in question and shall replace the contested test result in computing pay adjustments for the Lot in question . .
If the Department concludes that the permeability of the placement in question is adequate as a result of the above procedure then the concrete shall remain in place and payment will be adjusted using the test results from the above procedure .
If the Department concludes that the permeability of the affected placement in question is unsatisfactory as a result of the above procedure the original acceptance test result will remain in the lot and the Department will direct the Contractor to take appropriate actions as determined by the Department and at no additional cost to the Department .
C. Entrained Air In order to dispute the Departments test results the Contractor must test material from the same sample as the Department .
If the difference between the Departments and the Contractors air tests is equal to or greater than .
percent then the material shall be retested by both parties .
If the difference between the retests is equal to or greater than .
percent the concrete placement will be suspended immediately .
Both air meters will be checked for accuracy by either comparison to a third calibrated air meter or by use of an air meter calibration vessel .
If either air meter is found to be out of calibration it shall be replaced immediately .
Once it is demonstrated that the QC and Acceptance air meters are in agreement within .
percent the concrete placement may resume . .
Method of Measurement A .
Structural concrete satisfactorily placed and accepted will be measured by the cubic yard in accordance with the dimensions shown on the Plans or authorized changes in the Plans or as one lump sum unit as indicated in the Schedule of Items .
Structural Concrete for any irregular shapes may be measured by the cubic yard as determined from the theoretical yield of the design mix or in the case of transit mixed concrete by delivery ticket as directed by the Resident .
B .
The limits to be used in determining the quantities of the aforementioned structural concrete items for arriving at a lump sum price will be as follows .
Structural Concrete Superstructure Slabs Structural Concrete Roadway and Sidewalk Slabs on Steel Bridges Structural Concrete Roadway and Sidewalk Slabs on Concrete Bridges and Structural Concrete Superstructure Tbeam Type The limits will be the entire concrete superstructure outside to outside both transversely and longitudinally exclusive of concrete curbs sidewalks permanent concrete barrier and concrete transition barriers . .
Structural Concrete Wearing Surfaces The limits will be the entire concrete wearing surface bounded transversely by the roadway curbs and longitudinally by the extreme ends . .
Structural Concrete Box Culverts The limits will be the entire structure meaning the bottom floor slab abutments wings superstructure floor slab and headwalls or curbs . .
Structural Concrete Approach Slabs The limit will be the entire approach slab or slabs as shown on the Plans . .
Structural Concrete Abutments and Retaining Walls Structural Concrete Abutments and Retaining Walls placed under water Structural Concrete Piers and Structural Concrete Piers placed under water The limits will be the entire concrete substructure unit or units from the bottom of the footing to the top of the unit and outside to outside both transversely and longitudinally except for the portion to be placed under water as indicated on the Plans which will be the limits of the concrete unit or units outside to outside transversely longitudinally and vertically . .
Structural Concrete Rigid Frame Structures The limits will be the entire concrete structure meaning the frame walls and top slab .
Included within the limits for payment unless otherwise shown on the Plans are bottom slab wing walls and headwalls . .
Structural Concrete Culvert End walls The limit will be the entire concrete end wall or end walls as shown on the Plans . .
Structural Concrete Curb and Sidewalks The limit will be the entire concrete curb or sidewalk as shown on the Plans . .
Concrete Fill Will be measured for payment by the number of cubic yards of concrete in place to the vertical pay limits shown on the Plans .
If the Contractor elects to omit forms then any excavation or concrete placed beyond the pay limits indicated on the Plans shall not be paid for but shall be at the Contractors expense .
C. No deduction will be made for the volume of concrete displaced by structural steel reinforcing steel pile heads expansion joint material drains chamfers on corners inset panels of  inches or less in depth pipes weep holes and authorized openings for utilities of  yd or less in volume when any of these items occur in structural concrete which is to be paid for on a cubic yard basis .
D. When the bottom of foundations for concrete structures is required to be at a definite elevation within rock excavation as shown on the Plans or otherwise designated the quantity to be measured will be the number of cubic yards of concrete actually and satisfactorily placed above a plane at one foot below the above specified plan elevation and within the neat lines of the structure as shown on the Plans or on authorized changes in the Plans .
If the ledge rock is excavated below the plane at one foot below the plan elevation without authorization then this space shall be replaced with concrete of the same composition as required for the structure foundation but will not be measured for payment .
E. For the purposes of making pay adjustments under Quality Level Analysis Method A or Method B quantities of lots and sublots shall be determined as outlined under Section .
Acceptance Methods A and B and under Section .
Basis of Payment .
F. Transverse saw cut grooving of concrete wearing surfaces complete and accepted will be measured for payment as one lump sum . .
Basis of Payment The accepted work done under structural concrete of the classes and for the types of work required will be paid for at the Contract unit price per cubic yard or at the Contract lump sum price for the respective Contract items involved .
Payment for both the unit price and the lump sum price items will be full compensation for furnishing and installing bridge drains pier nose armor water stops expansion joint filler PVC or plastic tube drains asphalt roll roofing roofing felt asphalt for painting or covering various type of joints all required sandblasting highpressure water cleaning bonding curing and joint sealing and all incidentals necessary to complete the work satisfactorily .
No direct payment will be made for concrete admixtures .
No price adjustments will be made to the lump sum bid for the respective items that are bid lump sum except when quantity changes are directed by the Department .
It will be the responsibility of the Contractor to verify the estimated quantities prior to submitting bid documents .
Transverse saw cut grooving of concrete wearing surfaces will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price which shall be payment for furnishing all materials labor and equipment including depth gauges and all incidentals to satisfactorily complete the work .
Payment for structural concrete culvert connection shall include drilling and grouting the dowels into the existing headwall and excavation .
Reinforcing will be paid for under Pay Item .
Reinforcing Steel Fabricated and Delivered and Pay Item .
Reinforcing Steel Placing .
Reinforcing steel railings stone curbing and any material that may be required for bridge lighting systems will be measured and paid for separately as provided in the appropriate sections .
Implementation of the QCP and costs associated with acceptance test sampling shall be incidental to related items .
All costs associated with obtaining testing and evaluating drilled core specimens for dispute resolution will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to related items .
Pay adjustments will be made only for castinplace concrete .
Pay adjustments shall be computed on the actual final quantity for unit price items .
Pay adjustments shall be computed on the estimated quantity for lump sum items except when precast deck panels are used or when quantity changes are directed by the Department .
When precast deck panels are used the precast deck panel quantity as computed from the Working Drawings shall be deducted from the estimated lump sum quantity to determine the new estimated quantity that will be used to compute pay adjustments .
When Departmentdirected quantity changes are made this quantity shall be added to or subtracted from the estimated lump sum quantity to determine the new estimated quantity that will be used to compute pay adjustments .
When precast deck panels are used and Departmentdirected quantity changes are made under the same lump sum item the combined quantity change shall be added to or subtracted from the estimated lump sum quantity to determine the new estimated lump sum quantity that will be used to compute pay adjustments .
Pay adjustments will be made according to the formula in Section .. P the unit value for pay adjustment purposes is specified in Special Provision Section Structural Concrete QCQA Acceptance Methods .
P values as specified in Special Provision Section reflect the price per cubic yard for all pay adjustment purposes. . Pay Adjustment for Compressive Strength Methods A and B Pay factors PF for pay adjustments for compressive strength will be determined using the Quality Level Analysis as specified in Section . . Pay Adjustment for Chloride Permeability Methods A and B Pay factors PF for pay adjustments for Chloride Permeability will be determined using the Quality Level Analysis as specified in Section .
Values greater than coulombs for Class A concrete or coulombs for Class LP concrete shall be subject to rejection and replacement at no additional cost to the Department. . Pay Adjustment for Air Content Methods A and B Pay factors PF for pay adjustments for air content will be determined using the Quality Level Analysis as specified in Section . . Pay Adjustments for Compressive Strength Chloride Permeability and Air Content Methods A and B The Composite Pay Factor CPF for each lot of concrete shall be computed as follows CPF Compressive Strength PF .
Air Content PF .
Chloride Permeability PF .
The pay adjustment for each lot of concrete shall be computed as follows Lot Pay Adjustment P x CPF x Lot Size There will be no positive pay adjustments for Method B Concrete. . Pay Adjustment Method C When the Department determines that Method C concrete which does not meet the specified limits may remain in place payment will be reduced in accordance with Table .
The quantity to which the pay reduction shall apply will be determined by the Resident .
TABLE METHOD C PAY REDUCTIONS Class LP Class A Class S Class Fill Compressive Strength Strength Range in PSI and Pay Reduction per CY to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to Removal Removal to to Removal Removal Chloride Permeability Permeability Range in Coulombs and Pay Reduction per CY to to NA NA to to NA NA to to NA NA to to NA NA Removal Removal NA NA Entrained Air Air Range in Percent and Pay Reduction per CY .
Removal .
Removal NA .
Removal .
to . . to .
NA .
to . . to . . to .
NA .
to . . to . . to .
Acceptable .
to . . to .
Acceptable NA .
to . . to .
Acceptable .
to . . to .
NA .
to . . to . . to .
NA .
to . . to . . to .
NA .
to . .
Removal .
Removal NA .
Removal All Ranges Are Inclusive Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Structural Concrete Abutments and Retaining Walls Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Abutments and Retaining Walls Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Abutments and Retaining Walls placed under water Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Abutments and Retaining Walls Lump Sum placed under water .
Structural Concrete Piers Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Piers Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Piers placed under water Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Piers placed under water Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Superstructure Slab Lump Sum . .
Structural Concrete Roadway and Sidewalk Slab on Steel Bridges Structural Concrete Roadway and Sidewalk Slab on Concrete Bridges Lump Sum Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Superstructure Tbeam Type Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Rigid Frame Structures Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Rigid Frame Structures Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Wearing Surface on Bridges Lump Sum .
Saw Cut Grooving Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Box Culvert Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Approach Slab Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Culvert End wall Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Culvert End wall Lump Sum .
Structural Concrete Box Culvert Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Superstructure Slab Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Roadway and Sidewalk Slab on Steel Bridges Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Superstructure Tbeam Type Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Wearing Surface on Bridges Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Approach Slab Cubic Yard .
Structural Concrete Culvert Connection Cubic Yard .
. . Low Permeability Concrete Structural Concrete Curbs and Sidewalks Concrete Fill Cubic Yard Lump Sum Cubic Yard SECTION REINFORCING STEEL .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing reinforcing steel bars plain galvanized stainless epoxycoated zinc and epoxy dualcoated or lowcarbon chromium welded wire fabric and mechanicalwelded reinforcing steel splices in accordance with these specifications and other applicable Contract Documents. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials Reinforcing Steel .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric . .
Schedule of Material When the Department does not furnish reinforcing steel schedules the Contractor shall submit order lists bending diagrams and bar layout drawings to the Resident for approval .
The reinforcing steel shall not be ordered until these lists and drawings are approved .
Approval shall not relieve the Contractor of full responsibility for the satisfactory completion of this item .
When the Department allows the use of precast concrete deck panels or any other significant changes that affect the quantity of reinforcing steel the Contractor shall be responsible for revising the reinforcing steel schedule the revised schedule shall be submitted to the Resident for approval. . Protection of Material Reinforcement either plain galvanized stainless epoxy coated zinc and epoxy dualcoated or lowcarbon chromium shall be stored on skids or other supports a minimum of inches above the ground surface and protected at all times from damage and surface contamination .
The storage supports shall be constructed of wood or other material that will not damage the surface of the reinforcement or epoxy coating .
Bundles of bars shall be stored on supports in a single layer .
Each bundle shall be placed on the supports out of contact with adjacent bundles .
Coated and uncoated steel reinforcing bars should be stored separately .
Do not use carbon steel tools chains slings etc .
when fabricating or handling stainless steel reinforcing bars use only nylon or polypropylene slings .
Prior to shipping ensure that all chains and steel bands will not come into direct contact with stainless steel reinforcing bars .
Place wood or other soft materials e.g .
thick cardboard under the tiedowns .
Alternatively use nylon or polypropylene straps to secure stainless steel reinforcing bars .
When bundles of plain reinforcement steel and stainless steel reinforcing bars must be shipped one on top of the other the stainless steel reinforcing bars should be loaded on top .
Use wooden spacers to separate the two materials .
If it is expected that epoxycoated or zinc and epoxy dualcoated bars will be required to be stored outdoors for a period in excess of two months then they shall be protected from ultraviolet radiation . .
Fabrication Bending of reinforcing bars and tolerances for bending of reinforcing bars shall be in conformance with the latest edition of the Manual of Standard Practice of the Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute and the Detailing Manual of the American Concrete Institute .
Unless otherwise specifically authorized bars shall be bent cold. . Epoxy Coating Reinforcing steel specified on the design drawings to be epoxy coated or zinc and epoxy dualcoated shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A EpoxyCoated Steel Reinforcing Bars or ASTM A Zinc and Epoxy DualCoated Steel Reinforcing Bars as applicable and the following requirements a .
The Contractor shall furnish a written certification that at the point of application of the coating and at the reinforcing steel fabrication shop the coating the coated bars and the handling and packaging of the coated bars meet all the requirements specified in Section .. and Section .
of AASHTO M ASTM A or .. and .
of ASTM A as applicable and Section .
of these specifications .
b. Patching material as specified in Section .
of AASHTO M ASTM A shall be supplied for both shop and field patching of epoxycoated and dualcoated reinforcing steel .
The patching material shall be supplied as required but at not less than the following rates to bars quart ft. of bar or fraction thereof to bars quart ft. of bar or fraction thereof and up quart ft. of bar or fraction thereof c. All testing shall be as specified in AASHTO M ASTM A or ASTM A as applicable except that the frequency of testing for adhesion of the coating shall be two bars of each size out of all bars coated with each individual batch or lot of epoxy resin or two bars of each size out of all bars coated in an eight hour period whichever is greater .
d. If a reinforcing bar fabrication shop uses previously stockpiled bars to supply the requirements of this Contract the fabrication shop shall furnish copies of all certificates required to be furnished by the coating applicator under a. above .
The certificates furnished shall be directly traceable to the actual bars used through batch numbers order numbers or similar information .
If such certification is not available the Department reserves the right to perform the tests specified under AASHTO M ASTM A or ASTM A as applicable at the expense of the Contractor .
For bars supplied from stock the fabrication shop shall supply all patching material specified under b. above .
e. The Contractor shall notify the Resident at least one week prior to the start of any coating application so that the Resident or their designated representative may be present at the beginning of the application of the coating. . Patching of Epoxy Coating Patching required at the point of application of the epoxy coating shall be done in conformance with the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A .
All patching related guidelines in ASTM A or A Section X Guidelines for JobSite Practices shall be considered mandatory .
At the reinforcing steel fabrication shop and at the job site all nicks cuts scratches cracks abrasions sheared ends etc .
visible to the naked eye shall be repaired using patching material supplied as specified under Section .
b .
To the greatest extent possible repairs to each days production at the fabrication shop and each days placement at the job site shall be done before the end of each working day .
If damaged areas do become rusted or contaminated with foreign matter then these areas shall be cleaned by sandblasting or an equally effective method such that all visible rust andor foreign matter is removed prior to patching. . Zinc Coating Reinforcing steel specified on the design drawings to be zinccoated galvanized shall meet the requirements of ASTM A ZincCoated Galvanized Steel Bars for Concrete Reinforcement .
Bars shall have a Class coating per ASTM A and shall be galvanized after fabrication .
Bending of galvanized bars in the field shall not be allowed unless approved by the Resident .
Damage to the zinc coating as a result of fieldbending shall be repaired in accordance with Section of ASTM A .
The Contractor shall furnish a written certification from the galvanizer that the material was manufactured and tested in accordance with ASTM A together with the report of the test results at the time of shipment. . Packaging and Handling of EpoxyCoated and ZincCoated Galvanized Bars All handling of epoxycoated dualcoated and galvanized reinforcing bars by mechanical means shall be done by equipment having padded contact areas or by the use of nylon webbing slings .
The use of chains or wire rope slings shall not be allowed even when used with padding .
All bundles of coated bars shall be lifted with a strongback spreader bar multiple supports or a platform bridge to prevent bartobar abrasion from sags in the bundles .
Support points during lifting or transporting of bundled coated bars shall be spaced at a maximum of feet .
Bundled bars shall be strapped together with nonmetallic or padded straps in a manner to prevent bartobar abrasion due to relative movement between bars .
Bars loaded for transport shall be loaded and strapped down in a manner that will prevent damage from motion and vibration to the greatest extent possible .
Bundles of bent bars shall be transported strapped to wooden platforms or shall be crated .
All individual bundles and layers of bundles shall be separated and supported by dunnage .
Individual bars shall be handled in a manner that prevents damage to the coating due to abrasion or impact and at no time shall any bar be moved by dragging over any surface including other reinforcing bars .
Sufficient personnel shall be assigned to assure that there is compliance with the above .
All packaging and handling related guidelines in ASTM A A or A Section X Guidelines for JobSite Practices shall be considered mandatory where not already covered by this specification . .
Placing and Fastening All steel reinforcement shall be accurately placed in the positions shown on the Plans and shall be firmly held there during the placing and setting of the concrete .
Immediately before placing concrete steel reinforcement shall be free from all foreign material which could decrease the bond between the steel and concrete .
Such foreign material shall include but not be limited to dirt loose mill scale excessive rust paint oil bitumen and dried concrete mortar .
Bars shall be fastened together at all intersections except where spacing is less than foot in either direction in which case fastening at alternate intersections of each bar with other bars will be permitted providing this will hold all the bars securely in position .
This fastening may be done using tightly twisted wire or by welding when permitted by the Fabrication Engineer .
All welding shall be done in accordance with this specification .
Welders must be qualified by passing qualification tests for the process and position to be used in accordance with AWS D. Structural Welding Code Reinforcing Steel .
Welding shall only be done when performed in accordance with a welding procedure approved by the Fabrication Engineer .
Weld area preheat shall comply with AWS D .. Weld areas shall be free of cracks undercut or other deficiencies injurious to the reinforcing steel .
Welds are not permitted within two bar diameters of a bend if the bend radius is less than bar diameters .
Welds must comply with testing and sampling requirements in the Fabrication and Mechanical Properties sections of AASHTO M ASTM A. Welds shall be able to withstand a static load of pounds applied perpendicular to the reinforcing grid .
Tension specimens must meet the material requirements of the type bar used when tested with a welded joint approximately at the center of the specimen .
Frequency of testing shall be for every square feet or fraction thereof of reinforcing grid fastened by welding .
No welding for fastening or supporting reinforcing steel in areas of high tensile stresses will be permitted .
Welding on epoxycoated or dualcoated reinforcing steel will not be permitted under any condition .
In general no welding will be permitted on the main reinforcing steel of superstructures .
Proper distances from the forms shall be maintained by means of chairs stays blocks ties hangers or other approved means .
Chairs used for this purpose shall be plastic plastic coated epoxy coated or plastic tipped .
Where stainless steel reinforcement is specified the plastic tipped chairs shall be made of stainless steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM A Type or L. Blocks used for this purpose shall be precast portland cement mortar blocks of approved shape and dimensions .
Blocks shall not be used in cases where the blocks will be visible in the finished product .
Layers of bars may be separated by precast portland cement mortar blocks or other approved devices .
The use of pebbles pieces of broken stone or brick metal pipe or wooden blocks shall not be permitted .
The placing of reinforcement as concrete placement progresses without definite and secure means of holding the steel in its correct position shall not be permitted except in the case of welded steel wire fabric or reinforcing bar grids .
Epoxycoated dualcoated or galvanized reinforcing bars supported on formwork shall rest on coated wire bar supports or on bar supports made of dielectric material or other acceptable materials .
Wire bar supports shall be coated with dielectric material for a minimum distance of inches from the point of contact with the reinforcing bars .
Reinforcing bars used as support bars shall be epoxycoated or zinccoated as applicable .
In walls spreader bars shall be epoxy coated or zinccoated as applicable .
Tie wire for epoxycoated zinc and epoxy dualcoated galvanized stainless or lowcarbon chromium reinforcing steel shall be soft annealed wire that has been nylon epoxy or plastic coated .
Tie wire for stainless steel reinforcement may also be uncoated stainless steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM A Type or L. gauge or heavier black annealed ferrous metal wire may also be used for lowcarbon chromium or plain reinforcement .
Stainless steel reinforcement shall not be tied to any other type of reinforcement galvanized attachments or conduits or any other dissimilar metal including concrete formwork hardware .
Direct contact is not acceptable .
When stainless steel reinforcing must be near other steel reinforcing galvanized metals or dissimilar metal formwork hardware a minimum of one inch clearance between the two metals shall be maintained .
Where insufficient space exists to maintain this minimum the least significant metal subject to the Residents approval may be sleeved with a continuous inch minimum thickness polyethylene or nylon tube extending at least one inch in each direction past the point of closest contact between the two dissimilar metals and bound with nylon or polypropylene cable ties .
When formwork for casting concrete is made of uncoated steel or stainless steel the use of galvanized steel reinforcing bars shall require an electrical isolation of the formwork from the galvanized reinforcement .
The Contractor is referred to Section X of ASTM A Guidelines for Use of Galvanized Reinforcing Bars with NonGalvanized Steel Formwork for more information .
Field bending or cutting of epoxycoated or dualcoated reinforcing bars will not be allowed unless otherwise indicated on the Plans or permitted by the Resident .
When field bending or cutting is allowed all damaged coating areas shall be repaired in accordance with the patching requirements Section .. All placing and fastening related guidelines in ASTM A or A Section X Guidelines for JobSite Practices shall be considered mandatory where not already covered by this specification .
Bars in bridge seats shall be placed so as to clear anchor bolts .
When specified on the Plans reinforcing steel shall be anchored into drilled holes .
The anchoring material shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List Type Anchoring Materials .
Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
At each anchor location existing reinforcing shall be located to avoid drilling through existing bars .
Where interferences are found to exist location adjustments will be determined by the Resident .
Minimum embedment lengths of reinforcing bars shall comply with the manufacturers published recommendations for the anchoring material selected .
These embedment lengths shall be verified by the Resident before installation of the reinforcing bars .
The reinforcing steel lengths indicated on the Plans may be reduced at the Contractors option to the determined minimum embedment lengths .
Reinforcement shall be inspected and approved by the Resident before any concrete is placed. . Splicing Reinforcing bars shall be spliced in accordance with the requirements of this section and in the locations shown on the Plans .
No modifications of or additions to the splice arrangements shown on the Plans shall be made without the Residents prior approval .
Any additional splices authorized shall be staggered as much as possible .
All splices shall be made in a manner that will ensure that not less than percent of the clear concrete cover and not less than percent of the minimum clear distance to other bars will be maintained as compared to the cover and clear distance requirements for the unspliced bar .
Lapped splices shall be made by placing the bars in contact and wiring them together .
Splice laps shall be made in accordance with the following table unless otherwise noted on the Plans US CUSTOMARY UNITS Minimum Lap Splice Length inches Bar Type Bar Size Plain or Galvanized Epoxy or DualCoated Lowcarbon Chromium Stainless Lap Splice lengths are based on the following parameters Minimum centerto center spacing between bars of inches nominal yield strength of the reinforcing steel equal to ksi ksi for lowcarbon chromium reinforcement ksi for stainless steel reinforcement minimum day compressive strength of concrete equal to psi Class B tension lap splice .
When any of the preceding parameters are altered appropriate minimum lap splice lengths will be as shown on the Plans .
When lap splices are placed horizontally in an element where the concrete depth below the splice will be inches or more the indicated lap splice lengths shall be multiplied by a factor of ..
Mechanical couplers may be used for splicing reinforcing bars provided they are approved by the Resident and conform to the following requirements a .
Tension Couplers Couplers shall be able to develop .
times the theoretical yield strength of the spliced bar in tension .
Bolted and wedgelock type couplers will not be allowed .
b .
Compression Couplers Couplers shall be capable of maintaining the spliced bars in alignment prior to and during concrete placement .
For reinforcing bars designed to act in compression the individual bar ends shall be within  degrees of being square to the final inches of the bar .
Additionally abutting bar ends shall be in contact and the angle of the gap between abutting bar ends shall be degrees or less .
c. Mechanical Couplers Any mechanical couplers using a threaded splicer and dowel in combination requiring a lapped splice with the reinforcing bars shall have a minimum lap splice length as required by this Section .
Welded splices may be made by the Thermit process or with the approval of the Resident by the shielded metal arc welding process or the selfshielded fluxcore arc welding process .
The latter two processes shall be used in strict conformance with the requirements of the latest edition of AWS D. Structural Welding Code Welding Reinforcing Steel and any applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
The Contractor shall submit complete details of their proposed method of making welded splices for the Residents approval. . Lapping Sections of welded steel wire fabric shall be securely fastened to adjoining sections and overlapped .
All laps for wire sizes D thru D shall be inches .
Reinforcing bar grids shall be spliced as required for the individual bars per the table in Section .
Splicing . .
Substitution Substitution of different size bars shall not be permitted except with the written authorization of the Resident . .
Method of Measurement Reinforcing steel bars either plain galvanized stainless epoxycoated zinc and epoxy dualcoated or lowcarbon chromium shall be measured by the computed number of pounds or by the lump sum of steel reinforcement authorized as indicated in the Contract .
Welded steel wire fabric shall be measured by the computed number of pounds or by the lump sum of fabric authorized as indicated in the Contract .
Splices made using mechanical devices or by welding as shown on the Plans or required by the specifications will be measured as the number of splices of each kind satisfactorily made and accepted .
Weights will be computed in accordance with the following For steel bars either plain galvanized stainless epoxycoated zinc and epoxy dualcoated or lowcarbon chromium weights will be computed in accordance with the following table US CUSTOMARY UNITS Pounds per Foot Bar Size Weight .
. . . . . . . . For welded steel wire fabric weights will be computed in accordance with the following table US CUSTOMARY UNITS Size in inches by by by by Gauge W. by W. W. by W. W. by W. W. by W. Weight lbs .
ft For other sizes of fabric the commercially recognized weights will be used .
No addition to or deduction from the theoretical weight per foot of the uncoated bars will be made because of additional requirements for blast cleaning and epoxy zinc or dualcoating of the bars .
Lapped splices and splices made using mechanical devices or by welding that are authorized at the Contractors request will not be measured for payment . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of reinforcing steel either plain stainless or low carbon chromium will be paid for at the Contract unit price per pound or by the lump sum for each item involved complete and accepted .
The accepted quantity of epoxycoated galvanized or zinc and epoxy dualcoated reinforcing steel will be paid for at the Contract unit price per pound or by the lump sum for each item involved complete and accepted and all additional expenses that may be incurred by the Contractor or their suppliers as a result of the requirements in these specifications will be considered incidental to and included in the Contract unit price per pound or lump sum price .
When reinforcing steel schedules are required they shall be considered incidental to the related Contract items .
Payment for work associated with revisions to the reinforcing steel schedule required when the Department allows the use of precast concrete deck panels or any other significant changes that affect the quantity of reinforcing steel shall be considered incidental to related Contract items .
The accepted quantity of welded steel wire fabric will be paid for at the Contract unit price per pound or by the lump sum in place complete and accepted .
The accepted quantity of mechanical andor welded splices will be paid for at the Contract unit price each complete and accepted for each type specified .
Payment will not be made for any materials used to hold reinforcement in place or for extra weight due to substitutions and splices made for the Contractors convenience .
When reinforcing steel is specified to be anchored into drilled holes no additional payment will be made for drilling and anchoring reinforcing steel or cutting of reinforcing steel to embedment lengths .
Payment for additional material samples as required for testing by the Department shall be considered incidental to related Contract items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Reinforcing Steel Fabricated and Delivered Pound .
Reinforcing Steel Fabricated and Delivered Lump Sum .
Reinforcing Steel Placing Pound .
Reinforcing Steel Placing Lump Sum .
EpoxyCoated Reinforcing Steel Pound Fabricated and Delivered .
EpoxyCoated Reinforcing Steel Lump Sum Fabricated and Delivered .
EpoxyCoated Reinforcing Steel Placing Pound .
EpoxyCoated Reinforcing Steel Placing Lump Sum .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric Complete in place Pound .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric Complete in place Lump Sum .
MechanicalWelded Splice Each .
LowCarbon Chromium Reinforcement Pound Fabricated and Delivered .
LowCarbon Chromium Reinforcement Lump Sum Fabricated and Delivered .
LowCarbon Chromium Reinforcement Placing Pound .
LowCarbon Chromium Reinforcement Placing Lump Sum .
ZincCoated Galvanized Reinforcing Steel Pound Fabricated and Delivered .
ZincCoated Galvanized Reinforcing Steel Lump Sum Fabricated and Delivered .
ZincCoated Galvanized Reinforcing Steel Placing Pound .
ZincCoated Galvanized Reinforcing Steel Placing Lump Sum .
Stainless Steel Reinforcement Pound Fabricated and Delivered .
Stainless Steel Reinforcement Lump Sum Fabricated and Delivered .
Stainless Steel Reinforcement Placing Pound .
Stainless Steel Reinforcement Placing Lump Sum .
Zinc and Epoxy DualCoated Reinforcing Steel Pound Fabricated and Delivered .
Zinc and Epoxy DualCoated Reinforcing Steel Lump Sum Fabricated and Delivered .
Zinc and Epoxy DualCoated Reinforcing Steel Pound Placing .
Zinc and Epoxy DualCoated Reinforcing Steel Lump Sum Placing SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .
Description This work shall consist of detailing fabricating and erecting structural steel bridges ancillary bridge products and other steel structures .
Materials workmanship inspection and documentation not specifically addressed by this Specification shall done be in accordance with the applicable sections of the AASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code including Commentary the D. Code the AASHTO Guide Specification For Highway Bridge Fabrication with HPS W HPS W STEEL the Fab Guide and other Standards and Specifications referenced herein .
ALL REQUIREMENTS IN THIS SPECIFICATION ARE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CONTRACTOR UNLESS NOTED OTHERWISE. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following sections of Division Materials Structural Steel .
HeavyHex Structural Bolts Washers Nuts and DTIs .
Preformed Pads .
Bronze or CopperAlloy Bearing and Expansion Plates .
ColdFinished Carbon Steel Shafting .
Castings .
Note The Department maintains a list of preapproved welding consumables that the Contractor may use without furnishing Certificates of Conformance from the electrodeconsumable manufacturer .
This list is available on the Departments Qualified Products List of Electrodes and ElectrodeFlux Combinations . .
Drawings Prepare shop detail erection and other necessary drawings in accordance with Section .Working Drawings .
Show nondestructive examination symbols on the Shop Drawings .
Include a fastener assembly table showing the number size length location and number of all bolts .
Procedure Qualification Records and Weld Procedure Specifications are part of the shop drawing submittal .
Weld Procedure Specifications that have been previously reviewed by the Department and are in conformance with the D. Code need not be re submitted .
The drawings will be reviewed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section .
of the Standard Specifications the AASHTONSBA Shop Detail Drawing ReviewApproval Guidelines G. and this Specification .
Review times will be in accordance with Section .. of the Standard Specifications . .
Facility Requirements Fabricate steel in a facility holding a current AISC or MDOT shop certification as follows Type of Product Type of Certification Required .
Welded Plate Girders .
Spliced Rolled Beams .
Complex Bridges and Movable Bridges .
All Structures that include the use of High Performance Grade Steel HPS AISC CBR .
Unspliced Rolled Beam Bridges .
Steel for Bridge Repair and Rehabilitation AISC CBR or SBR .
Ancillary Products See Section . .
Structural Supports See Section .
Any AISC Fabrication Certification or MaineDOT Application of protective coatings requires a P endorsement or SSPC QP Certification .
Fracture Critical fabrication requires an F endorsement .
All materials fabricated in a noncertified shop will be rejected .
Work shall not be subcontracted to a noncertified facility except that machining operations may be performed in noncertified facilities as approved by the Fabrication Engineer. . Notice of Beginning Work Give the Fabrication Engineer a minimum of two weeks notice for instate work and three weeks notice for outofstate work prior to beginning production .
Provide the Fabrication Engineer with a copy of the production schedule .
If the production schedule changes notify the Fabrication Engineer no less than working days prior to the initial startup date .
If work is suspended on a project the Fabrication Engineer will require hours notice prior to the resumption of work .
Any work done without the Quality Assurance Inspector QAI present will be subject to rejection . .
Inspection Quality Control QC is the responsibility of the Contractor .
Inspect all aspects of the work and supervise all nondestructive examination NDE .
Record measurements and test results in a clear and legible manner .
Reject materials and workmanship that do not meet contract requirements .
The Contractor may perform NDE in addition to the minimum required .
Make the results of all measurements and testing available to the QAI .
Quality Assurance QA is the prerogative of the Department .
The QAI will ensure that the QC Department is performing properly verify documentation periodically inspect workmanship and witness NDE .
The QAI will schedule testing deemed necessary by the Fabrication Engineer in addition to the minimum testing requirements in a manner that minimizes interference with the production schedule . .
Inspectors Authority The QAI has the authority to reject material or workmanship that does not meet the contract requirements .
The acceptance of material or workmanship by the QAI will not prevent subsequent rejection if the work or material is found unacceptable. . Rejections Correct or replace rejected material andor workmanship .
Generate a nonconformance report NCR .
Provide a copy to the QAI and forward a copy to the Fabrication Engineer for review and comments .
In the event that an item fabricated under this Specification does not meet the contract requirements but is deemed suitable for use by the Department said item may be accepted in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications see .
NonConforming Work. . Facilities for Fabrication Inspection Provide a private office at the fabrication plant for QA personnel .
The office shall be in close proximity to the work .
The office shall be climate controlled to maintain the temperature between F and F and have the exits closed by a doors equipped with a lock and two keys which shall be furnished to the QAI s. The QAIs office shall meet the following minimum requirements Description Quantity Office area minimum ft Drafting Table Surface ft Drafting stoolseach Office Desk Ergonomic Swivel Chairs per inspector Folding Chairs Highspeed internet connection ports or wireless per inspector Fluorescent Lighting of ftcandles minimum for all work areas Volt Cycle Electric Wall Outlets Wall Closet Waste Basket with trash bags Water Cooler Broom Dustpan Cleaning Materialsfloor surfaces windows duration of the project The Contractor is responsible for disposing of trash and supplying commercially bottled water for the water cooler .
The QAI will have the option to reject any furniture or supplies provided to the Inspectors Office based on general condition .
Provide parking spaces for QA personnel in close proximity to the QAIs Office .
Maintain the pathway between the parking area and the QAIs office so that it is free of obstacles debris snow and ice .
The facilities and all furnishings shall remain the property of the Contractor upon completion of the work .
Payment for the facilities heating lighting telephone installation internet connection basic monthly telephone and internet charges and all furnishings shall be incidental to the Contract .
Failure to comply with the above requirements will be considered denial of access to work for the purpose of inspection .
The Department will reject all work done when access for inspection is denied. . Mill Test Reports Provide legible Certified Mill Test Reports CMTRs for all steel and iron material .
Provide the CMTRs prior to fabrication .
If the Contractor begins fabrication including cutting material before the QAI has verified the CMTRs and mill markings the material will be rejected .
Furnish Certified Mill Test Reports for fasteners .
The supplier shall perform a Rotational Capacity Test RCT for both plain and galvanized bolts in accordance with AASHTO M MM ASTM A for each combination of bolts nuts and washers supplied .
Each combination shall be assigned a unique Rotational Capacity RC lot number. . Material Identification and Control Mark steel plates and shapes as specified in AASHTO M ASTM A .
Only use material from stock if it can be positively identified properly documented and the direction of rolling can be determined .
Store material and fabricated items off the ground .
Protect the material and fabricated items from dirt grease other foreign materials and significant corrosion .
Store fasteners in a protected environment .
Provide four fastener assemblies for each lot length and combination to the Fabrication Engineer for testing .
A fastener assembly consists of a bolt washer nut and direct tension indicator when required .
Provide the fastener samples to the Fabrication Engineer immediately upon delivery to the fabrication shop or job site .
Provide Certificates of Conformance for welding consumables that are not on the Departments preapproved electrode list . .
Protective Coatings If paint is specified apply the coating in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications or Special Provision as applicable .
When galvanizing is specified clean the steel in accordance with SSPCSP prior to galvanizing .
Galvanize in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A .
Galvanize fasteners in accordance with ASTM F or AASHTO M Class ASTM B Class .
Galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a watersoluble lubricant containing a dye that contrasts with the color of the galvanizing. . Unpainted Steel Clean all surfaces to a minimum SSPCSP Commercial Blast Cleaning .
Steel may be abrasiveblast cleaned prior to fabrication .
Clean steel that is abrasive blast cleaned prior to fabrication in accordance with SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning after fabrication is complete .
Disassemble bolted field splices and solvent clean all faying surfaces in accordance with SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning after drilling or reaming is complete .
Inspect the splices prior to reassembly .
HIGHWAY BRIDGE FABRICATION .
Materials for Bridges The grade of steel is designated on the Plans .
Do not substitute material without the approval of the Fabrication Engineer. . Handling Material Handle material in a manner that prevents nicks gouges or other damage from chains wire ropes or other handling devices during all phases of fabrication. . Plates for Fabricated Members Cut plates subject to calculated stress including splice plates so that the direction of rolling is parallel to the primary stresses .
The direction of primary stresses for web and field splice material is parallel to the flanges unless otherwise shown .
Transfer heat numbers to each primary member used in fabrication .
Primary members include flanges webs splice plates bearing stiffeners connection plates and diaphragm material on curved bridges. . Correcting Materials Correct material by a method that does not damage the material .
If heating of the steel is required submit a written procedure to the Fabrication Engineer for review .
Do not use external force in conjunction with heating unless authorized in the procedure .
Following corrective work inspect the steel with nondestructive testing methods acceptable to the Fabrication Engineer .
The presence of cracks or fractures will be cause for rejection of the material. . Base Metal Repairs Make base metal repairs in accordance with the D. Code .
Submit an NCR to the Fabrication Engineer for review if the repair area exceeds the allowable limits for base metal repairs as specified in the D. Code .
Notify the QAI prior to beginning the repairs . .
Thermal Cutting Thermal cut steel using automatic equipment or a mechanical guide .
Adjust the rate of travel of the cutting equipment to prevent hardening the steel .
Do not cut material freehand . .
Edge Hardness Edge Hardness testing is not required . .
Edge Planing Plane sheared edges of plates greater than inch thick to a depth of inch . .
Bent Plates Coldbend rolled steel plates in accordance with the AASHTONSBA S . Steel Bridge Fabrication Guide Specifications Table .
and the following a The bend line will be at right angles to the direction of rolling .
b The radius of bends shall be such that no cracking of the plate occurs .
Measure the radii at the concave surface as follows MATERIAL Radius in terms of plate thickness inches ASTM Specification Grade T t t ASTM A Gr .
.t .t .t ASTM A Gr .
Gr.W .t .t .t ASTM A Gr .
W .t .t .t A radius of t is required if the plate is subject to calculated stresses c If a smaller radius is required heat the bend line to a temperature between  F and  F before bending .
Heat plates greater than inches in thickness to a temperature of between  F and  F before bending .
Do not heat HPSW without written approval of the Fabrication Engineer . .
Die Stamping Die stamp primary members including splice material diaphragms and cross frames on curved bridges in nostress locations .
Nostress locations include the ends of girders within the crosssectional area web splice plates in the middle third of the plate height and outside the outermost row of bolt holes and flange splice plate ends between the outermost row of holes and the edge .
Use bluntnose lowstress dies. . Camber and Curvature When camber or curvature is required for stringers or girders it will be specified on the Plans .
Measure and record specified camber or curvature using the same ordinates shown on the reviewed shop drawings after all welding is complete .
When no camber or curvature is specified variations in straightness of rolled shapes with and without cover plates shall not exceed the tolerances of AASHTO M ASTM A . . Heat Cambering and Curving Minor correction of camber or sweep of welded plate girders is considered part of ordinary shop fabrication practice and does not require an approved procedure however use the following guidelines .
Notify the QAI prior to beginning heat correction .
Do not use hammers .
Have suitable temperature indicating crayons at the work station .
Do not exceed  F . Cool in still air to  F. Below  F compressed air may be used All cambering and curving operations that are not corrective shall meet the following Use a cambercurving procedure reviewed by the Fabrication Engineer .
The procedure shall include .
The heating pattern and sequencing of heating .
Method of support of the member .
Proposed minimum and maximum base metal temperature .
Method of heating fuel nozzle size etc .
Clean structural steel to SSPC SP prior to heating .
Heat both the flanges and the web using two torches one torch on either side of the plate .
Do not use restraint or jacking devices unless approved by the Fabrication Engineer .
Submit calculations showing that the nominal bending stress in the member does not exceed .
Fy if restraint or jacking is proposed .
The target temperature for all ASTM A steel is  F. Steel heated in excess of F will be subject to rejection .
Measure the temperature of the steel with temperature indicating crayons applied to the heated area seconds after the torch is removed or with a pyrometer that has been calibrated within the past year .
Provide temperatureindicating crayons in increments of  F between  F and  F to each torch operator .
Stop the camberingcurving operation if a torch operator fails to demonstrate the proper skill and technique necessary to prevent potential damage to the steel .
Camber stringers and girders using a V pattern with a degree included angle that extends the full web depth less inches at the apex .
Heat the web first beginning at the apex of the triangle and proceeding toward the base .
Begin heating the flange immediately after completion of the web .
The Contractor may curve stringers and girders using a combination of line heats applied to the edge of both flanges simultaneously with automatic track torches and V heats .
V heats shall have an included angle of degrees and a minimum height of of the flange width .
Apply heat to adjacent areas on both flanges simultaneously .
Perform all cambering and curving in the presence of the QAI .
Heating a structural member without the QAI present shall be cause for rejection of the member .
Measure and record camber and sweep after the steel has reached ambient temperature and all stiffeners and connection plates have been welded. . Welding Qualify welders and Weld Procedure Specifications in accordance with the most recent edition of the D. Code .
Provide a list of qualified welders including process and position to the QAI prior to beginning fabrication .
Submit the Weld Procedure Specifications to the Fabrication Engineer for review prior to beginning work .
Weld Procedure Specifications previously reviewed and still valid in accordance with the D. Code are acceptable without re submission .
The range of heat input for Complete Joint Penetration groove welds is between kilojoulesinch kjin and kjin for singlearc processes .
Fillet welds joining primary members shall have a minimum heat input of kjin .
Make runoff tabs in accordance with the D. Code. . Welding Requirements Calibrate welding equipment at the intervals indicated in the D. Code .
Meters shall be accurate within throughout the range of the WPS .
Work done with equipment that is not properly calibrated will be rejected .
Provide copies of the calibration records to the QAI .
The QAI can require the Contractor to demonstrate the accuracy of the meters at any time .
Display a copy of the applicable Weld Procedure Specification at each welding station .
Weld within the parameters of the Weld Procedure Specification .
Failure to display a Weld Procedure Specification at the welding station will make all welding performed at that station subject to rejection .
Perform all preheat welding and postheat in accordance with the D. Code and this Specification .
Provide the appropriate temperature indicating crayons at each workstation to verify preheat .
Calibrated digital thermometers may be used with the approval of the Fabrication Engineer instead of temperature indicating crayons .
Weld flange plate and web plate butt joints web to flange welds stiffener and connection plate to web welds and cover plate to flange welds using an automatic weld process .
Make repairs with the same process used for the original welds except that repairs less than inches in length may be made with a different process using an approved Weld Procedure Specification .
Do not blend repair welds by grinding unless the original weld requires grinding. . Welded Fabrication Each side of complete joint penetration welds once begun shall be welded to completion without interruption or a delay between passes except as necessary to maintain interpass temperature requirements .
After backgouging the groove and inches on either side of the groove and through the thickness of the steel shall be preheated in accordance with the D. Code immediately before the resumption of welding .
Singlepass fillet welds may be qualified by a Fillet Weld Soundness Test performed in accordance with the D. Code as modified herein .
Perform the T test by welding the smallest fillet weld to be used in production on one side and the largest fillet weld used in production on the other side of the T. Macroetch the test specimens in accordance with the requirements of Clause Method of Testing Specimens of the D. Code .
Acceptance and retesting if required shall be in accordance with Clause Test Results Required and Retests of the D. Code .
The minimum heat input for singlepass fillet welds during testing and production shall be kilojoulesin. . Welding ASTM A HPS W Steel In addition to .
use the most recent edition of the D. Code and the Fab Guide as amended herein when welding ASTM A Gr .
HPS W. Use only consumables that produce weld metal with diffusible hydrogen of Hor less .
Handle and store consumables in accordance with the requirements of Clause of the D. Code .
Preheat in accordance with Clause of the D. Code through the thickness of the steel and three inches in all directions from the weldment .
Failure to properly preheat the steel will result in rejection of the weld metal .
Remove and reweld rejected weldments .
HPS W may be joined to Grade W steel using a Weld Procedure Specification qualified for Grade W steel if the diffusible hydrogen content of the deposited weld metal is H or less .
Use minimum preheat temperature for Gr .
HPS W in accordance with the D. Code .
Make weld runoff tabs for Gr .
HPS W in accordance with the D. Code except make them six inches long .
Remove runoff tabs and grind butt welds prior to nondestructive examination. . Nondestructive Testing Perform nondestructive testing in accordance with the D. Code and these Specifications .
The QAI will witness nondestructive testing .
Give the QAI adequate notice to facilitate the QAIs presence .
Failure to notify the QAI will result in re testing with the QAI present .
Document nondestructive testing on the appropriate forms from Annex III of the D. Code or an equivalent form. . Shop Assembly Assemble stringers and girders in accordance with the shop assembly drawings .
Measure and record the bearingtobearing dimensions the bearingto fieldsplice dimensions and the offset from the reference line dimensions as shown on the shop assembly drawings .
Give the QAI the opportunity to verify the measurements prior to disassembly. . Tolerances Dimensional tolerances for welded plate girders are described in the D. Code .
Dimensional tolerances for rolled shapes are described in AASHTO M ASTM A .
The tolerance for the length of any primary bridge member is inch .
The bearingtobearing tolerance is inch .
The bearing elevation tolerance is inch .
The offset tolerance for bolted field splices is inch . .
Match marking Match mark drill assembled or ream assembled field splice material prior to disassembly .
Preserve the match marking through field erection. . Holes for High Strength Bolts Oversize holes are not allowed unless noted on the Plans .
Drill bolt holes fullsize .
Splice plates may be used as onetime templates to drill webs and flanges .
The plates shall remain with the splice .
Replace damaged plates used as a template .
The Contractor may temporarily tack weld web splice plates to the web in the middle of the web only .
Completely remove tack welds by grinding and MT the tack areas .
Do not tack weld flange splice plates to flanges .
Holes for cross frames diaphragms and associated connection plates may be punched when the thickness of the plate is inch .
The diameter of the die shall not exceed the diameter of the punch by more than inch .
Holes shall be clean cut without torn or ragged edges .
Make holes cylindrical and perpendicular to the member .
Remove burrs from parts after drilling or reaming .
Remove all visible drilling oil lubricants and coolants including water soluble lubricants and coolants from faying surfaces in accordance with SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning .
The Contractor may thermal cut holes in bearing base plates using an automatic process .
Do not exceed a surface roughness of ANSI microinches . .
Accuracy of Holes Following the completion of the drilling of holes in a contiguous group with all plies of a connection in their proper position for assembly all bolt holes shall accept a pin inch smaller in diameter than the nominal bolt hole diameter .
Provide a pin of the applicable diameter for inspection purposes .
No finished bolt hole shall be located more than inch from its theoretical location .
The repair of mislocated holes shall be subject to the approval of the Fabrication Engineer. . Shop Bolts Install shop bolts in accordance with this Specification except that adequately lubricated fastener assemblies that have been Rotational Capacity Ro Cap tested by the supplier do not need to be Ro Cap tested prior to installation .
As an alternative Tension Control TC bolts meeting the requirements of ASTM F may be used with the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Submit a tensioning procedure for TC bolts to the Resident for review. . Bearings Finish bearings base plates and other contact surfaces to the requirements of Section . .
Marking and Delivery Mark each piece as shown on the Shop Drawings .
Place erection marks match marks and piece marks where they will not be exposed on the finished structure .
Notify the Fabrication Engineer after the girders and stringers have been loaded on trailers and prior to shipment .
Furnish the Resident copies of shipping documents and erection diagrams .
Package bolts of each length and diameter along with the required number of nuts and washers in waterproof containers .
Attach a list of the fastener assemblies including the identifying shipping lot number and RotationalCapacity lot number in a waterproof envelope to the outside of the container. . Handling and Storing Materials Store beams and girders in an upright position on platforms skids or other supports above the ground .
Support material in a manner that will prevent damage due to excessive deflection and torsion .
Do not use chains and wire rope slings in direct contact with fabricated members when being lifted or transported .
Store bolts under sheltered conditions at all times .
BRIDGE STEEL ERECTION .
Plans Provide the Resident with a steel erection plan for review prior to beginning steel erection .
Schedule a presteel erection meeting at the jobsite prior to the delivery of the steel to discuss the erection plan personnel qualifications adequacy of tools and equipment and any other areas of concern to the Resident .
If fabrication and erection of the Superstructure are done under separate contracts the Department will furnish detailed Plans for the Bridge or Bridges to the Contractor. . Methods and Equipment Submit plans for any false work andor modifications to an existing structure necessitated by construction loading to the Fabrication Engineer .
The false work andor modifications shall be designed constructed and maintained for the loads placed upon it .
False work calculations and design shall be stamped by a licensed Professional Engineer .
The review by the Fabrication Engineer shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for the safety of the method equipment or from carrying out the work in accordance with the plans and Specifications .
Do not build or erect false work until the Fabrication Engineer has reviewed and returned the plan. . Bearings and Anchorages Finish bridge seats true to line and grade .
Do not place bearings upon bridge seats that are improperly finished .
Cast anchor rods in place or set them in drilled holes .
If the anchor rods are set in drilled holes use an anchoring material from the MDOT Qualified Products List .
Anchor rods shall be capable of developing unconfined pullout strength of Kips and Kips for inch and  inch anchor rods respectively .
The Department reserves the right to perform inplace pullout tests .
Replace bolts failing to meet the pullout strength requirements .
Set bearings so that they are plumb or centered at  F. .
Assembling Steel Clean all faying surfaces before assembly .
Use drift pins in both the web and flange connections to assure alignment of all holes .
Use a minimum of eight drift pins in each flange and web connection .
Install and tension a minimum of of the bolts in each contiguous group before the member is released from the crane .
Tension field splices within hours of bolt installation .
Protect splices from rain or other conditions that will in the opinion of the Resident degrade the lubrication on the bolts . .
Connections Using High Strength Bolts Provide all necessary torque and power wrenches calibration equipment feeler gauges and labor required for the testing calibration installation and inspection of high strength bolts .
Provide a tensionmeasuring device SkidmoreWilhelm or approved equal and torque wrench both of which have been calibrated within months and are in good condition .
Provide calibration documentation .
Both the tensionmeasuring device and the torque wrench shall remain at the job site during steel erection .
The torque wrench shall have a maximum capacity that is approximately greater than the anticipated job torque .
Torque wrenches shall be equipped with a dial face gauge and a memory pointer that remains at the applied torque reading .
Torque wrenches shall be graduated in increments not to exceed two percent of the maximum capacity of the wrench and shall be readable to one percent of the maximum capacity. . Bolts Nuts Washers and Direct Tension Indicators Protect fasteners from dirt and moisture .
Take only as many fasteners as anticipated to be installed during a work shift from protected storage .
Return unused fasteners to protected storage at the end of the workday .
Clean and lubricate rusty and dirty fasteners prior to installation with a lubricant recommended by the bolt supplier or manufacturer .
Tension Control TC fasteners shall only be relubricated by the manufacturer .
Surfaces in contact with the bolt head and nut shall not have a slope more than to with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
Where an outer face of the bolted parts has a slope of more than to with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis a hardened beveled washer shall be used .
Bolted parts shall fit solidly together when assembled .
All faying surfaces shall be free of mill scale dirt burrs or other material that would prevent solid seating of the parts .
Install bolts with a hardened washer under the element turned in tightening .
Hardened washers are required over slotted and oversize holes. . Fastener Assemblies for Testing Provide fastener assemblies bolt washer nut and DTI if required to the Resident two weeks prior to beginning steel erection for testing .
Randomly select and package four assemblies of each lot length and diameter for independent verification testing .
Identify each size fastener assembly separately with the lot numbers of the boltwashernutDTI combinations clearly marked .
The cost of the assemblies is incidental to the appropriate contract items .
Replace unacceptable fastener assembly lots. . Verification Perform a Rotational Capacity Test RCT for each Rotational Capacity RC lot at the job site immediately prior to installation .
Do not use fasteners assemblies that have been used to perform the RCT in the final assembly of the steel .
If DTIs are used perform a DTI Verification Test for each production lot immediately prior to installation .
Give the Department adequate notification in order to witness both the RCT and DTI verification tests . .
Rotational Capacity Test The RCT is intended to verify the effectiveness of the lubricant and the compatibility of the components of the fastener assembly .
The test shall be conducted using a tensionmeasuring device SkidmoreWilhelm or equivalent and a torque wrench .
Select two fastener assemblies of each length and diameter from each RC lot .
Perform the RCT in the following manner .
Insert the fastener assembly in the tensionmeasuring device using enough hardened washers under the nut a minimum of one so that there is full nut engagement threads flush with the end of the nut and no more than threads visible after the assembly is brought to a snugtight condition with a hand wrench approximately of the Minimum Installation Tension from Table . . Mark the faceplate of the tension measuring device with a line at    and  .
Mark the torque wrench socket so that the total amount of nut rotation can be measured and recorded .
Note the lines are for measuring total rotation of the turned element and have nothing to do with minimum installation tension. . Bring the fastener assembly to at least the Minimum Installation Tension from Table using the torque wrench. . At a point after the required Minimum Installation Tension has been achieved measure and record the tension and the torque .
Take the reading as close as possible to the Minimum Installation Tension from Table .
Table Minimum Installation Tension Requirements and Turn Test TensionU.S .
Customary Bolt Diameter inches Installation Tension kips Turn Test Tension kips .
Further tighten the fastener assembly to the total rotation from snug tight specified in Table below Table Total Fastener Rotation from Snug Tight Bolt length up to and including diameters turn degrees Bolt length over diameters up to and including diameters turn degrees Bolt length over diameters and less than diameters degrees diameters and greater test not applicable .
Measure and record the tension after total rotation of the nut .
The measured tension must be equal to or greater than the Turn Test Tension value shown in Table for the diameter bolt being tested .
If the measured tension is less than the required Turn Test Tension the fastener assembly has failed . .
Upon completion of steps through a The torque measured in step shall not exceed the value obtained by the following equation Measured Torque .PD Where P Measured Bolt Tension pounds Step D Nominal Bolt Diameter feet bolt diameter in Inches divided by b If the torque measured in step is greater than the torque calculated in step the fastener has failed the test .
Relubricate all fasteners in the lot and retest .
c Disassemble each fastener assembly and run the nut down the full length of the threads excluding the grip length the length between the bolt head and washer face of the nut .
If evidence is found of torsional failure shear failure or stripping of the threads the assembly failed the test .
Slight necking in the grip length is not a failure .
d If either bolt assembly fails the test the RC lot has failed .
Relubricate all bolts from that lot and perform the test again .
If either bolt fails the second test the RC lot shall be rejected. . Test bolts that are too short to fit in the tensionmeasuring device in a solid joint such as a bearing stiffener or connection plate .
The hole in the joint may not be more than inch greater in diameter than the bolt being tested .
Randomly select two fastener assemblies from each RC lot .
Mark the nut relative to the steel joint in such a manner that rotation can be measured .
Snug tighten the bolt with a spud wrench using approximately the same effort used to snugtighten longer bolts in a tension measuring device .
Restrain the bolt with a wrench to prevent rotation .
Rotate the nut from snug tight to turn with a torque wrench .
Record the torque required to reach that rotation while the turned element is in motion .
If the measured torque exceeds the maximum torque listed in Table the fasteners have failed the test .
If the fasteners fail the first test relubricate all fasteners from that RC lot randomly select two samples and retest .
If there is no stripping or fracture the fasteners pass .
If the either fastener fails the second test the RC lot is rejected .
Table Maximum Allowable Torque Bolt Diameter inches Torque ftlbs .
Discard bolts used for the Rotational Capacity Test. . DTI Verification Test Perform the DTI Verification Test for each production lot of DTIs in combination with each RC lot of fasteners .
If any of the three test assemblies fails three additional samples from the same production lot shall be tested as the first .
If any of the three samples fails the second test the lot shall be rejected .
Perform the test in TWO STEPS .
Step is a test to determine that the DTIs are acceptable when the fastener is brought to the minimum allowable tension .
a Randomly select three fastener assemblies from each RC lot .
b Install each bolt in the tensionmeasuring device with the bolt head bearing against the faceplate the front of the tensionmeasuring device .
Place the DTI under the bolt head with the protrusions bearing against the washer face of the bolt .
This is done so that the DTI is accessible for inspection with a feeler gauge .
Install the nut and hardened washer using a filler sleeve between the bolt bushing the back of the tensionmeasuring device and the hardened washer under the nut .
Two or more hardened washers may be used under the nut instead of a filler sleeve if the washers do not interfere with the proper operation of the tensionmeasuring device .
When the bolt is brought to snugtight condition there should be to threads visible .
c Using two wrenches one to restrain the unturned element of the bolt assembly tighten the nut to the Bolt Tension listed in Table .
If an impact wrench is used tighten the bolt to approximately of the required tension and use a torque wrench to bring the fastener to the required tension .
TABLE Minimum Installation Tension U.S .
Customary Bolt Diameter inches Bolt Tension kips d Using a thickness gauge provided by the DTI manufacturer record the number of spaces between the protrusions on the DTI that a . inch thickness gage is refused .
e If the number of refusals exceeds the number in Table the DTI has failed the DTI Verification Test for minimum tension .
Reject the DTI lot .
TABLE If the test is a coated DTI the maximum number of spaces the gage is refused is the number of spaces on the DTI minus one .
Step is to determine the maximum bolt tension allowable using a DTI .
a After completing step the bolt shall be further tightened to the smallest gap to be used during installation .
Normally this is defined as a condition where all gaps refuse a . inch gage but at least one visible gap remains .
b Remove the bolt from the tension measuring device and turn the nut on the threads of the bolt by hand .
If the nut can be run the length of the threads excluding the thread run out the DTI lot is acceptable .
If the nut is unable to run the thread length at the smallest gap condition defined in a above the test shall be performed again using a larger acceptance gap .
Bolt Diameter inches  Number of Spaces in DTI Maximum Number of gaps in which gage is refused .
Installation and Tensioning High Strength Bolts Select one of the methods listed below for installing and tensioning high strength bolts .
Do not use standard torque determined by the use of tables or formulas that attempt to relate torque to tension . .
Installation Install a hardened washer under the turned element and a hardened washer on oversize holes .
Install fasteners in all holes in a contiguous group except for holes containing drift pins and bring them to a snug tight condition progressing systematically from the most severely restrained location in a connection to the free edges .
Do not remove the drift pins until a minimum of of the fasteners have been tensioned .
Do not force the bolts .
If the bolts can not be installed easily by hand correct the hole alignment by installing more drift pins. . Tensioning Install and tension bolts by the Calibrated Wrench method the Turn of Nut method with Direct Tension Indicators or Alternative Design Fasteners .
Tension the fasteners systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to the free edges . .
The Calibrated Wrench Method Adjustable pneumatic wrenches adjustable hydraulic wrenches or torque wrenches may be used .
Calibrate the wrench used for tensioning bolts at least once each shift with fastener assemblies of each diameter length and RC lot to be installed .
Calibrate pneumatic wrenches any time a section of hose has been added or eliminated .
Calibrate pneumatic wrenches any time the compressor is changed .
Randomly select five fastener assemblies of each length and RC lot for wrench calibration .
Install each of the fastener assemblies in the tension measuring device and install enough washers so at least three but no more than five threads are showing .
Install at least one hardened washer under the turned element .
Snug the bolt using the same procedure to be used during installation .
If the wrench is an adjustable pneumatic wrench or an adjustable hydraulic wrench set the adjustment so that each of the three assemblies is tensioned to no less than the Minimum Installation Tension specified in Table above .
If a torque wrench is used tension five randomly selected fastener assemblies to the minimum tension specified in Table .
Record the torque readings .
Discard the high and low torque reading .
The job installation torque shall be the average of the three remaining torque values .
When bolts are too short to fit in the tensionmeasuring device install five randomly selected fasteners in a solid joint with a hole diameter no greater than inch the nominal bolt diameter .
Rotate each assembly turn and record the torque .
Discard the high and low torque reading .
The job installation torque shall be the average of the three remaining torque values .
Bolts used to calibrate wrenches may be reused . .
The Turn of Nut Method Perform the Turn of Nut calibration once prior to fastener installation for each diameter length and RC lot .
Select a random sample of no less than three fastener assemblies of each diameter length and R C lot .
Install each assembly in a tensionmeasuring device .
Bring the fastener assembly to snug tight approximately of the minimum installation tension from Table .
Match mark the socket to reference points on the tensionmeasuring device in order to accurately determine nut rotation .
Tighten the bolt to the required rotation specified in Table .
Record the tensions for each diameter length and R_C lot .
The average of the three tension readings shall be no less than the Minimum Installation Tension specified in Table .
If any of the three fastener assemblies does not achieve minimum installation tension at the specified rotation select three more and retest .
Increase the minimum rotation if necessary .
Snug all the bolts in a contiguous group .
Rotate the turned element the appropriate amount rotation specified in TABLE .
The unturned element shall be held by a wrench to prevent rotation during tightening .
TABLE Nut Rotation from Snug Tight Disposition of Outer Faces of Bolted Parts Bolt Length Measured from Underside of head to extreme of point Both Faces Normal to Axis One Face Normal to Bolt Axis and Other Face Sloped Not More Than to bevel washer not used Both Faces Sloped Not More Than to from Normal to Axis bevel washer not used Up to and including diameters turn  turn turn Over diameters but not exceeding diameters  turn turn turn Over diameters but not exceeding diameters turn turn turn Nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut of bolt being turned .
For bolts tensioned with  turn or less the tolerance shall be plus or minus degree .
For bolts tensioned with more than  turn the tolerance shall be plus or minus degrees .
No research work has been performed by the Research Council on Riveted and Bolted Structural Joints to establish the turnofnut procedure when bolt lengths exceed diameters therefore the required rotation must be determined by actual tests in a suitable tension measuring device simulating the actual condition. . Tensioning Fastener Assemblies with DTIs Tension fasteners using DTIs so that a . inch feeler gage is refused in at least the number of gaps shown in Table and a minimum of one visible gap remains .
Tightening beyond crushing the DTI shall be cause for rejection of the fastener assembly .
TABLE Inspection Criteria for DTIs Number of gaps in DTI Minimum number of gap refusals .
Alternate Design Fasteners Alternate design fasteners that are designed to indicate bolt tension indirectly or tension bolts automatically may be used only with the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Alternate design fasteners shall meet the chemical and mechanical requirements of AASHTO M M M ASTM A A M and shall have the same body diameter of similar traditional fasteners and not less than the same bearing area under the head and nut as a similar heavy hex fastener .
Provide a detailed written installation procedure from the fastener manufacturer to the Fabrication Engineer for approval prior to beginning bolt installation .
The Fabrication Engineer may modify or place restrictions on the installation procedure prior to approval .
Calibrate three random samples in a tensionmeasuring device .
Each fastener shall achieve the Minimum Bolt Tension from Table when installed and tensioned in accordance with the approved installation procedure .
If any of the three fasteners fails to achieve of the Minimum Bolt Tension a retest of five fastener assemblies from the same lot may be performed .
If any of the five fastener assemblies fails to achieve of the Minimum Bolt Tension the lot shall be rejected .
The Resident may require recalibration of the fasteners if the condition of the fasteners has significantly changed .
Tension alternate design fasteners immediately after installation .
Alternate design fasteners are extremely dependent on proper lubrication and thread condition .
Handle and store fasteners in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Fasteners that have been improperly handled or stored shall be rejected . .
Inspection Inspect all completed joints within hours following completion of tensioning each joint or contiguous group of fasteners .
Use the following inspection procedure .
The Contractor in the presence of the Resident shall use a calibrated torque wrench as an inspection tool. . At least once each day tighten a representative sample of five bolts from each diameter length and RoCap lot used in the work in the tensionmeasuring device to the Minimum Bolt Tension specified in Table .
Place a washer under the turned element of each bolt assembly .
The job inspection torque shall be the average of three values after rejecting the high and low values. . Bolts represented by the sample in the preceding paragraph which have been tightened in the structure shall be inspected by applying in the tightening direction the inspection wrench and the job inspection torque to a minimum of of the bolts but not less than two bolts selected at random in each connection .
If any nut or bolt is turned more than five degrees approximately one inch at a twelve inch radius by the application of the job inspection torque all bolts in the connection shall be tested .
Alternatively the Contractor or Erector may retighten all the bolts in the connection before the specified inspection. . For joints using DTIs inspection will consist of verifying that the DTI has the minimum number of refusals required from Table and the minimum gap allowed in the work from the DTI Verification Test remains in at least one space. . At the Residents option if the Quality Assurance Inspector witnesses the initial and final tensioning of fasteners in a joint using the Turn of Nut method and finds it acceptable no further inspection will be required. . Reuse of Bolts Reuse only black AASHTO MMM ASTM AAM bolts .
Do not reuse galvanized fasteners. . Field Welding Welders shall have in their possession a valid certification for the process and position to be used in production from the American Welding Society or other organization acceptable to the Resident .
Submit a written Weld Procedure Specification for each joint to the Fabrication Engineer for review .
Provide the Weld Procedure Specification to the welder and Resident prior to beginning welding .
Do not perform field welding without an approved Weld Procedure Specification .
Power sources shall have meters indicating amperagevoltage that have been calibrated within year .
Field welding and nondestructive examination of field welds shall be done in conformance with the requirements of the D . Code. . Misfits The correction of misfits involving minor reaming will be considered a legitimate part of steel erection .
Errors in shop fabrication or deformation from handling and transportation that prevents the proper assembling and fitup of parts by the use of drift pins or by reaming not to exceed of the holes in a contiguous array shall be reported immediately to the Resident .
Provide a written proposal for correction to the Fabrication Engineer .
Do not make any field corrections that involve cutting or welding without the permission of the Resident .
ANCILLARY BRIDGE PRODUCTS and SUPPORT STRUCTURES .
Ancillary Bridge Products Ancillary bridge products are defined in Subsection .
of the Standard Specifications .
Fabricate ancillary bridge products in accordance with the D. Code as applicable to ancillary bridge products and this Specification .
Fabricate tubular products in accordance with the AWS D. Structural Welding Code the D. Code. . Support Structures Weld support structures in accordance with the D. Code .
Support structures shall include but not be limited to nonvehicular bridges high mast poles light and signal poles dual purpose poles strain poles and sign supports cantilever bridge and butterfly support structures. . Materials Materials for ancillary bridge products will be specified in the Contract documents .
When AASHTO M MM ASTM A A M steel is specified for ancillary bridge products equivalent ASTM grades of steel may be substituted .
Provide Certified Mill Test Reports for all material. . Holes for Base Plates Holes in base plates may be drilled or thermal cut at the Contractors option .
The roughness shall not exceed the allowable tolerances in the D . Code .
Do not deviate from specified dimension for thermal cut holes by more than inch in any direction. . Bolted Connections Holes for bolted connections shall meet the requirements of Subsections .
and .. High strength bolts shall be installed tensioned and inspected in accordance with Subsections .
through .. . Anchor Rods Anchor rods shall be as shown on the Plans or in the Standard Details .
Anchor rods shall meet the material requirements of .. . Support Structures Qualify Weld Procedure Specifications welders and welding operators in accordance with the D. Code .
Circumferential shop splices for poles shall be full penetration butt welds .
Welded longitudinal seams shall have percent penetration for inches on either side of a shop splice and for the splice length plus inches at the field splice ends of a shaft section .
The remainder of the seam weld shall have a minimum effective weld throat of percent of the wall thickness .
Pole to base welds may be complete joint penetration welds or sockettype joints with two fillet welds .
Prior to erection the assembled shaft or structure shall not exhibit a sweep in excess of .
percent of the nominal pole height or length as measured with the pole or structure in a horizontal position .
Shafts that are to remain unpainted shall have the lower edge of all field slip connections sealed around the entire circumference with a sealant that will remain flexible and not degrade from exposure to ultraviolet light . .
Non Destructive TestingAncillary Bridge Products and Support Structures Unless otherwise specified nondestructive testing shall be as follows .
Examine ten percent of each production lot using Magnetic Particle MT inspection .
If any welds examined require a welded repair an additional ten percent of the original lot number will be examined using MT .
If any welds in the second ten percent require a welded repair test all welds in that production lot using MT. . For the purposes of this Specification a production lot shall be defined as a days production of small parts e.g .
post to base welds each discrete segment of complex structures e.g .
overhead sign supports mast arm poles etc .
or other grouping or unit not to exceed one weeks production at the discretion of the Fabrication Engineer . .
Inspect one hundred percent of all circumferential welds and the full penetration sections of the longitudinal seam welds by radiographic examination RT .
Inspect one hundred percent of tube to plate welds full penetration by RT partial penetration and fillet by MT .
Inspect twenty five percent of the partial penetration sections of the longitudinal seam welds MT .
Ultrasonic testing UT may be used on material inch thick and properly qualified UT may be used on thicknesses inch . .
Method of Measurement Unless otherwise specified structural steel will be measured as one lump sum complete and accepted consisting of all metal and related materials in the fabricated and erected structure as shown on the Plans excluding railings and drains .
Related materials shall include but not be limited to preformed pads placed under the bearings and when required selflubricating bronze or copperalloy bearing and expansion plates . .
Basis of Payment Structural steel will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the respective contract items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Structural steel fabricated and delivered Lump Sum .
Structural steel fabricated and delivered rolled Lump Sum .
Structural steel fabricated and delivered welded Lump Sum .
Structural steel erection Lump Sum SECTION STUD WELDED SHEAR CONNECTORS ANCHORS FASTENERS .
Description This work consists of furnishing and installing steel stud welded shear connectors concrete anchors and threaded fasteners in accordance with the AASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code D. and these Specifications. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of Section .
Stud Shear Connectors Anchors and Fasteners .
The Contractor shall provide the stud manufacturers certification that the studs meet the material requirements prior to beginning welding. . Quality of Work The studs shall be free from rust scale oil and other contaminants that would adversely affect the welding operation .
Weld locations shall be free of scale rust oil and other deleterious material .
The Contractor may clean the weld locations by any method that results in satisfactory welds .
The arc shields or ferrules shall be kept dry .
Ferrules showing signs of moisture shall be oven dried at degrees Fahrenheit for two hours prior to use .
The longitudinal spacing of shear connectors shall vary no more than inch from that shown on the Plans .
The minimum edge distance shall be inches .
Arc shields or ferrules shall be removed from studs after welding . .
Technique Studs shall be welded with automatically timed stud welding equipment connected to a suitable direct current electrode negative DCEN power source .
If more than one studwelding gun is operated from the same power source they shall be interlocked so that only one gun can operate at one time .
Welding shall not be done when the base metal temperature is below zero degrees Fahrenheit or when the surface is wet or exposed to rain or snow .
Studs may be fillet welded using SMAW with the approval of the Resident. . Construction Requirements At the beginning of each day or shift and after any change in setup the first two studs welded shall be tested .
The studs shall be visually inspected for a full degrees weld flash .
The studs shall be bent a minimum of degrees from their original axis with a hammer pipe or other hollow device .
If either stud fails the visual or bend test the Contractor shall correct the procedure and weld two more studs to separate material representative of the grade and thickness of the material being welded in production .
This procedure shall continue on separate plates until the Contractor has successfully welded two consecutive studs .
While in operation the welding gun shall be held in position without movement until the weld metal has solidified .
If an unacceptable stud has been removed from an area subject to tensile stresses or stress reversal the weld area shall be ground flush .
If base metal has been pulled out in the course of stud removal the pocket shall be filled by welding in accordance with the field welding requirements of Section Structural Steel .
The weld shall be ground flush .
Base metal repairs in compression areas shall be the same as the repairs for tension areas except that if the depth of the pocket is less than  inch it shall be faired out by grinding .
Replacement studs shall be welded no closer than inch from the repair area . .
Inspection Studs will be visually inspected for a full degrees weld flash .
Studs not having a full degrees weld collar shall be bent degrees from its original position in a direction away from the missing weld flash .
Studs not developing a crack or tear will be considered acceptable .
Failing studs shall be removed replaced and weld areas repaired . .
Method of Measurement Shear connectors shall be measured as one lump sum consisting of all shear connectors required and acceptably installed .
Stud welded anchors and fasteners will be considered incidental to the pay item for which they are required . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of shear connectors will be paid for at the lump sum price .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Shear Connectors Lump Sum SECTION SHOP APPLIED PROTECTIVE COATING STEEL .
Description This work shall consist of applying protective coating to steel substrate in accordance with the Plans and this Specification .
The protective coating system shall be as specified on the Plans .
ALL REQUIREMENTS IN THIS SPECIFICATION ARE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CONTRACTOR UNLESS NOTED OTHERWISE. . Materials Materials shall comply with the requirements of the respective Subsections of this Specification. . Submittals Submit the following as applicable A .
The manufacturers product data sheet for the specified protective coating systems .
B .
Material Safety Data Sheets .
C. Facility Certification Endorsement or other Qualifications D. Quality Control Plan E. Quality Control Inspector QCI qualifications .
General Specifications Specifications for the protective coating andor protective coating systems are Zinc Rich Coating System Subsections .
through .
HotDip Galvanizing Subsections .
through .
Thermal Spray Coating Subsections .
through .
Fusion Bonded Epoxy Coating Subsections .
through . .
Inspection Quality Control QC is the responsibility of the Contractor .
Inspect all aspects of the work and supervise all sampling measurements and testing .
Record measurements and test results in a clear and legible manner in a format acceptable to the Fabrication Engineer .
Reject materials and workmanship that do not meet Contract requirements .
The QCI may perform sampling measurements and testing in addition to the minimum required .
Make the results of all sampling measurements and testing available to the Quality Assurance Inspector QAI .
Training in surface preparation coatings application and inspection is required for QCIs .
Acceptable training includes one or more of the following A .
National Association of Corrosion Engineers NACE International Coating Inspector Program Level minimum B. SSPC BCI Coatings Inspection Training and Certification for the Bridge Industry Level I without certification or Level II C. Other training that is acceptable to the Department .
Quality Assurance QA is the prerogative of the Department .
The QAIs responsibility is to ensure that the QC personnel are performing acceptably verify documentation periodically inspect workmanship and witness sampling measurements and testing .
The QAI will schedule measurements and testing deemed necessary by the Resident in addition to the minimum requirements in a manner that minimizes interference with the production schedule .
The QAI has the authority to reject material or workmanship that does not meet the Contract requirements .
The acceptance of material or workmanship by the QAI will not preclude subsequent rejection if found unacceptable by the Department. . NonConforming Work Submit a nonconformance report to the Fabrication Engineer describing the deficiencies and proposed solution .
Correct or replace rejected coatings as directed by the Fabrication Engineer. . Facilities for Inspection Provide a private office at the fabrication plant for the Departments inspection personnel or QAIs .
The office shall be in close proximity to the work .
The office shall be climate controlled to maintain the temperature between F and F and have the exits closed by a doors equipped with a lock and keys which shall be furnished to the Inspectors .
The QAIs office shall meet the following minimum requirements Description Quantity Office area minimum ft Drafting Table Surface ft Drafting stoolseach Office Desk Ergonomic Swivel Chairs Folding Chairs Highspeed internet connection ports or wireless Fluorescent Lighting of footcandles minimum for all work areas Volt Cycle Electric Wall Outlets Wall Closet Waste Basket with trash bags Broom Dustpan Water Cooler Cleaning materialsfloor surfaces windows for duration of the project The Contractor will be responsible for disposing of trash and supplying commercially bottled water for the water cooler .
The QAI has the option to reject any furniture or supplies provided to the QAIs office based on general poor condition .
Provide parking space for the QAIs in close proximity to the entrance to the QAIs office .
Maintain the pathway between the parking area and the QAIs office so that it is free of obstacles debris snow and ice .
The facilities and all furnishings shall remain the property of the Contractor upon completion of the Work .
Payment for the facilities heating lighting telephone installation internet connection basic monthly telephone and internet charges and all furnishings shall be incidental to the Contract .
Failure to comply with the above requirements will be considered denial of access to the Work for the purpose of inspection .
The Department will reject all Work done when access for inspection is denied. . Applicator Qualification Shopapplied paint systems shall be applied by applicators that hold a current AISC Sophisticated Paint Endorsement SPE or are qualified in accordance with SSPCQP Standard Procedure for Evaluating Qualifications of Shop Painting Applicators .
For specialty items the Fabrication Engineer may accept other shop qualifications based on experience andor an audit by the Department .
Thermal Spray Coating TSC including sealers and top coating fusion bonded coatings and hotdip galvanizing shall be applied in facilities with a minimum of five years experience of satisfactory performance . .
Inspection Measure and record the following as applicable to the coating application in a Job Control Record JCR A .
Surface preparation cleanliness and anchor profile .
B .
Environmental conditions ambient temperature surface temperature relative humidity dew point .
C. Coating batch andor lot number date of manufacture and shelf life .
D. Mixingthinning .
E. Dry Film Thickness DFT for each coat .
F. Cure datatimetemperaturerelative humidity .
G. Final inspection and acceptance by the QCI .
Submit the format for the JCR to the Fabrication Engineer for review prior to beginning application of protective coating .
Provide work area illumination as follows Work Area Illumination Requirements in Foot Candles Description of Work Minimum Recommended General Work Area Illumination Surface Preparation and Coating Inspection Provide a light meter that measures illumination in foot candles .
Use SSPCVIS Guide and Reference Photographs for Steel Surfaces Prepared by Dry Abrasive Blast Cleaning or SSPCVIS Guide and Reference Photographs for Steel Surfaces Prepared by Hand and Power Tool Cleaning as required in order to determine acceptable surface cleanliness .
Measure and record the environmental conditions during application and during the entire curing cycle .
Failure to provide accurate and complete environmental data may result in rejection of the coating or an extended cure time as determined by the Fabrication Engineer .
Measure and record the DFT of each coat in accordance with SSPCPA Measurement of Dry Coating Thickness with Magnetic Gages PA . ZINC RICH COATING SYSTEM .
Description This work shall consist of surface preparation and application of coating systems in accordance with the Plans and this Specification .
The color shall be as specified on the Plans. . Materials Coatings systems shall be from the Northeast Protective Coating Committee NEPCOAT Qualified Products List QPL list A or B .
The list may be found through NEPCOATs Web page httpwww.nepcoat.org .
Provide the paint batch description lot number date of manufacture shelf life and the manufacturers storage requirements to the QAI .
Provide the manufacturers published data sheet for each coat of the coating system including equipment surface cleanliness anchor profile mixing thinning application and cure time for the entire range of allowable environmental conditions and the DFT. . Limits of Work Coat all surfaces exposed in the assembled product unless otherwise specified .
Apply a mist coat .
to .
mils of primer only to surfaces to be embedded in concrete .
Apply primer to faying surfaces of bolted connections that develop a class B slip coefficient in accordance with the Specification for Structural Joints Using ASTM A or A Bolts by the Research Council of Structural Connections RCSC .
Provide documentation to demonstrate that the primer was tested and the requirements were met .
Do not exceed the DFT applied for test purposes . .
Surface Preparation Surface cleanliness shall be SSPCSP NearWhite Blast Cleaning SP unless a higher standard of surface cleanliness is required by the manufacturers published data sheet .
Round all corners exposed in the assembled product to approximately a inch radius prior to abrasive blast cleaning .
A series of tangents that approximate a radius may be considered as a rounded edge if there are no sharp breaks .
Provide radius gauges to inspect corner preparation .
The radius shall be the minimum specified above but not greater than inch .
The abrasive blast media shall meet the requirements of SSPCAB Mineral and Slag Abrasives AB Cleanliness of Recycled Ferrous Metallic Abrasives andor AB Ferrous Metallic Abrasive .
The anchor profile shall be angular and meet the requirements of the coating manufacturers published data sheet .
If compressed air is used for abrasive blast cleaning perform a blotter test ASTM D at the beginning of each shift and at any time requested by the QAI .
Notify the QAI prior to performing the test .
Measure and record the anchor profile in accordance with ASTM D Method C replica tape .
If the anchor profile fails to meet the minimum requirements reblast the substrate until the required anchor profile is achieved .
If the anchor profile exceeds the maximum allowed generate a NonConformance Report NCR describing the condition of the substrate and a proposed solution and submit it to the Fabrication Engineer for review .
Measure the anchor profile of the substrate on every plane of each beam or girder .
If it has been established to the satisfaction of the QAI that the abrasive blast equipment is capable of providing uniform acceptable anchor profile a diminished degree of testing may be allowed at the discretion of the Fabrication Engineer .
The allowable time between abrasive blast cleaning and primer application shall not exceed the manufacturers published recommendations or one work shift whichever is less .
Any evidence of rust bloom flash rust or other surface conditions that cause the substrate cleanliness to fall outside the specified cleanliness standard will be rejected .
Inspect all substrate immediately prior to coating application .
Reblast steel substrate that does not meet the surface cleanliness requirements. . Mixing and Application Record the batch and lot numbers of the coating the type and amount of thinner used the time and pot life of the coating .
Add thinner in accordance with the manufacturers published data sheet .
Measure thinner with a graduated cup or other container that clearly indicates the amount of thinner being added .
Record the amount of thinner added .
Mix the paint using the method equipment and time recommended by the coating manufacturer .
Mix each component separately and mix all components together for at least the minimum time recommended on the Manufacturers Product Data Sheet but not less than two minutes .
Measure the environmental conditions in the immediate vicinity of the pieces being coated during the coating operation and during the entire cure period .
Provide two data loggers capable of measuring ambient humidity and temperature .
The data loggers shall come with software that can download the data onto a computer .
Print out the data and provide a copy to the QAI for review prior to applying the subsequent coat of paint .
Place the data loggers in the immediate vicinity of the coating operation during the entire application and curing cycle .
The data will be used to determine that the curerecoat time requirements for each coat have been met .
Failure to comply will result in the coating being cured for the maximum time necessary to assure adequate cure as determined by the Fabrication Engineer .
Stripe all corners fasteners welds and locations with poor access in accordance with SSPC PA Shop Field and Maintenance Painting of Steel PA . Do not stripe using inorganic zinc primer IOZ .
Stripe the IOZ primer between the primer and intermediate coats using the intermediate coating .
Apply the coating using equipment recommended in the Manufacturers Product Data Sheet or equal .
Apply the coating in a uniform manner without sags runs or drips. . Dry Film Thickness Measure and record the DFT of each coat in accordance with PA . Record the following A .
Gauge typemanufacturermodel B .
Serial number C. Coatshim used for calibration e.g .
Primer Coat or mil shim D. Measurementsspot averagelocation E. Cure time F. Nonconforming areas and determination for correction Each piece or area presented for acceptance regardless of size shall be considered a separate structure for purposes of determining the number of spot measurements to be taken except that large quantities of small parts andor secondary framing members coated at the same time may be measured at a lesser frequency as directed by the Fabrication Engineer .
When random DFT testing of a large quantity of small parts andor secondary framing members results in unacceptable DFTs the Contractor shall have the option of measuring and documenting the DFT of each piece or removing the coating andor recoating all pieces represented in the production lot. . Touchup and Repairs Touchup is the repair of minor blemishes including but not limited to scratches and abrasions that to do not penetrate underlying layers of coating .
Perform touchup using the same coating and methods specified in the Manufacturers Product Data Sheet .
Cure the touchup coating in the same manner as the original coating .
Repair coating damage that penetrates underlying layers in accordance with the Manufacturers Product Data Sheet and this Specification .
Prepare areas to be repaired in a manner that assures the proper adhesion of each coat .
Feather back each damaged layer so that each repair coat is continuous with each corresponding existing coat .
The topcoat shall be smooth and uniform in appearance .
Repair damaged or unacceptable shop coating before the piece is removed from the paint area. . Handling and Storage Handle coated members in a manner that avoids damage to the coating .
Lift and move members using nonmetallic slings padded chains and beam clamps softeners or by other noninjurious methods .
Store painted material in a manner that prevents damage to the coating .
Document damage to the coating that is discovered after the product is loaded for shipment to the job site .
Minor damage as a result of handling shall be considered field repair unless in the opinion of the Fabrication Engineer the damage is the result of negligence or poor handling methods .
Damage that is deemed to be the result of negligence or poor handling methods shall be repaired as directed by the Fabrication Engineer. . through .
Reserved HOTDIP GALVANIZING .
Description This work shall consist of surface preparation and application of hotdip galvanizing in accordance with the Plans and this Specification .
Hotdip galvanizing shall meet the requirements of AASHTO MASTM A Standard Specification for Zinc HotDip Galvanized Coatings on Iron and Steel A including any applicable requirements listed in Section Referenced Documents .
The minimum average coating thickness grade shall conform to Table .
The frequency of testing shall be in accordance with Section .
The choice of the test method is the prerogative of the Contractor .
Record the test results and provide them to the Department .
Provide certification of compliance and written test results to The Department in accordance with A Section . .
Surface Preparation Abrasive blastclean the steel to a minimum of SSPCSP Commercial Blast Cleaning SP prior to galvanizing .
Grind all corners exposed in the assembled product to a inch radius prior to galvanizing . .
Repairs Repairs to galvanizing shall be in accordance with ASTM A Standard Practice for Repair of Damaged and Uncoated Areas of HotDip Galvanized Coatings A Annex A or A. Zincrich paints for repairs may only be used with approval of the Fabrication Engineer. . Topcoating Galvanized Surfaces Areas of galvanized surfaces to be topcoated will be described on the Plans or in the Special Provisions .
Do not use chromate quenching or other types of quenching after galvanizing .
Remove runs sags dross and other deleterious material from surfaces to be painted .
Provide a smooth uniform surface free of heavy build areas or other discontinuities that will project through the finish coat .
Perform repairs to galvanizing in accordance with A .
Remove visible surface contaminants in accordance with SSPCSP Solvent Cleaning SP prior to blast cleaning .
Blastclean surfaces to be coated in accordance with SSPCSP NACE No.BrushOff Blast Cleaning SP .
Measure the anchor profile in accordance with ASTM D Method C replica tape .
Record the results in a manner acceptable to the Fabrication Engineer .
Assure that the anchor profile corresponds with the anchor profile requirements on the Manufacturers Product Data Sheet. . Materials Provide materials in accordance with .. . Mixing and Application Mix and apply in accordance with .. . Dry Film Thickness Measure and record the DFT in accordance with .. . Touchup and Repairs Perform touchup and repairs in accordance with .. . Handling and Storage Handle and store material in accordance with .. .
RESERVED THERMAL SPRAY COATING .
Description This work shall consist of surface preparation and application of Thermal Spray Coatings TSC in accordance with the Plans and this Specification .
Application of TSC to steel substrate shall be done in accordance with requirements recommendations and appendices of Joint Standard NACE NO .
AWS C.MSSPCCS .
Specification for the Application of Thermal Spray Coatings Metallizing of Aluminum Zinc and Their Alloys and Composites for the Corrosion Protection of Steel The Standard and this Specification .
The applicator shall have a minimum of five years experience and shall provide copies of application procedures operator qualifications QC Manuals and repair procedures. . Submittals Submit an application procedure and QC Plan for review by the Department prior to beginning work .
Submit a certified analysis of the feedstock to the Department .
Submit sample copies of QC records for review .
Submit copies of applicator qualifications job history etc .
Provide the name and qualifications of the QCI . .
Surface Preparation Prior to abrasive blast cleaning round all corners exposed in the assembled product to approximately a inch radius .
A series of tangents to the approximate radius will be considered acceptable .
Abrasive blast clean all surfaces to be coated in accordance with the requirements of SSPCSP White Metal Blast Cleaning SP .
Use SSPCVIS .
as a visual standard to determine acceptable cleanliness .
Inspect the substrate immediately before spray application .
The anchor profile shall be .. mils .
Measure and record the anchor profile in accordance with ASTM D Method C Replica Tape on each plane to be sprayed or at intervals on pipe or tube .
If the anchor profile fails to meet the minimum required profile re blast the substrate until the required anchor profile is achieved .
If compressed air is used for abrasive blast cleaning perform a blotter test in accordance with ASTM D at the beginning of each shift .
Empty moisture traps at the beginning of each shift and at any time thereafter when moisture appears to be present on the substrate .
Notify the QAI prior to performing the test in order that the QAI can witness the blotter test. . TSC Requirements The coating thickness shall be between mils and mils .
The DFT on faying surfaces shall not exceed the thickness tested for Class B slip coefficient rating .
The TSC shall have a minimum tensile bond of psi .
Test the tensile bond in accordance with ASTM D. The frequency of testing shall be one test every ft or once per shift whichever is less .
The test location will be as directed by the QAI .
The specified tensile force shall be applied to the TSC and removed .
If the test does not reveal a failure of the TSC the tensile bond shall be considered acceptable .
Repair or recoat unacceptable work .
Perform a bend test as described The Standard at the beginning of each shift .
If the bend test fails take corrective action and perform another test .
After performing the bend test successfully a number of times the Fabrication Engineer may reduce the frequency of testing .
Document the results of the tensile bond test and bend test and provide the results to the Department .
The TSC shall have a uniform appearance free from blistering cracks loose particles or exposed steel substrate when examined with X magnification. . TSC Application Record the batch and lot numbers of the consumables .
Measure the environmental conditions in the immediate vicinity of the pieces being coated during the coating operation and during the entire cure period for intermediate and top coat .
Provide two data loggers capable of measuring ambient humidity and temperature .
The data loggers shall come with software that can download the data onto a computer .
Print out the data and provide a copy to the QAI for review prior to applying the subsequent coat of paint .
Place the data loggers in the immediate vicinity of the coating operation during the entire application and curing cycle .
The data will be used to determine that the curerecoat time requirements for each coat have been met .
Failure to comply will result in the coating being cured for the maximum time necessary to assure adequate cure as determined by the Fabrication Engineer. . Seal Coat and Top Coat Application Paint Apply a wash primer and seal coat that contains pigmentation indicating uniformity of application .
Top flanges of beams requiring shear connectors shall receive a flashprimer coat only .
The seal coat shall be compatible with an epoxy intermediate coat and a polyurethane top coat from the NEPCOAT QPL .
Provide certification of compatibility between the seal coat and intermediate coat from the intermediate coattop coat manufacturer. . Materials Provide materials in accordance with .. . Mixing and Application Mix and apply in accordance with .. . Dry Film Thickness Measure and record the DFT in accordance with .. . Touchup and Repairs Repair damage to TSC by reblasting the damaged area and reapplying TSC in accordance with this Specification .
Perform touchup and repairs to paint in accordance with .. FUSION BONDED EPOXY COATING .
Description This work shall consist of surface preparation and application of Fusion Bonded Epoxy FBE coating in accordance with the Plans and this Specification including measuring and documenting DFT and testing for holidays and other discontinuities in the epoxy coating .
The FBE shall be applied to all surface areas indicated on the Plans .
Perform surface preparation and application of FBE in accordance with the following Specifications A .
Steel pipe pile ASTM A Fusion Bonded EpoxyCoated Pipe Pile B. Hpile and sheet pile ASTM A Fusion Bonded EpoxyCoated Structural Steel H Piles and Sheet Piling C. Reinforcing steel ASTM A EpoxyCoated Steel Reinforcing Bars .
Materials The FBE coating shall meet all of the physical and testing requirements of the applicable Specifications above including Annexes .
Provide a certification that identifies the coating batch or lot number date of manufacture and test results .
Supply patching material from the same manufacturer . .
Surface Preparation Prepare the surfaces in accordance with applicable Specifications listed above .
Grind all welds flush on spiral welded pipe pile prior to abrasive blast cleaning . .
Inspection The DFT shall be between mils and mils unless otherwise specified .
Measure the DFT using a fixedprobe gauge in accordance with SSPCPA .
The testing procedure and reporting shall be in accordance with ASTM G. The frequency of testing shall be each piece coated unless a lesser frequency of testing is directed by the Fabrication Engineer .
After curing the coating shall be checked for holidays pinholes not visible to the unaided eye using a  Volt dc wet sponge holiday detector in accordance with the requirements of ASTM G Test Methods for Holiday Detection in Pipeline Coatings .
An average of more than five holidays per foot in the coated length of a pile will be cause for rejection of that pile. . through .
RESERVED .
Method of Measurement Protective coating shall be measured by the lump sum complete and accepted .
The coating limits shall be as shown or described in the Contract Documents . .
Basis of Payment All work for Protective Coating will be paid for at the lump sum price for the respective item .
Payment will be full compensation for all labor materials and equipment required to complete the surface preparation and coating work including but not limited to coating and cleaning materials staging or accessing testing surface preparation cleaning application curing and repairs .
Payment will be made under Pay Items Pay Unit .
Zinc Rich Coating System Shop Applied Lump Sum .
Galvanizing Lump Sum .
Thermal Spray Coating Shop Applied Lump Sum .
Fusion Bonded Epoxy Coating Lump Sum SECTION RAILINGS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing all materials for and construction of bridge rail handrail and barrier mounted bridge rail in accordance with these specifications and the lines and grades shown on the Plans. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials Steel Bridge Rail Structural Steel .
Preformed Pads .
Aluminum Rail Preformed Pads .
Aluminum Railings .
Pipe for Steel Pipe Hand Railing shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade A or B. .
Drawings The contractor shall prepare shop detail erection and other necessary Working Drawings in accordance with the requirements of Section .
Working Drawings. . General Anchor bolts or anchor bolt sleeves shall be set with a template and shall be securely placed in their final position prior to the placement of the embedding concrete .
Post anchor assemblies shall be installed to within inch of the theoretical horizontal and vertical location .
No field drilling will be allowed to install anchor bolts without approval of the Resident .
Post bearing areas shall be dressed smooth and true to grade .
Prior to post erection each rail post location shall be finished to the theoretical elevation determined from profile grade cross slope and curb height and will not be acceptable until it is within inch of the theoretical elevation as measured at the top of concrete .
Preformed pads shall be used to adjust the rail posts for height and alignment .
The number of preformed pads supplied shall be percent more than the theoretical minimum number required .
After erection of the railing the Contractor shall clean the whole assembly to present a neat and uniform appearance. . Steel Bridge Railing Steel railings shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of Section Structural Steel .
When called for on the Plans railings shall be galvanized andor coated in accordance with Section Shop Applied Protective Coating Steel .
Rail bars to be used on a radius of feet or less shall be curved before the application of any galvanizing andor coating .
Bending tolerance from theoretical horizontal curvature shall be plus or minus  inch per yard not to exceed  inch total. . Steel Pipe Hand Railing Steel pipe hand railings shall be fabricated in accordance with the requirements of Section Structural Steel .
When called for on the Plans railings shall be galvanized andor coated in accordance with Section Shop Applied Protective Coating Steel. . Aluminum Bridge Railing Aluminum sections may be sheared sawed or milled .
Cut edges shall be smooth and free of burrs .
Holes for rivets shall be drilled full size from the solid or sub punched and reamed .
Rivets shall be colddriven in the asreceived condition and the driven head shall be of the conepoint type .
Welding shall be done in conformance with the latest edition of AWS Structural Welding CodeAluminum D .. No welding shall be performed before the approval of the appropriate weld procedures .
No field welding is permitted .
To facilitate bending aluminum extrusions of Alloy T or T may be heated to a maximum temperature of degrees Fahrenheit for a period of not more than thirty minutes .
Threaded fasteners shall conform to the requirements of ANSI Standard B .
Class A for external and Class B for internal threads . .
Method of Measurement Railing will be measured as one lump sum unit fabricated delivered erected and accepted . .
Basis of Payment Railing will be paid for at the contract lump sum price complete in place .
Payment for galvanizing andor protective coating when required shall be included in the lump sum price .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Steel Bridge Railing Bar Lump Sum .
Steel Bridge Railing Bar Lump Sum .
Steel Bridge Railing Bar Lump Sum .
Steel Pipe Hand Railing Lump Sum .
Barrier Mounted Steel Bridge Rail Bar Lump Sum .
Barrier Mounted Steel Bridge Rail Bar Lump Sum .
Aluminum Bridge Railing Pedestrians Lump Sum .
Aluminum Bridge Railing Pedestrian with Pales Lump Sum SECTION WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and applying an approved waterproofing membrane to concrete deck surfaces or other concrete surfaces with a barrier type membrane in accordance with this specification other applicable Contract documents and the manufacturers published recommendations complete in place and accepted .
Waterproofing membrane shall be either peel and stick sheet waterproofing membrane sheet membrane or torch or spray applied high performance waterproofing membrane high performance membrane. . Materials Sheet membrane and high performance membrane shall include all materials as recommended by the manufacturer to produce a waterproof barrier on the specified concrete surface .
In addition to the membrane these materials may include primer hotapplied rubberized asphalt sealer mastic flashing aggregate scatter and tack coat .
The list of acceptable sheet membrane products is included on the MaineDOTs Qualified Products List QPL under Waterproofing Membranes under Prequalified Standard Systems .
The list of acceptable high performance membrane products is included on the MaineDOTs QPL under Waterproofing Membranes under Prequalified HighPerformance Systems Spray Applied and Torch Applied. . Construction General The Contractor shall store and install the membrane and all associated components in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
Existing membrane waterproofing remaining on structures to be rehabilitated shall be completely removed to the primed surfaces .
At the discretion of the Resident tightly adhered membrane residue that can not reasonably be removed by scraping using industry standard practices may be left in place .
Prior to application of primer or installation of membrane Concrete shall be cured in accordance with applicable Contract requirements areas where rapid setting patching materials have been placed shall be cured for a minimum of hours or as recommended by the product manufacturer .
The entire surface of concrete structures specified to receive waterproofing membrane shall be shot blasted to achieve a surface which is clean and free of laitance oil grease and any foreign materials as well as any sharp protrusions or sharp indentations .
For superstructure decks including but not limited to precast box beams voided slabs and NEXT beams shot blasting shall be accomplished using selfcontained selfpropelled equipment to achieve a consistent anchor profile areas that are not accessible to selfpropelled shot blasting equipment as determined by the Resident shall be blasted with appropriate equipment utilizing either mineral grit or steel grit and air pressure sufficient to achieve an acceptable surface profile .
Surfaces of structures other than superstructure decks such as box culverts or arches that are to receive waterproofing membrane may be highpressure minimum of psi water blasted or sandblasted in lieu of being shot blasted as approved by the Resident .
The Contractor shall have a copy of Technical Guideline No .
published by the International Concrete Repair Institute .
The final concrete surface profile shall range between a CSP and a CSP as defined by this Guideline or as approved by the membrane manufacturers representative .
All surfaces shall then be cleaned to remove all loose dust and debris .
Priming and membraning shall only be done when the air and concrete temperatures are above degrees Fahrenheit and the surfaces that are to receive the primer and membrane have a moisture content at or below percent .
Primer or membrane shall not be applied or installed until the concrete has been in place for a minimum of days .
The Contractor shall supply a portable electronic moisture meter capable of measuring the moisture content of concrete surfaces in percent .
The list of acceptable moisture meters is included on the MaineDOTs QPL under Waterproofing Membranes .
The moisture meter shall be calibrated annually and a certificate of calibration from the moisture meter manufacturer shall accompany the meter .
The Contractor shall perform moisture testing of the concrete substrate using the Contractor provided moisture meter .
Moisture tests shall be performed at locations determined by and in the presence of the Resident .
Written test results shall be submitted to the Resident prior to beginning the priming and membraning operations .
Membrane shall be installed in a shingled pattern so that water is permitted to drain to the low areas of the structure without accumulating against seams and pressed or rolled into place to assure bond with the primed surface and to eliminate air bubbles .
Lap joints at the beginning and end of rolls shall be staggered with those of adjacent rolls .
All overlapping joints shall be sealed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Care shall be taken to ensure that the waterproofing membrane is properly sealed around the one inch diameter superstructure deck drains and that the drains are completely opened prior to paving over them .
Any drainage slots in the bridge drains shall be opened both before and after placing the bituminous pavement .
Waterproofing membrane over which hot mix asphalt HMA pavement will be placed shall receive a bituminous tack coat in accordance with Standard Specification Section with a coverage rate of between .
and .
gallons per square yard .
Alternately if a membrane manufacturer recommends its own tack coat as part of its waterproofing system then this tack material shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Prior to tacking the membrane shall be clean and free from loose debris moisture or other contaminants .
Membrane surfaces that have been tacked shall be paved within hours of application of the tack coat .
The required laydown temperature of HMA pavement placed on high performance membrane shall be within the tolerances included in the membrane manufacturers written recommendations with the target temperature to be at the high end of the given range but not to exceed degrees Fahrenheit measured at the HMA pavement plant .
Paving operations shall be done in a manner to permit water to drain to the low area of the deck without entrapment .
No vehicles other than the HMA paving equipment will be permitted on the membrane prior to placing the HMA pavement .
The first layer of HMA pavement placed on a superstructure deck shall be placed with an approved rubber mounted bituminous paver of such type and operated in such a manner that the waterproofing membrane will not be damaged in any way .
Paving equipment wheels and tires shall be clean and free from stones or other material that could penetrate the membrane .
The tack coat and HMA pavement may be applied immediately after the membrane is installed .
For high performance membrane the primer and membrane shall be applied by a manufacturer certified applicator .
Applicators shall be individuals who have been thoroughly trained by the manufacturer in all aspects of application of the membrane system .
Although an individual may be certified as both an applicator and a representative the individual shall not serve in both capacities at the same time .
Upon certification the manufacturer shall issue a badge to the applicator that includes the manufacturers name and logo a current photograph of the applicator the applicators full name and the word Applicator .
The text of the badge shall be clearly printed in English .
The applicator shall have the badge on and prominently displayed at all times while installing the membrane system .
The Contractor shall arrange for a manufacturers representative to be present at all times during the installation of high performance membrane including application of the primer and tack coat .
The representative shall also be present for placement of the HMA binder course over the membrane .
The representative shall be readily identified by a photo identification badge issued by the manufacturer that includes the manufacturers name and logo a current photograph of the representative the representatives full name and the word Representative .
The text of the badge shall be clearly printed in English .
The representative shall have the badge on and prominently displayed at all times while overseeing this work .
Overlap of side seams and end laps and application procedures not addressed by this specification shall be done in accordance with the membrane manufacturers published recommendations .
Torn or damaged membrane shall be repaired in accordance with manufacturers recommendations .
Blistering of membrane at any time prior to Final Acceptance shall be repaired in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
At least one week prior to installation of any waterproofing membrane the Contractor shall submit the manufacturers written requirements pertaining to overlapping of seams application procedures repairing of damaged membrane and treatment of blistering of the membrane including treatment of blistering either before during or after the first lift of HMA pavement is placed on the membrane to the Resident . .
Installation Sheet Membrane All construction joints and all joints between precast concrete elements e.g .
box culverts threesided boxes arches box beams voided slabs shall be double covered with membrane by first applying a sheet with a minimum width of inches centered along the joint .
The perimeter of all membrane placed in a given days operation shall receive a seal of mastic over the edge of the membrane .
Areas around drains or protrusions shall be liberally coated with mastic at the edges .
When the membrane is completed the perimeter shall receive an additional seal of mastic along the edge of the membrane . .
Installation Torch Applied High Performance Membrane The waterproofing membrane shall be heat welded onto the prepared substrate .
Care shall be taken to assure that the membrane is completely bonded to the primed surface .
The Contractor shall be responsible for protection of adjacent areas .
Machines used to apply membrane shall be fully functional including thermostats .
When the surface area of a superstructure deck is greater than square feet the membrane shall be machine applied .
The machine shall be capable of handling rolls of at least square yards shall be selfpropelled and shall be capable of automatically following the edge of previously placed membrane .
Corner detail at edge of superstructure slabvertical surfaces e.g .
curb or permanent barrier Membrane material or special flashing shall be installed in corners in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations to within  inch of the top of the HMA wearing surface .
In the absence of a manufacturers recommended flashing or if the manufacturer does not recommend bending membrane material to conform to this corner configuration then the following procedure shall be used The membrane shall be heat welded to the slab to within one inch of the vertical surface the vertical surface shall be protected to prevent damage or permanent discoloring of the vertical surface the remaining area between the edge of the membrane and the vertical surface shall be completely sealed with hotapplied rubberized asphalt material meeting the requirements of the membrane manufacturers recommendations the hotapplied rubberized asphalt material shall be applied so as to form a complete seal between the membrane and the vertical surface and shall extend up the vertical surface to within  inch of the top of the HMA wearing surface .
Corner detail at end of superstructure slabvertical surface e.g .
backwall The waterproofing system shall be placed on vertical surfaces at the ends of slabs down the vertical face a minimum of one foot unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
All joints between buried precast concrete elements e.g .
box culverts threesided boxes arches shall be double covered with membrane by first applying a strip with a minimum width of inches centered along the joint .
For superstructure decks Immediately prior to application of the tack coat the entire surface of the membrane shall be rolled with a rubber tired roller and any blisters found in the membrane shall be repaired with guidance from the manufacturers representative as per the manufacturers recommendations similarly if blisters appear during or after placement of the first lift of HMA pavement the membrane shall be repaired with guidance from the manufacturers representative as per the manufacturers recommendations . .
Installation Spray Applied High Performance Membrane Spray applied membrane shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Corner detail at edge of superstructure slabvertical surfaces e.g .
curb or permanent barrier The waterproofing system shall be placed to within  inch of the top of the HMA wearing surface .
Corner detail at end of superstructure slabvertical surface e.g .
backwall The waterproofing system shall be placed on vertical surfaces at the ends of slabs down the vertical face a minimum of one foot unless otherwise shown on the Plans .
Aggregate scatter shall be applied to the final coat of membrane in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
Materials for aggregate scatter shall be in accordance with the manufacturers requirements . .
Method of Measurement Waterproofing Membrane will be measured for payment as one lump sum . .
Basis of Payment Waterproofing Membrane will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price which shall be payment in full for furnishing all materials labor and equipment including cleaning of concrete surfaces and providing a moisture meter and all incidentals necessary to provide a waterproof barrier on the specified concrete surface that is properly adhered to the concrete substrate .
Tack coat provided as part of the waterproofing membrane manufacturers system shall be included in the lump sum price for waterproofing membrane bituminous tack coat provided in accordance with Standard Specification Section Bituminous Tack Coat shall be paid for under Item .
Bituminous Tack Coat Applied .
Payment for repair of surfaces to which membrane is to be applied shall be paid for separately when applicable repair items are included in the Contract .
Damage to new concrete surfaces resulting from the Contractors placement or curing operations or any damage caused by the Contractors operations shall be repaired at no cost to the Department .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Sheet Waterproofing Membrane Lump Sum .
High Performance Waterproofing Membrane Lump Sum SECTION STRUCTURAL PLATE PIPES PIPE ARCHES ARCHES AND METAL BOX CULVERTS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing structural plate pipes pipe arches arches and metal box culverts in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown in the Contract Documents. . Materials Material shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials Asphalt Filler for Structural Plate Arches .
Steel Structural Plate Pipe Pipe Arches Arches Box Culverts and Fasteners .
Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe Pipe Arches Arches Box Culverts and Fasteners . .
Fabrication Structural plate pipes shall be circular with a vertical elongation of approximately percent unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
Plates shall be formed to provide lap joints for bolted assembly .
Joints shall be staggered so that no more than three plates come together at one point .
Bolt holes shall be made so that all plates having like dimension curvature and the same number of bolts per foot of seam shall be interchangeable .
Each plate shall be curved before assembly to the radius necessary to produce the final cross section called for .
End plates shall be neatly cut to the skew and slope shown on the Plans .
Burnt edges shall be free of oxide and burrs and shall be completely galvanized .
Special plates and part plates shall be legibly marked to correspond to markings on an erectionassembly diagram which shall be furnished by the Contractor .
The Contractor shall prepare and submit Shop Drawings erectionassembly diagrams or other necessary Working Drawings in accordance with Section ..
These drawings will be reviewed and approved in accordance Section .. Bolt holes along those edges of the plates that will form longitudinal seams in the finished structure shall be staggered in rows inches apart for steel structural plates and shall be in rows  inch apart for aluminum structural plates .
Holes shall be in the valley and crest of the corrugations .
Bolt holes along those edges of the plates that will form circumferential seams in the finished structure shall be no more than inches apart .
The distance from the center of a hole to the edge of the plate shall not be less than times the diameter of the bolt .
The nominal diameter of the bolt holes not including corner holes in the longitudinal seam shall be  inch greater that the diameter of the bolts. . General Excavation for the structure and for the bedding material shall be in conformance with Section Structural Excavation .
Structures shall be assembled in the sequence and manner recommended by the manufacturer and in such a way that no distortion of plates would occur .
Bolts of the manufacturers recommended length shall be used in all holes .
Nuts shall be tightened to footpounds plus or minus footpounds of torque .
Aluminum nuts used with aluminum structural plate structures shall be tightened to footpounds plus or minus footpounds of torque .
Any nuts loosened by subsequent procedures shall be retightened .
The Contractor shall provide the Resident with a calibrated torque wrench for use during construction .
The Contractor shall provide proof to the Resident that the torque wrench has been calibrated within the past six months .
Steel plates or accessory materials on which the zinc metallic coating has been burned by welding or has otherwise been damaged in fabrication or handling shall be repaired in the field .
The Resident shall determine if repairs are needed to the coating and will mark the areas to be repaired .
The damaged areas shall be cleaned to bright metal by blast cleaning power disk sanding or wire brushing .
The cleaned areas shall extend  inch into the undamaged section of the coating .
The cleaned areas shall be coated within hours of the cleaning using an approved zincrich paint .
The zincrich paint shall be applied to a dry film thickness of at least .
inch over the damaged sections and surrounding cleaned areas .
The Contractor shall maintain a minimum cover of feet over the top of the structure where construction equipment is used or traffic is maintained . .
Structural Plate Pipes and Pipe Arches The use of cofferdams and dewatering of the stream will not be a requirement for the installation of pipes and pipe arches unless otherwise specified in the Contract Documents .
Prior to placing the structure or any plates the bed shall be brought to the required line and grade and shaped to its required section as much as practicable .
When practicable the pipe or pipe arch shall be moved back and forth longitudinally on the bedding material to shape and compact the bedding material prior to releasing the structure in its final position .
The bedding material and structure shall not be placed at times of high water .
The Contractor shall obtain approval before placing the bedding material and the structure .
The specified bedding material may be omitted if the existing material under the pipe is suitable .
When not otherwise specified in the Contract Documents backfill shall be a selected material of a granular nature with a minimum of clay .
It shall contain neither frozen material vegetable matter nor anything that will not pass through a inch square opening screen .
The inch size limitation shall not apply to areas feet or more from the structure .
Fill material shall be deposited evenly on both sides of the structure in layers not exceeding inches in depth loose measure until the threequarter point is reached .
It shall be thoroughly compacted under the pipe or pipe arch on both sides of the structure .
Above the threequarter point fill layers shall not exceed a depth of inches loose measure .
Backfilling and compacting shall be done in the presence of the Resident . .
Structural Plate Arches Structural plate arches shall be anchored to the concrete substructure by unbalanced channels as shown on the Plans .
When erection is complete and before any backfilling is done the spaces between the structural plates and the legs of the unbalanced channels on both sides shall be completely filled with asphalt filler .
Aluminum channels used with aluminum structural plate structures shall not be in direct contact with concrete .
An appropriate material approved by the Resident shall be used between the aluminum channel and the concrete .
When backfilling arches before headwalls are built a narrow ramp of backfill material shall be built up evenly at each side of the arch and midway between its ends until a minimum cover of feet over the top of the arch is reached .
The backfill material used in the ramps shall be thoroughly compacted as it is placed .
The remainder of the backfill shall be deposited from the top of the ramp both ways from the center toward the ends as evenly as possible on the sides of the arch .
If the headwalls are built before the arch is backfilled the same procedure as above shall be followed except that the backfill material shall first be placed in the form of a narrow ramp adjacent to one headwall .
When the aforementioned height above the arch is reached the backfill material shall be deposited from the top of the ramp toward the other headwall .
In all cases the filling material shall be thoroughly but not excessively compacted .
Compacting the backfill by means of flooding or ponding the material with water will not be permitted . .
Structural Plate Box Culverts Box culverts shall be assembled in accordance with the Shop Drawings provided by the manufacturer and per the manufacturers recommendations .
The box culverts shall be installed in accordance with the Contract Documents and the manufacturers recommendations .
End treatments and the type of invert andor foundation shall be as indicated on the Plans .
The Contractor shall use caution during backfilling operations so that any anchor rods attached to the headwalls and wingwalls are not damaged .
Structural plate box culverts on concrete substructures shall be anchored to the substructure by unbalanced channels as shown on the Plans .
When erection is complete and before any backfilling is done the spaces between the structural plates and the legs of the unbalanced channels on both sides shall be completely filled with asphalt filler meeting the requirements of .. Aluminum channels used with aluminum structural plate structures shall not be in direct contact with concrete .
An appropriate material approved by the Resident shall be used between the aluminum channel and the concrete . .
Method of Measurement Structural plate pipe pipe arches arches and plate box culverts will be measured as one lump sum . .
Basis of Payment The accepted structure will be paid for at the respective Contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for Preparation of the bed for pipes and pipe arches the asphalt filler and unbalanced channel for arches and metal box culverts the horizontal end reinforcing ribs for aluminum alloy structural plate pipe and pipe arches the headwalls wingwalls toewalls full metal invert andor footing pads for metal box culverts anchor bolts embedded in concrete the receiving channels for metal box culverts on concrete substructures and all incidental items required to complete the work including but not limited to the calibrated torque wrench for use by the Resident .
Reinforced concrete headwalls and wingwalls are not included for payment under this item .
Whenever the minimum cover material extends above the subgrade line the removal of the material which is necessary to complete the work in accordance with the Plans will be measured and paid for as Common Excavation as provided in Section Excavation and Embankment .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Steel Structural Plate Pipe Lump Sum .
Steel Structural Plate Pipe Arch Lump Sum .
Steel Structural Plate Arch Lump Sum .
Steel Structural Plate Box Culvert Lump Sum .
Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe Lump Sum .
Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe Arch Lump Sum .
Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Arch Lump Sum .
Aluminum Structural Plate Box Culvert Lump Sum SECTION SPECIAL DETOURS .
Description This work shall consist of the design construction maintenance in good condition and removal of temporary structures and approaches required for the satisfactory maintenance of vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
Easements or rightofway for the Special Detour will be furnished by the Department and will be shown on the Contract Plans .
If the Contractor proposes an alternative location for the Special Detour and the alternative location is approved by Department that easement may only be acquired by the Department .
All additional costs associated with the acquisition including but not limited to obtaining easements environmental mitigation restoration and Department time shall be borne by the Contractor. . Materials Materials used for the Special Detour structure and approaches shall conform to the detailed plans and specifications submitted by the Contractor. . Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Not Separated The Special Detour shall be located as close as practicable to the new Work or as shown on the Plans .
The Special Detour including the temporary structure and approaches shall be designed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in accordance with the laws of the State of Maine .
The Contractor shall submit the design computations and detailed plans of the temporary structure and approaches that will serve as the temporary detour to the Resident prior to beginning construction of the Special Detour .
If the Department requires changes to Temporary Detour plans or computations based on Contract requirements then the Contractor shall implement the changes at no additional cost to the Department .
The Department shall have no obligation to review or comment on any design construction maintenance or removal of Temporary Detours .
No review or comment by the Department or any lack of review or comment by the Department shall relieve the Contractor of its responsibility to properly design construct maintain in good condition and remove Temporary Detours in accordance with the Contract or shall shift any responsibility to the Department .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all damages resulting from the failure of temporary structures or approaches .
The Special Detour shall not be opened to traffic until the Contractors Professional Engineer inspects the temporary structure and provides the Department with a signed and sealed document certifying that the structure was built in accordance with the previously submitted sealed plans and design details of the structure and approaches . .
Structure Design Temporary structures shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges th Edition or the current edition of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications except as noted herein to meet live load requirements of HS for ASD and LFD or HL Maine Modified for LRFD designs .
a. Deflections Primary structural members shall be designed so that deflection due to live load plus impact shall not exceed of the span .
b .
Fatigue Stresses Fatigue stresses for steel need not be considered if the steel is judged by the Contractors Professional Engineer to be in sound structural condition .
c. Bridge Railing Loads Bridge railing shall be designed in accordance with AASHTO Standard Specifications th Edition or the current edition of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Specifications except that the Standard Specification design load P specified as kips may be decreased to kips .
However allowable design stresses for material used in bridge rails and posts shall not be increased above those allowed by AASHTO Standard Specifications .
d. Waterway Opening The minimum waterway opening of the temporary structure shall be designed to pass the Design Discharge indicated in the Contract Specifications without any overtopping of the roadway .
e. Foundations Temporary foundations embankment foundations and earth retaining structures shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Standard Specifications th Edition or the current edition of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications and AASHTO LFRD Bridge Construction Specifications except as noted herein .
The Contractor is responsible for determining the ultimate load carrying capacity of the foundation materials and foundation elements for the Special Detour .
The determination of the ultimate load carrying capacity may require characterization of the subsurface conditions by the Contractor by means of subsurface investigation .
The applied loads on foundations shall consider both dead and live loads and all other applicable loads and forces .
The Contractor is responsible for choosing an applicable factor of safety for foundations on soil and rock and an appropriate design load group .
The factor of safety and maximum applied load or LRFD factored applied loads and factored geotechnical resistances used for each foundation design shall be clearly stated on the submitted calculations. . Geometric and Approach Design The geometric design of the Special Detour except as otherwise shown on the Plans or as noted herein shall be designed in accordance with the current AASHTO Specification A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets .
a. Horizontal Alignment Horizontal curve radius shall not be less than feet at the centerline of roadway except as otherwise shown on the Plans .
Roadway width as indicated in the Contract shall be the minimum clear travel width between faces of bridge curbs bridge rails or approach rails whichever is less .
The approach roadway shall have feet wide shoulders minimum to the roadway berms where guardrail is not required in addition to the roadway width indicated in the Contract .
The roadway width shall be increased on curved portions of the Special Detour to account for the off tracking characteristics of a WB vehicle in accordance with Exhibit Case I or Case III of the AASHTO Standard Specifications .
b. Vertical Alignment Grades shall not exceed percent and any change in grade shall accommodate all legal highway vehicle components or attached loads .
c. Approach Road Guardrail The Special Detour approaches shall have guardrail where side slopes are steeper than three horizontal to one vertical .
Approach guardrail shall be attached to the bridge rail in a manner that develops the approach guardrail in tension .
Approach guardrail shall consist of Type guardrail or an approved equal unless other rail or barriers are specified .
The termination of approach guardrail and the end treatment of the rail shall be in accordance with the current AASHTO Roadside Design Guide .
d. Approach embankments The earth material used for approach embankments shall have sufficient strength under the placement method specified in the Contractors plans to maintain stability throughout the duration of the Special Detour .
e. Approach Road Base Drainage The approach road base structure shall consist of a foot thick layer minimum of aggregate subbase course gravel Type D or E. This layer shall be designed to support legal loads during the use of the detour .
Drainage shall be designed to drain the approach area .
f. Approach Road Surface The approach road surface including the shoulders shall be paved with a inch minimum thickness hot bituminous pavement layer except when specified to be a gravel surface .
When a gravel surface is specified it shall consist of an approved gravel .
g. Design Speed The design speed of the Special Detour shall be not less than the construction area posted speed limit or the advisory speed limit as applicable unless otherwise indicated in the Contract. . Pedestrian Traffic Only The provisions of Section .
Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Not Separated shall apply to this Section with the following modifications a .
Structures shall be designed for a live load of lbft .
b .
The Special Detour shall have a minimum clear width of feet or as specified in the Contract .
c. Vertical alignment and ramps shall be ADA compliant .
d. Deflections due to live load shall not exceed of the span. . Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Separated The provisions of both Section .
Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Not Separated and Section .
Pedestrian Traffic Only shall apply to this Section .
If vehicles and pedestrians are carried on the same structure each shall have its own lane as specified .
The pedestrian lane shall be protected from vehicular traffic by being at least inches above the roadway surface or suitably protected by means of an adequate curb at least inches in height above the roadway surface .
No bridge rail will be required between vehicle traffic and pedestrian traffic unless otherwise specified but shall be located at the exterior side of the sidewalk. . Special Detour Construction The Special Detour including temporary structures and approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the plans submitted by the Contractor .
Barricades warning signs lights and other traffic control devices shall be provided in accordance with the Contract and the approved Traffic Control Plan .
The temporary structures deck and floor members shall be fastened or anchored so that all contact surfaces with adjacent supporting members bear continuously .
If timber plank decking is used it shall be secured into timber nailer strips with screwtype nails or securely fastened by an alternate method that will prevent the decking from loosening .
Immediate corrective action shall be taken by the Contractor to remedy any condition in the structure that results in objectionable or distractive noise levels or results in the decking becoming loose when subject to traffic loads .
Screwtype nails will not be required to anchor timber plank decking for pedestrian traffic use .
The approach road surface including shoulders whether paved or graveled shall be maintained in a compacted and smooth condition .
The temporary structure travel surface shall be constructed and maintained in an acceptably smooth condition as determined by the Resident .
Immediate corrective action shall be taken by the Contractor to remedy objectionable roughness of the Special Detour riding surface .
Provisions shall be made for a skid resistant wearing surface throughout the period of time the temporary structure is open to public travel for vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
A steel grid floor may be used for vehicular traffic if installed in accordance with the design plans and these specifications .
Erosion control shall be accomplished in accordance with Section Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control .
When the Project has been opened to traffic the temporary structure and approaches shall be removed to or below the streambed finish ground line or original ground line as applicable .
The approaches shall be obliterated and the disturbed areas shall be stabilized to original or better than original conditions .
The provisions of Section General Rights and Responsibilities shall apply . .
Contractors Responsibility The Contractor shall be responsible for removal of snow from areas provided for pedestrian traffic as well as vehicular traffic in accordance with Section General Scope of Work .
In addition to normal maintenance should any part or all of the Special Detour be damaged or destroyed by high water or any other cause prior to or after opening the Special Detour to traffic it shall be repaired or replaced by the Contractor without additional compensation . .
Method of Measurement Special Detours will be paid by the lump sum . .
Basis of Payment The accepted Special Detour will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price which price shall be full compensation for the respective items as called for in the Contract including design construction maintenance complete removal rehabilitation and permanent stabilization including loaming seeding and mulching .
All gravel or borrow material and excavation needed to accommodate changes in elevation between temporary structures and existing roadways shall be incidental to this item .
The lump sum price shall also include the cost of furnishing and revising as necessary all plans computations and certifications as called for in the Contract .
Payment will be made as follows percent of the lump sum price will be paid when the Special Detour is acceptable and open to traffic another percent of the lump sum price will be paid when the Special Detour is no longer needed and is closed to traffic the final percent of the lump sum price will be paid when the Special Detour is removed and the area encompassing the Special Detour is acceptably restored .
Traffic control devices temporary erosion control pavement and dust control will be paid for in accordance with the applicable Contract items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Special Detour ___ foot Roadway Lump Sum Width Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Not Separated .
Special Detour Pedestrian Traffic Only Lump Sum .
Special Detour ___ foot Roadway Lump Sum Width Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Separated SECTION COFFERDAMS .
Description This work shall consist of the complete design construction maintenance and removal of cofferdams and other related work including dewatering and inspection required to allow for the excavation of foundation units to permit and protect the construction of bridge or other structural units and to protect adjacent Roadways embankments or other structural units in accordance with the Contract. . Materials As specified in the cofferdam Working Drawings. . Cofferdam Construction A .
Working Drawings .
The Contractor shall submit Working Drawings showing the materials to be used and the proposed method of construction of cofferdams to the Department .
Construction shall not start on cofferdams until such Working Drawings have been submitted .
Any review of or comment on or any lack of review of or comment on these Working Drawings by the Department shall not result in any liability upon the Department and it shall not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for the satisfactory functioning of the cofferdam .
B .
Construction .
Construct cofferdams in conformance with the submitted Working Drawings .
Cofferdams shall in general be carried below the elevation of the bottom of footings to adequate depths to ensure stability and adequate heights to seal off water .
Cofferdams shall be braced to withstand pressure without buckling secured in place to prevent tipping or movement and be as watertight as necessary for the safe and proper construction of the substructure Work inside them .
With the exception of construction of a concrete foundation seal placed under water the interior dimensions of cofferdams shall provide sufficient clearance for the construction and inspection of forms and to permit pumping outside of forms .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the righting and resetting of cofferdams that have tilted or moved laterally as required for construction .
During the placing and curing of seal concrete maintain the water level inside the cofferdam at the same level as the water outside the cofferdam to prevent flow through the concrete .
No timber or bracing shall be used in cofferdams in such a way as to remain in the substructure Work .
Cofferdams shall be constructed to protect fresh concrete against damage from the sudden rising of the water body to prevent damage by erosion and to prevent damage to adjacent Roadways embankments or other structural units .
Unless otherwise noted cofferdams including all sheeting and bracing involved shall be removed after the completion of the substructure work in a manner that prevents disturbance or injury to the finished Work .
Cofferdams shall be constructed dewatered and removed in accordance with the requirements of Section Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control and related Special Provisions .
C. Inspection of Seal Cofferdams .
Seal cofferdam excavations shall initially be inspected and approved by the Contractor .
For each seal cofferdam excavation the Contractor shall submit a written procedure to the Resident for sedimentoverburden removal and excavation inspection .
For cofferdams where seal concrete is to be placed on bedrock the inspection procedure shall describe the Contractors final cleaning and inspection process for attaining cleanliness of each cofferdam excavation .
For cofferdams where seal concrete is not excavated to bedrock the procedure shall describe the Contractors final cleaning and inspection process for attaining the bottom of seal elevation shown on the Plans .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident at least hours prior to when each seal cofferdam excavation will be ready for final inspection by the Department .
The Contractor shall allow adequate time for each occurrence of cofferdam excavation inspection by the Department .
The Contractor shall provide and maintain access and equipment such as steel probes for the Resident andor the Departments Dive Team to independently inspect each cofferdam excavation .
No seal concrete placement shall begin until the Department has approved the cofferdam excavation. . Pumping Pumping from the interior of any cofferdam shall be done in such a manner as to prevent any current of water that would carry away or segregate the concrete .
Pumping to dewater a sealed cofferdam shall not commence until the seal concrete has set sufficiently to withstand the hydrostatic pressure and meets the following minimum curing time after the completion of the installation of the seal concrete .
When the temperature of the water body outside the cofferdam is greater than degrees Fahrenheit a minimum of days . .
When the temperature of the water body outside the cofferdam is less than degrees Fahrenheit a minimum of days .
Procedures for the removal of all water and materials from cofferdams shall be described in the Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Plan as required in Section Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control and related Special Provisions . .
Method of Measurement Cofferdams will be measured as one lump sum unit as indicated on the Plans or called for in the Contract . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of cofferdam will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price for the respective cofferdam items which price shall be full compensation for design construction maintenance inspection and removal .
When required the elevation of the bottom of the footing of any substructure unit may be lowered without change in the price to be paid for cofferdams .
However if the average elevation of more than percent of the area of the excavation is more than three feet below the elevation shown on the Plans and if requested by the Contractor then the additional costs incurred that are included in the cofferdam Pay Item will be paid for in accordance with Section .
Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time .
The Contractor shall immediately notify the Department when these additional costs commence .
Failure of the Contractor to provide this notification will result in undocumented additional work that will be nonreimbursable .
The Department will evaluate this additional work to determine an appropriate time extension if warranted .
All costs for sedimentation control practices including but not limited to constructing maintaining and removing sedimentation control structures and pumping or transporting water and other materials for sedimentation control will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the cofferdam Pay Items .
All costs for related temporary soil erosion and water pollution controls including inspection and maintenance will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the cofferdam Pay Items .
All costs associated with preparation of Working Drawings design calculations written procedure for sedimentoverburden removal and excavation inspection and the inspection of the seal cofferdam excavation shall be considered incidental to the cofferdam Pay Items .
There shall be no additional payment for repeated inspection by the Department of the same cofferdam excavation .
All costs for cofferdams and related temporary soil erosion and water pollution controls including inspection and maintenance will be considered incidental to related Pay Items when a specific Pay Item for cofferdams is not included in the Contract .
Seal concrete will be evaluated under Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Cofferdam Lump Sum SECTION FRENCH DRAINS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing placing and compacting stone and gravel and furnishing and placing erosion control geotextile for French drains in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown in the Contract. . Materials .
Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials .
Aggregate for Subbase .b Gravel Borrow .
Stone for French Drains .
Erosion Control Geotextile .
Class Gravel for French drains shall meet the requirements of either Aggregate for Subbase Type D or Gravel Borrow at the Contractors option. . Drains Stone shall be placed behind and against the structures with the bottom of the stone at the elevation of the flow line of the weeper drains .
The stone shall form a box section feet wide and feet high for the entire length of the structure .
Erosion control geotextile shall be installed to separate the stone box section from the surrounding gravel .
Installation of the erosion control geotextile shall be in accordance with Section Geotextiles .
Gravel shall be placed to form a box section around the stone to the limits of feet above the stone feet behind the stone and feet below the stone but not to be placed below the top of the footing .
Gravel for French drains shall be compacted to the same requirements as the adjacent embankment . .
Method of Measurement French drains will be measured as one lump sum unit satisfactorily placed and accepted .
Excavation for French drains will be measured for payment in accordance with Section Structural Excavation . .
Basis of Payment French drains will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price complete in place .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
French Drains Lump Sum SECTION SLOPE PROTECTION .
Description This work shall consist of excavating for and placing of a protective covering on designated slopes in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades and thickness as shown in the Contract. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials .
Crushed Stone .
Reinforcing Steel .
Portland cement concrete for slope protection shall be Class A and shall meet the requirements of Section Structural Concrete. . Portland Cement Concrete The slope on which the reinforced concrete for slope protection is to be placed shall be free of frost and frozen material and shall be well compacted .
If additional fill material is required to bring the slope to the proper grade it shall be of the same type material as that required for the slope protection foundation .
Immediately prior to placing the concrete the area to be covered shall be thoroughly dampened .
The Portland cement concrete shall be placed in alternate sections .
Each individual section shall be placed by starting at the lowest extremity of the section and progressing upward on the slope .
The reinforcement shall not extend through the construction joints and the bond between sections shall be broken by the application of approved asphalt cement on the edges of the previously placed slabs .
The surface of the concrete shall be float finished in accordance with the requirements of Section Structural Concrete and textured by applying a uniform light broom finish using an approved broom .
An edging tool shall be used on the surface edges of each section and a groover at the transverse centerline of each section .
The exterior surface from the edging or grooving shall be finished to match the interior surface .
Construction procedures shall be in accordance with Section Structural Concrete . .
Crushed Stone Crushed stone shall be placed on granular material as shown on the Plans .
The finished slope shall be worked to present a smooth and uniform surface. . Drains or Weep Holes Drains or weep holes through the slope protection shall be pipe of the size and shape shown on the Plans and shall be constructed of approved cast iron tile fiber or other material that will maintain its shape and alignment during placement of the concrete .
Care shall be taken not to cover the drains when installed or when concrete is placed . .
Method of Measurement Slope protection will be measured by the number of square yards of surface area acceptably covered in accordance with the Contract . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of slope protection will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square yard .
Payment will be full compensation for excavating shaping and compacting the slope prior to placing bedding and slope protection and shall also include the bedding material .
Excavating from original ground to the face of the slope protection will be paid under the appropriate Contract item .
Payment for Portland cement concrete slope protection shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing all material including reinforcement and for all labor and other incidentals including drains and weep holes necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Slope ProtectionPortland Cement Concrete Square Yard .
Crushed Stone Slope Protection Square Yard SECTION CURING BOX FOR CONCRETE CYLINDERS .
Description This item shall consist of furnishing installing operating and maintaining an approved thermostatically controlled curing box for concrete test cylinders with the equipment as herein specified. . General The curing box shall be for the sole use of the Resident for the duration of the Contract .
The Contractor shall relocate the curing box to a new location as directed whenever considered necessary during the progress of the Work .
The Contractor shall furnish and maintain the electrical power and all utility connections necessary for the operation of the curing box .
The Contractor shall monitor and maintain the internal temperature and water level of the box .
The Resident shall be provided with two locks each with two keys to be used with the two securing latches .
A lock for the switch box with two keys shall be furnished as well. . Construction Details The curing box shall be constructed with double walls separated by two inches of rigid foam insulation and shall have minimum internal dimensions of inches long by inches wide by inches deep .
The top of the curing box shall be an insulated lid hinged at the back with at least two securing latches on the front suitable for sealing and locking the curing box .
A moistureproof seal shall be provided between the lid and the body of the curing box .
Handles shall be provided at the ends of the box for use in moving the box .
The curing box shall be constructed so that the required temperature and humidity within the box can be maintained using an immersible heating element minimum of watts when the heating element is immersed in water approximately inches in depth at the bottom of the box .
The heating element shall be located to provide free access for cleaning and for adequate circulation of the surrounding water .
The cylinders shall be supported so that they will not come in direct contact with the pool of water and that there will be free circulation of air above the water and around the cylinders .
A drain shall be provided at the base of the box to allow draining of the water from the box .
The electrical utility connection to the source of power shall be made in a lockable switch box that is securely attached to one end of the curing box .
All electrical connections from the curing box to the utility connection shall conform to the latest requirements of the NEC .
When the curing box is outside and exposed to the weather all wiring and fittings shall be of the weatherproof type .
The curing box shall be effectively grounded .
An approved bimetallic thermometer shall be installed that will measure the internal temperature of the curing box and that can be read from the outside without having to open the box .
The curing box shall be suitable for maintaining an internal temperature of degrees Fahrenheit plus or minus degrees Fahrenheit . .
Method of Measurement Curing box for concrete cylinders will be measured by each unit furnished and satisfactorily maintained . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of curing box for concrete cylinders will be paid for at the Contract unit price each which payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and maintaining for all materials labor tools equipment electrical power temporary utility changes and adjustments and all necessary incidentals .
At the completion of the Contract the curing box shall remain the property of the Contractor .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Curing Box for Concrete Cylinders Each SECTION PROTECTIVE COATING FOR CONCRETE SURFACES .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and applying a protective coating on concrete surfaces as called for on the Plans or as designated by the Resident in accordance with these specifications and the manufacturers published recommendations. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of Type c penetrating silane concrete sealers from the MaineDOT Qualified Products List QPL . .
Surface Preparation On surfaces to be treated all voids shall be filled with mortar and the entire surface shall be dressed by dry rubbing to remove form marks and blemishes to present a neat appearance .
The concrete shall remain dry for at least hours before treatment and shall be free of laitance oil grease dirt dust curing compound or any other deleterious materials .
All traces of dust shall be removed immediately before applying the silane sealer .
The treatment shall not be done until at least days after casting the concrete or in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations and completed at least hours before the treated portion is opened to traffic . .
Application The application rate and method of application shall be in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
When practical treatment of the concrete surfaces shall be completed before exposure to deicing salts .
The temperature of the concrete to be treated shall be above degrees Fahrenheit at the time of application or per the manufacturers published recommendations . .
Method of Measurement Protective coating for concrete surfaces will be measured for payment by the square yard or lump sum unit as specified satisfactorily applied and accepted . .
Basis of Payment Protective coating for concrete surfaces will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard or lump sum as specified .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Protective Coating for Concrete Surfaces Square Yard .
Protective Coating for Concrete Surfaces Lump Sum SECTION STYRENEBUTADIENNE LATEX MODIFIED PORTLAND CEMENT MORTAR AND CONCRETE Reserved SECTION SHOTCRETE Reserved SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE REPAIR .
Description This work shall consist of repairing existing structural concrete as shown on the Plans andor as directed by the Resident .
Repairing structural concrete shall include removal and disposal of deteriorated concrete cleaning exposed reinforcing steel cleaning of concrete surfaces in repair areas application of bonding agent and placing and curing repair material .
All work shall be in conformance with applicable provisions of Sections and .
Upward Facing Surfaces are defined as any concrete surfaces where the slope is less than or equal to percent from the horizontal .
Overhead Surfaces are defined as any concrete surfaces where the slope is overhanging more than percent from plumb .
All other surfaces shall be defined as Vertical Surfaces. . Repair Materials A material from the Departments Qualified Products List QPL of concrete patching materials may be used instead of concrete for any depth of placement at the Contractors option providing that all requirements of the manufacturers published recommendations are met .
All materials used for repair of concrete or reinforcing steel shall meet the applicable requirements of Division as specified in Standard Specification Sections and respectively .
When concrete is used as the repair material it shall conform to the requirements of Table of Section .
for Class A Concrete .
Where the depth of placement is less than inch the repair material used shall be one of the products listed on the Departments QPL of concrete patching materials .
Where the depth of placement is equal to or greater than inch the Contractor may use concrete as the repair material .
When concrete is used the coarse aggregate shall conform to the requirements of the following tables .
Thickness of Placement Coarse Aggregate Gradation Designation to inches to inches inches SP x SP x SP x SP x Class AA x Class A or AA x x Coarse Aggregate Gradation Designation Sieve Designation Percent By Weight Passing a Square Mesh Sieve  in  in  in No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
SP .
SP .
SP .
SP .
A bonding material shall be used for bonding fresh concrete or patching material to existing hardened concrete .
The bonding material shall consist of the following except that in the case where patching materials from the QPL are used in the repair areas the manufacturers published recommendations regarding application and use of bonding materials shall take precedence a For repair of Upward Facing Surfaces the bonding grout shall have Portland cement and fine aggregate proportioned to respectively by volume .
The fine aggregate shall be from the same source as that used in the repair concrete .
All material greater than  inch shall be removed from the fine aggregate .
The sand and cement shall be measured separately in equal sized containers .
The sand shall be added prior to the cement .
Water shall be added during the mixing process a little at a time until sufficient water has been added to result in a workable consistency .
A workable consistency is defined as the minimum water necessary to allow flow of most of the grout without segregation of the grout ingredients .
Alternately the Contractor may use a product from the Departments QPL of concrete bonding agents in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations .
b For repair of Vertical and Overhead Surfaces the Contractor shall use a product from the Departments QPL of concrete bonding agents in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations . .
Removal of Unsound Concrete Removal of existing concrete shall be accomplished without damage to the portion of the structure that is to remain .
The deteriorated or delaminated concrete shall first be removed from areas designated by the Resident .
The initial classification of an area as sound concrete does not prevent its subsequent reclassification upon further inspection .
After the initial removal of unsound concrete the Resident shall inspect the area again to determine whether additional areas of unsound concrete were revealed by removal operations and if additional concrete removal is required in the areas to be repaired .
This process shall continue until additional areas of unsound concrete are not revealed .
After the Resident has determined that the deteriorated concrete has been completely and satisfactorily removed the perimeter of each cavity created by the removal of concrete shall be saw cut to a minimum depth of  inch unless a lesser depth is required to avoid reinforcing steel .
The saw cut shall be approximately perpendicular to the original surface .
Edges of the cavity shall not be feathered .
Unless otherwise approved by the Resident the equipment used for removal of unsound concrete shall be chipping hammers weighing a maximum of pounds and only chisel point bits will be allowed .
The surface area and depth of removal for concrete repairs shall be subject to the approval of the Resident .
Deteriorated concrete shall be removed to one of the following depths whichever is greatest a Sound substrate .
b To the minimum depth required per the manufacturers recommendations when a material from the Departments QPL for concrete patching materials is used .
c To the minimum depth indicated in the Thickness of Placement Table when concrete is used depending on the coarse aggregate gradation .
d When reinforcing steel is exposed or encountered the minimum depth shall be inch behind reinforcing steel for Upward Facing Surfaces and  inches behind reinforcing steel for Vertical and Overhead Surfaces . .
Reinforcing Steel All existing reinforcing steel exposed by concrete removal which is to remain in the structure shall be cleaned of all loose rust by sand blasting wire brushing machine wire brushing or other methods approved by the Resident .
Where reinforcing steel is to remain in the structure care shall be taken to prevent damage to the reinforcing steel or its bond to the surrounding concrete .
All existing main reinforcing steel which is broken or has lost percent or more of its original cross sectional area shall be supplemented with new reinforcing steel .
The total area of supplemental bars plus existing bars with section loss shall have the same total area as the original bar .
Supplementary reinforcing steel shall be lap spliced a minimum length of bar diameters for bars with section loss of up to percent of the original bar area and per Section Reinforcing Steel for all other bars .
Reinforcing steel shall be wired to the existing steel or where designated by the Resident the existing reinforcing steel shall be cut and supplementary reinforcing steel spliced in with tension couplers . .
Surface Preparation The surfaces to receive repair material shall be free of oil solvent grease dirt loose particles and foreign matter .
Cleaning of repair areas shall be performed by sandblasting or other methods approved by the Resident .
All surfaces receiving new material are to be sandblasted not more than hours ahead of the placement of the repair material or as per the bonding agent manufacturers recommendations .
Any sandblasted areas that have been rained on exposed to high humidity or fog or contaminated in any other manner shall be sandblasted again before the repair material is applied .
All debris from the cleaning operations shall be thoroughly removed from the cleaned surfaces and adjacent areas using compressed dry air prior to the application of repair materials .
All air compressor lines used for cleaning of repair areas shall be equipped with effective oil traps . .
Application of Bonding Agent When bonding grout is used on repair of upward facing surfaces the following shall apply except that in the case where concrete patching materials from the Departments QPL are used in the repair areas the manufacturers published recommendations regarding application and use of bonding materials shall take precedence .
Once a workable consistency has been reached additional water shall not be added .
The grout must be used or discarded within minutes of the time water is added to the mix .
The grout shall be applied no greater than  inch thick with stiff bristled nylon street brooms .
The Contractor shall prevent the grout from drying by beginning the grout application immediately prior to the concrete placement and limiting the area of grout application ahead of concrete placement .
If the grout begins to dry prior to concrete placement additional grout may be brushed on the area as directed by the Resident .
Should the grout become thoroughly dry it shall be removed by sand blasting or other methods as approved by the Resident .
When a bonding agent from the Departments QPL is used the product shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations . .
Placing Repair Materials When concrete is used as the repair material the provisions of Section shall apply .
Additionally concrete shall not be placed when either the ambient air temperature or the existing concrete temperature is below degrees Fahrenheit .
When a patching material is used the Contractor shall follow the manufacturers published recommendations for mixing and placing the material .
Forms shall be erected to the neat lines of the existing structure and the new concrete placed .
For overhead and vertical repair areas sufficient concrete shall be removed to ensure that air within the area to be patched can effectively escape during the placement of the repair material. . Curing Curing of concrete shall conform to the requirements of Section .
For Overhead and Vertical Surfaces curing compounds may be used in accordance with the manufacturers requirements .
Patching materials shall be cured in accordance with the manufacturers published recommendations . .
Inspection The Contractor shall make provisions to allow safe access to the work for the Resident in order to inspect the work facilitate ongoing inspection of the work and to measure the work for payment purposes . .
Method of Measurement Repair of structural concrete is divided into repair areas less than inches in depth and repair areas inches in depth or greater .
The repair depth shall be considered the average thickness of an individual repair area .
The Resident shall make the final determination as to whether the average depth of repair is less than inches or inches or greater .
Concrete repair will be measured for payment by the square foot of all surfaces repaired where the average depth of repair is less than inches complete and accepted .
Concrete repair will be measured for payment by the cubic yard for all repairs where the average depth of repair is inches or greater complete and accepted .
The quantity will be determined from the theoretical yield of the design mix or in the case of transit mixed concrete by delivery ticket as directed by the Resident .
Supplementary reinforcing steel will be measured for payment by the pounds of steel provided and installed and paid for under Item .
Reinforcing Steel Fabricated and Delivered and Item .
Reinforcing Steel Placing respectively except that Reinforcing Steel Placing will be measured for payment as .
times the actual number of pounds placed .
Reinforcing steel required to supplement reinforcing steel damaged by the Contractor shall be supplied and installed at the Contractors expense .
Tension couplers will be measured for payment as the number of splices satisfactorily installed and accepted .
Payment will be made under Item .
MechanicalWelded Splices .
Couplers required to repair reinforcing steel damaged by the Contractor shall be provided and installed at the Contractors expense .
Temporary support beams or girders required to repair bridge seats or pier caps will be paid for separately as approved by the Resident . .
Basis of Payment The repair of structural concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price as indicated in the Schedule of Items for the respective Contract item involved .
The following will be included in the unit price for the respective concrete items complete and accepted Removal of existing concrete cleaning of existing reinforcing steel to remain in the structure cleaning of existing concrete surfaces in repair areas furnishing and installing bonding materials providing installing and removal of all formwork furnishing and placing new concrete or other approved concrete patching materials in areas where existing concrete is removed curing of concrete or patching materials disposal of all demolition material and debris .
Payment for any staging platforms or lifts required by the Contractor to gain access to the work in order to perform the work or to provide access to the Resident in order to inspect or measure the work shall be considered incidental to related Contract items unless the Contract provisions specify separate payment for such access devices .
Fabrication delivery and placing of reinforcing steel and mechanical couplers if required will be paid for under separate Contract items .
The payment for each Contract item will also be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor equipment and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Repair of Upward Facing Surfaces to Reinforcing Steel Square Foot inches .
Repair of Upward Facing Surfaces below Reinforcing Steel Square Foot inches .
Repair of Upward Facing Surfaces inches Cubic Yard .
Repair of Vertical Surfaces inches Square Foot .
Repair of Vertical Surfaces inches Cubic Yard .
Repair of Overhead Surfaces inches Square Foot .
Repair of Overhead Surfaces inches Cubic Yard SECTION VACANT SECTION EXPANSION DEVICES NONMODULAR .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing expansion devices including the seals anchorage system and curb sidewalk expansion dams and barrier sliding plates where required as shown on the Plans in accordance with these specifications and per the seal manufacturers published recommendations .
Seals for expansion devices shall be either gland seals or compression seals as specified on the Plans. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Expansion Device Gland Seal Stud Shear Connectors Anchors and Fasteners .
Structural Steel .
High Strength Bolts .
Steel Extrusions .
Elastomer for Seal Elements .
Lubricant Adhesive .
Gland Type Seals .
Expansion Device Compression Seal Stud Shear Connectors Anchors and Fasteners .
Structural Steel .
High Strength Bolts .
Elastomer for Seal Elements .
Lubricant Adhesive .
Sealant .
Compression Seals .
Gland and compression seals shall be of the general configuration as shown on the Contract documents and shall be one of the seals listed on the Departments Qualified Products List . .
Fabrication All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
The Contractor shall submit Working Drawings in accordance with Section .
Working Drawings .
Seals shall be furnished and installed in one continuous length and splices will not be allowed except as specified hereafter .
As received from the supplier of the seal seals may contain one splice for each continuous length of feet or greater .
Sections under feet long shall not have any splices .
Splices at abrupt angular changes in horizontal alignment will be allowed .
Splices in gland type seals shall be shop vulcanized by the seal supplier .
Splices in compression seals may be either vulcanized or adhesive bonded .
At abrupt angular changes in vertical alignment the lower percent of the depth of compression seals may be cut to allow short radius bends . .
Protective Coating The expansion device including the curb and sidewalk expansion dams and barrier sliding plates shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements for Protective Coatings in Section Structural Steel .
The galvanizing on the metal surfaces in direct contact with neoprene seals shall be lightly sandblasted to a dull gray appearance in order to promote a high strength bond between the seal and mating surface and for smoothness for installation purposes .
Alternately this galvanized surface may be prepared to the manufacturers published recommendations for installation and bonding of seals .
When specified on the Contract Plans reinforcing steel shall be anchored into drilled holes . .
Delivery Unless otherwise specified on the Plans expansion devices shall be shipped fully assembled and shall be installed as a unit .
The unit shall be equipped with shipping and temperature adjustment devices approved by the Fabrication Engineer and shall be preadjusted in the fabrication facility to the opening required at degrees Fahrenheit . .
Installation Expansion Devices shall be erected following placement of the structural deck slab .
The devices shall be lowered into the blockedout area of the deck slab adjusted for the temperature in accordance with the Plans and Working Drawings set to the proper height and fastened in place in accordance with the Standard Details .
Once the expansion devices are set in their final positions all shipping and temperature adjustment apparatuses shall be removed and the concrete for the slab and abutment backwall blockedout area shall be placed immediately .
Seal elements shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations using equipment manufactured specifically for the purpose of installing the seal elements .
The equipment shall not cause structural damage to either the seal or the joint armor and shall not twist distort or cause other malformations in the installed seal element .
Any perforation or tearing of a seal element due to installation procedures or construction activities will be cause for rejection of the installed seal element requiring replacement by the Contractor at no cost to the Department .
Immediately prior to the installation of the seal element the metal contact surfaces of the joint armor shall be clean dry and free of oil rust paint or foreign material .
Unless otherwise recommended by the seal manufacturer the contact surfaces of the seal element shall be cleaned with normal butylacetate using clean rags or mops immediately prior to application of the lubricantadhesive or sealant .
The lubricant adhesive or sealant shall be applied to the seal element and joint armor contact surfaces at the rate recommended by the manufacturer of the seal .
The exposed ends of compression seals shall be sealed with appropriately shaped pieces of foam rubber bonded in place with sealant as described in Section .
Sealant or a bonding agent approved by the Resident . .
Method of Measurement Expansion devices will be measured by each unit complete in place and accepted .
Each unit shall consist of one pair of matching elements including anchorage system seal shipping and temperature adjustment devices curb and sidewalk expansion dams and barrier sliding plates as required . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of expansion devices will be paid for at the Contract unit price each which shall be full compensation for all materials including anchorage system protective coating equipment labor and incidentals necessary for furnishing and installing the expansion devices and if required curb and sidewalk expansion dams and barrier sliding plates .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Expansion Device Gland Seal Each .
Expansion Device Compression Seal Each SECTION FINGER JOINT AND FABRIC TROUGHFABRIC CURTAIN .
Description This work shall consist of fabricating and installing finger joint expansion devices and fabric troughs or fabric curtains when required including the anchorage system curb and sidewalk expansion dams barrier sliding plates as required support components for fabric troughs or curtains when required and any metal downspouts andor chutes used to guide the discharge from the troughs when required and all necessary materials and equipment required to complete the work as shown on the Plans and in accordance with these specifications. . Materials Finger Joints Plates requiring a nonskid surface shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM A .
Other plates shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM A .
Shapes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grades A and B or ASTM A .
Other weldable steels may be used with approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Anchor studs shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Stud Shear Connectors Anchor and Fasteners .
Bolts shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A. . General All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
Completed expansion devices and any required support components for troughs or curtains expansion dams barrier sliding plates downspouts and chutes shall be hot dipped galvanized to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A. Anchorage parts encased in concrete may be supplied in the ungalvanized condition .
Each expansion device shall be shipped fully assembled shall be installed as a unit and shall be equipped with shipping and temperature adjustment devices approved by the Resident .
When a project is built in stages and if desired by the Contractor the expansion device may be shipped in two or more sections as approved by the Fabrication Engineer with appropriate provisions for field splicing. . Materials Fabric Trough or Curtain The fabric for the trough or curtain shall be  to inch in thickness and shall consist of a single layer of .
ounce woven nylon fabric or the equivalent in multiple layers of woven nylon fabric laminated between two or more layers of neoprene rubber .
The neoprene shall conform to the following requirements Physical Properties Grade Duro Original Physical Properties Hardness ASTM D Tensile Strength Minimum psi ASTM D Elongation at Break Minimum Accelerated Test to Determine Long Term Aging Characteristics Oven Aged HoursF ASTM D Hardness Points Change Maximum Tensile Strength Change Maximum Elongation at Break Change Maximum Ozone PPM in Air by Volume Strain No cracks F ASTM D hours Samples shall be solvent wiped before test to remove any traces of surface impurities .
Compression Set Hours F ASTM D Method B Maximum ASTM D Procedure B F Brittleness at No Failure Fluid Resistance ASTM D HoursF in ASTM Oil No .
Change in volume Maximum Change in tensile strength Maximum Change in ultimate elongation Maximum The finished fabric shall have a minimum breaking strength of poundsinch when tested by ASTM Test Method D. The minimum breaking strength shall be determined on a sample taken transverse to the centerline of the trough or a random sample taken from the curtain .
When delivered to the job site each separate length roll or container shall be clearly tagged or marked with the manufacturers name trade mark and lot number .
A lot is defined as that amount of fabric manufactured at one time from one batch of elastomer .
A batch is defined as that amount of elastomer prepared and compounded at one time .
Not less than thirty days prior to the installation of the trough a sample length of each lot of fabric not less than feet long shall be submitted to the Resident for testing .
All samples shall be taken from the lots to be furnished shall be tagged for identification purposes and shall be furnished to the Resident at no additional cost to the Department .
Approval of the material must be obtained before the material is incorporated in the work . .
Fabrication The Contractor shall submit Working Drawings in accordance with Section .
Working Drawings .
These drawings shall include but not be limited to the following information The complete details of the method materials and equipment proposed to be used in the installation operation .
Such details shall give complete specifications and details of the elastomeric trough or curtain and other data pertaining to the installation operation .
Installation holes shall be cut round and cleanly with a sharp tool .
Holes having jagged or roughly cut edges will be cause for rejection of the trough or curtain unit. . Construction of Fabric Trough Where a splice is required for staged construction the upper section of the trough shall be fitted inside the lower section of the trough in such a manner that any water spillage through the splice shall be eliminated . .
Method of Measurement Expansion Device Finger Joint will be measured by each unit complete in place and accepted .
Each unit shall consist of one pair of matching devices including anchorage system curb and sidewalk expansion dams barrier sliding plates as required and if shown on the Plans trough or curtain components downspouts and chutes .
Fabric Trough or Fabric Curtain for Finger Joint will be measured for payment by each unit complete in place and accepted . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Expansion Device Finger Joint will be paid for at the Contract unit price each which payment shall be full compensation for all materials including anchorage system curb and sidewalk expansion dams barrier sliding plates trough or curtain support systems downspouts and chutes galvanizing equipment labor and incidentals necessary for furnishing and installing the expansion devices and expansion dams .
The accepted quantity of Fabric Trough or Fabric Curtain for Finger Joint will be paid for at the Contract price each complete in place and accepted which price shall include all materials equipment tools labor and incidentals necessary for furnishing and installing the trough or curtain .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Expansion Device Finger Joint Each .
Fabric Trough for Finger Joint Each .
Fabric Curtain for Finger Joint Each SECTION EXPANSION DEVICES MODULAR .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing shop fabricated modular expansion devices .
This shall include but not be limited to neoprene seal elements steel transverse dividers and end channels support bars and bearings anchorages sidewalk median and curb expansion dams and barrier slide plates all as specified herein or specified in the Contract documents. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Stud Shear Connectors Anchor and Fasteners .
Structural Steel .
High Strength Bolts .
Steel Extrusions .
Lubricant Adhesive .
Gland Type Seals .
All steel divider bars end channels and support bars shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade Steel .
Other steel plates shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM A .
Shapes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grades A and B or ASTM A .
Other weldable steels may be used with the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
The entire assembly unless otherwise indicated on the Contract Plans shall be hot dip galvanized in conformance with AASHTO M ASTM A .
All miscellaneous materials such as stainless steel sliding surfaces bearings etc .
shall be as recommended by the manufacturer and as approved by the Fabrication Engineer .
The manufacturer shall submit full information on material specifications and dimensional data for approval. . Design The modular expansion devices shall incorporate divider bars end channels divider bar supports seals a system to maintain the seals at a substantially equal spacing at all times and joint armor incorporating a support system for the divider bar supports and an anchoring system for fixing the expansion device to the supporting concrete .
The expansion devices shall be capable of accommodating the movements specified in the Contract Documents .
The system maintaining the seal spacing shall be subject to prior approval by the Fabrication Engineer and shall be a design that does not employ a rigid scissortype mechanical system .
The seal spacing system shall at all times exert a positive control force and shall have a certain amount of flexibility to absorb shock loads such as snowplow impacts .
The sealing elements shall be gland type seals and shall be fabricated with lugs or other protrusions designed to have a positive interlocking action with the divider bars .
Sealing elements that are continuous over the full width of the joint and require a clamping element to fix the sealing element to the top surface of the divider bars will not be accepted .
The minimum joint opening between adjacent divider bars shall be  inch and the maximum joint opening shall be  inches .
The divider bars and end channels shall be extruded or rolled shapes designed to positively interlock with the sealing elements and capable of sustaining all vertical and horizontal loads imposed by the traffic .
The divider bar supports shall be supported on the joint armor in a manner incorporating sufficient flexibility to absorb vertical shock loads .
The divider bars divider bar supports and associated bearings hardware etc .
shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications .
The manufacturer shall submit computations and data to verify appropriate load carrying capacity and said computations shall show conformance to all applicable requirements including fatigue criteria of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications . .
Fabrication The expansion joints shall be shop assembled in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations and in conformance with the details shown in the Contract Documents and in these specifications .
All work shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
Twentyfive percent of full penetration welds shall be inspected by ultrasonic UT or radiographic RT examination .
Twentyfive percent of fillet welds and partial penetration welds shall be inspected by magnetic particle method MT .
Acceptance criteria shall be in accordance with the AWS D. Bridge Welding Code .
All shop welding shall be completed to the greatest extent possible before the steel is galvanized .
Any welds to be made after the steel is galvanized shall be identified on the Shop Drawings .
Steel surfaces welded subsequent to galvanizing shall be repaired to the requirements of ASTM A and Annexes A A or A .
The dry film thickness shall be within the range of mils to mils .
Damaged areas of the galvanizing shall be similarly treated .
The galvanizing on the metal surfaces in direct contact with the neoprene seals shall be lightly sandblasted to a dull gray appearance to provide a high strength bond between the seal and mating metal surfaces and to provide an appropriate surface smoothness for installation .
Alternately this galvanized surface may be prepared per the manufacturers published recommendations for installation and bonding of the seals .
Seal elements shall be furnished and shop installed in one continuous length .
Splices in seals will be permitted at abrupt changes in horizontal alignment .
Abutting surfaces of splices shall be shopvulcanized together .
The Contractor shall submit computations Shop Drawings erection drawings and other Working Drawings in accordance with Section .
Working Drawings .
The fabricated expansion device shall be preset by the manufacturer before shipment to the dimensions for degrees Fahrenheit .
Hardware for leveling shipping and adjusting the device shall be supplied as part of the assembled expansion device .
Final width adjustments of the prefabricated expansion device shall be made in the field immediately prior to the final concrete placement . .
Delivery Modular expansion devices shall be delivered to the job site in one unit fully assembled .
No field joints will be allowed unless shown on the Contract Documents or approved by the Fabrication Engineer before shop fabrication . .
Installation Following completion of the structural deck slab the expansion devices shall be installed in the blocked out portion of the slab and abutment backwall .
Following final adjustment the device shall be permanently fixed in place all shipping and adjustment devices shall be removed surfaces shall be repaired as specified in Section .
Fabrication and concrete shall be placed to complete the deck slab and backwall to the lines and grades shown on the Contract Documents . .
Method of Measurement Modular Expansion Devices will be measured by each unit complete in place and accepted .
Each unit shall consist of a modular expansion device including anchorage system seals shipping and temperature adjustment devices curb sidewalk and median expansion dams and barrier sliding plates as required . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Modular Expansion Devices will be paid for at the Contract unit price each which payment shall be full compensation for all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary for furnishing and installing the expansion devices curb sidewalk and median expansion dams and barrier sliding plates as required .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Modular Expansion Devices Each SECTION BEARINGS .
Description This work shall consist of designing furnishing testing and installing bearings in accordance with this specification and in conformance with the details shown on the Plans. . Materials Elastomer .
Stainless Steel .
Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE .
Structural Steel .
Preformed Pads .
Bronze or CopperAlloy Bearing and Expansion Plates .
Anchor Rods .
Miscellaneous materials caulking or lubricant shall be as recommended by the manufacturer of the bearings. . Submittals The Contractor shall prepare shop detail erection and other necessary Working Drawings in accordance with Section .
Working Drawings .
The drawings will be reviewed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section .. Changes and revisions to the reviewed Working Drawings shall require further review by the Fabrication Engineer. . General Requirements Requirements for the type of bearing furnished are as follows Steel Bearings Sections .
thru .
Elastomeric Bearings Sections .
thru .
Pot or Disc Bearings Sections .
thru .
Spherical Bearings Sections .
thru .
Design of bearings shall be in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications and AASHTONSBA Steel Bridge Collaboration G. Steel Bridge Bearing and Design Guidelines . .
Fabrication Steel fabrication work for all types of bearings shall comply with Section Structural Steel . .
Protective Coating Steel parts of bearings shall have protective coating applied to the areas described within this section in accordance with Section Shop Applied Protective Coating Steel .
Masonry plates shall at the Contractors option be galvanized or metalized .
The masonry plates shall be top coated to match the coating of the superstructure beams when beams are coated .
Portions of bearings between the masonry plate and sole plate that will be exposed after installation shall at the Contractors option be galvanized or metalized .
Steel between the masonry and sole plates shall be top coated to match the color of the superstructure beams when the adjacent superstructure beams are coated .
Stainless steel and or machined surfaces with a roughness height of microinches or smoother shall not be coated .
Machined surface finishes with a roughness height of microinches or smoother except stainless steel shall be lubricated with a noncorrosive waterproof high pressure lubricant having a temperature range of oF to oF National Lubrication and Grease Institute number not lower than and an OK load of not less than lbs .
as measured by the requirements of ASTM D. Metal surfaces designed for sliding in contact with Teflon TFE coated surfaces shall not be lubricated .
Sole plates shall have the same finish as the adjacent structural steel .
When adjacent structural steel is coated the sole plate shall be galvanizedor metalized at the option of the contractor .
Sole plates shall be top coated to match the color of the superstructure beams .
When the adjacent structural steel is bare and uncoated the sole plate shall be bare and uncoated .
When the adjacent beams are concrete the sole plates shall be galvanized .
Areas to be field welded shall not be coated prior to welding they shall be touched up after welding .
Anchor rods shall be galvanized .
When anchor rods are designated to secure bare unpainted steel a dielectric coating epoxy or bituminous type coatings are acceptable shall be applied to the anchor rod andor adjacent steel to prevent contact between galvanized surfaces and bare unpainted steel .
When bearings or portions of bearings are painted to match adjacent structural steel the anchor rods shall also be painted . .
Fabrication Tolerances Fabrication tolerances for all bearings shall comply with Section .
of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications Table unless otherwise noted on the Plans or in this Section Bearings. . Material Friction Test The coefficient of friction cof between the two mating surfaces shall be measured .
Tests shall be made either on samples taken from the same batch of materials as those used in the prototype bearings or the tests may at the manufacturers option be conducted on finished bearings .
Only new materials shall be used material that has been previously tested shall not be used .
The surfaces shall be thoroughly cleaned with a degreasing solvent .
No lubrication other than that specified for the prototype bearings shall be used .
The mating surfaces for the test pieces shall have a common area no less than the smaller of the bearing area or .
square inches .
The test piece shall be loaded in compression to a stress corresponding to their maximum service dead load plus live load which shall be held for one hour prior to and throughout the duration of the sliding test .
At least cycles of sliding each consisting of at least .
inch of movement shall then be applied at a temperature of oF oF .
The uniform sliding speed shall be .
inches per minute .
The breakaway cof shall be computed for each direction of each cycle and its mean and standard deviation shall be computed for the sixth through twelfth cycles .
The initial static breakaway cof for the first cycle shall not exceed twice the design cof .
The maximum cof for all subsequent cycles shall not exceed the design cof .
Failure of a single sample shall result in rejection of the entire lot .
Following the cycles of testing the breakaway cof shall be determined again and shall not exceed the initial value .
The bearing or specimen shall show no appreciable sign of wear bond failure or other defects . .
Inspection The Contractor shall notify the Fabrication Engineer at least days in advance of the start of fabrication so that inspection of the work can be provided by the Department .
All work will be subject to inspection by the Fabrication Engineer .
Quality Control QC is the responsibility of the Contractor .
The Quality Control Inspector QCI shall inspect all aspects of the work and shall supervise all testing .
The QCI shall record measurements and test results in a Job Control Record JCR .
The QCI shall reject materials and workmanship that do not meet contract requirements .
The Contractor may perform testing in addition to the minimum required .
The results of all measurements and testing shall be made available to the Quality Assurance Inspector QAI .
Quality Assurance QA is the prerogative of the Fabrication Engineer .
The QAI will ensure that the Contractors QC is performing properly verify documentation periodically inspect workmanship and witness testing .
QA testing deemed necessary by the Fabrication Engineer in addition to the minimum testing requirements shall be scheduled to minimize interference with the production schedule. . Certification The Contractor shall furnish a materials certification letter in accordance with Division . .
Installation of Bearings Bearings shall be placed upon bridge seats that are properly finished .
Bridge seat elevations shall be within  inch of the elevation shown on the Plans and the differential elevation between any two adjacent bearing areas shall not exceed  inch .
When the bearings are to be set directly on the concrete bridge seats as indicated on the Plans the bridge seats shall be dressed inch larger all around than the bottom member of the bearing and to the exact elevations shown on the Plans or as determined by the Resident .
If dressed areas are lower than the surface of the surrounding bridge seat a channel inches wide and with a minimum slope of percent shall be cut to the edge of the bridge seat for drainage .
Masonry plates shall be set level in their exact position and shall have a full and even bearing upon the masonry .
They shall be placed on a preformed pad the same size and shape as the masonry plate with holes to match the masonry plate. . Anchor Rods The contractor shall drill the holes and set the anchor rods with a chemical or cementitious Anchoring Material from the MaineDOT Qualified Products List .
The Anchoring Material shall completely fill the holes .
In place anchor rods shall be capable of developing unconfined pullout strength of kips and kips for M and M inch and  inch anchor bolts respectively. . Grout Pads When the bearings are to be set on a grout pad the grout shall be a nonshrink cementitious grout from the Grout Materials list of the MaineDOT Qualified Products List .
The grout shall have a minimum design compressive strength of psi .
The grout shall be well bonded to the adjacent concrete and shall be placed under pressure to ensure that all anchor holes and the entire area under the masonry plate is free of voids . .
Sliding Surfaces The sliding surfaces of bearings shall be installed level .
Special care shall be exercised at all times to ensure protection of the stainless steel and the PTFE surfaces from coming in contact with any foreign matter .
At no time shall any forms debris or other material interfere with the free action of the bearing assemblies .
When bronze or copperalloy bearing and expansion plates are used the sliding surfaces or the steel in contact with the bearing and expansion plates shall be recoated immediately prior to installation with a lubricant recommended by the manufacturer of the bronze or copperalloy plates . .
Final Adjustment Bearings shall not be connected in place until the deck is in place .
Final adjustment of the bearings for temperature shall be made after the deck is in place .
Connecting of the bearing sole plate to the girder flange shall be done only after all adjustments have been made .
Sliding expansion bearings shall be set so that slotted holes in the sole plate will be centered on the anchor bolts and rocker bearing assemblies shall be set so as to be plumb at F .
When determining temperature adjustments for bearings the difference between the steel temperature not the ambient temperature and F shall be used .
Nuts on anchor rods shall be brought in contact with the masonry plate or sole plate as shown on the Plans .
Threads on anchor rods shall be upset with a punch to prevent easy removal of the nuts .
When anchor rods extend through slotted holes in a sole plate the lower of double nuts shall be left loose bring to contact and loosen approximately  turn to allow movement of the sole plate .
STEEL BEARINGS .
Steel Bearings Structural steel bearings rocker type and sliding plate type shall be fabricated in accordance with the dimensions and finishes shown on the Plans Standard Details and the requirements of Section Structural Steel .
Bearings base plates and other contact surfaces shall be finished to the following tolerances Surface Roughness Requirements Steel slabs ANSI microinches Bearing sole plates ANSI microinches Milled ends to compression members milled or ground ends of stiffeners or rockers ANSI micro inches Bridge rockers and rollers ANSI microinches Sliding bearings ANSI microinches Pins and pin holes ANSI microinches Bearing mating surfaces including steel to steel or steel to bronze and steel to elastomeric material shall have a minimum of contact area .
Flatness the permissible variation from a true plane shall be a maximum of inch. . Materials Materials shall conform to Section .
Materials .
ELASTOMERIC BEARINGS .
Description Two types of bearings are applicable for the following Sections Laminated Elastomeric Bearings which shall consist of layers of elastomer laminated to steel plates and Plain Elastomeric Bearings which shall consist of a single layer of elastomer. . Materials Materials shall conform to Section .
Materials .
If the elastomer material is specified by its shear modulus on the Plans the measured shear modulus value shall lie within the specified range .
When the elastomer material is specified by shear modulus the Contractor shall supply a consistent value of hardness for the purposes of defining limits for the tests of Table A and B in Section .. Laminated Elastomeric bearings shall have a Shore A Durometer hardness of or .
Plain Elastomeric bearings shall have a Shore A Durometer hardness of between and .
Shear modulus tests shall be carried out using the apparatus and procedure described in Annex A of the ASTM D specifications . .
Fabrication All components of Laminated Elastomeric Bearings shall be molded as an integral unit .
Plain Elastomeric Bearings may be molded individually cut from previously molded slabs or extruded and cut to length .
Cut edges shall have an ANSI mils finish .
Steel laminates shall be abrasive blast cleaned to an SSPC SP and protected from contamination . .
Testing The following testing shall be performed prior to delivery of the bearings .
Ambient Temperature Tests on the Elastomer This test is required for each elastomer formulation The bond to the reinforcement shall develop a minimum peel strength of poundsinch .
Peel strength tests shall be performed in accordance with ASTM D Method B. . LowTemperature Test on the Elastomer This test is required for each elastomer formulation Lowtemperature tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of Section .
the compound shall satisfy all criteria for its grade .
The manufacturer may choose to provide certificates from lowtemperature crystallization tests performed on identical material within the last year for Grade to Grade material . .
Visual Inspection of the Finished Bearing Each laminated bearing shall be inspected for compliance with dimensional tolerances and for overall quality of manufacture .
In steel reinforced bearings the edges of the steel shall be protected everywhere from corrosion. . ShortDuration Compression Tests on Bearings Each laminated bearing shall be loaded in compression to of the Bearing Design Load .
The load shall be maintained for minutes and released .
The same load shall be reapplied and maintained for a second period of minutes .
The bearing shall be examined visually during the second loading .
If the load drops below the required value during either application the test shall be performed again .
The bearing shall be rejected if The bulging pattern suggests laminate parallelism outside of the specified tolerance A layer thickness is outside the specified tolerances A poor laminate bond exists or Three or more separate surface cracks greater than .
inch wide and .
inch deep exists. . LongDuration Compression Tests on Bearings This test is required on of each type and size of laminated bearing furnished The longterm compression test shall be performed as specified in item above ShortDuration Compression Tests on Bearings except that the second load shall be maintained for hours .
The bearing shall be visually examined at the end of the tests while still under the load .
If any patterns or cracks specified in section above occur all bearings from that lot shall be rejected unless the manufacture elects to test each bearing of the lot .
If the additional testing does not reveal any rejectable defects as noted in item above the bearings will be accepted. . Shear Modulus Tests on Material from Bearings This test is required for each elastomer formulation The shear modulus of the elastomer in the finished bearing shall be evaluated by testing a specimen cut from it using the apparatus and procedure described in Annex A of the ASTM D specifications amended where necessary in Tables A or B or at the discretion of the Fabrication Engineer a comparable nondestructive stiffness test may be conducted on a pair of finished bearings .
The shear modulus shall fall within the specified range .
If the test is conducted on the finished bearings the material shear modulus shall be computed from the measured shear stiffness of the bearings taking due account of the influence on shear stiffness of bearing geometry and compressive load .
Shear modulus tests performed on a sample of the same material as was used to fabricate the bearings will be acceptable .
Shear modulus testing shall be performed using the apparatus and procedure described in ASTM D Annex A. POT or DISC BEARINGS .
Design Pot or Disc bearings shall be designed for the loads and movements given on the Plans .
Configurations and dimensions shall conform to AASHTONSBA G . Steel Bridge Bearing Design and Detailing Guidelines .
Configurations and dimensions other than those given on the Plans or AASHTONSBA G . may be accepted subject to the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Design calculations to substantiate all the requirements stated in this specification shall be submitted as part of the Working Drawings and shall be stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
Except where indicated on the Plans the design shall also include the connections between the bearings and the superstructure and the bearings and the substructure along with adequate provisions for holddowns equal to the tensile strength of the anchor rods .
The bearings shall be designed to accommodate a rotation of not less than .
radians .
The static coefficient of friction between the PTFE and the stainless steel surface for each size and type of bearing shall not exceed .
at the average unit bearing pressure for the minimum vertical load indicated on the Plans .
The bearings shall be designed for a horizontal force at least equal to of the vertical capacity of the bearing .
No more than two bearings with guide bars per bearing line shall be considered to be carrying the total maximum lateral horizontal load as indicated on the Plans .
Bearing friction shall not be considered when the horizontal load capacity of guided or fixed bearings is calculated .
The PTFE sliding surface for pot or disc bearings shall be designed to meet the following .
The average unit pressure shall be psi for the maximum vertical load indicated on the Plans . .
Unfilled PTFE shall have a minimum thickness of  inch with half of its thickness recessed into the piston . .
Filled PTFE shall be a minimum of inch thick and shall be bonded to the surface of the piston and to the guide bar . .
The maximum thickness of the PTFE filled or unfilled shall be inch except if recessed it shall be inch .
The stainless steel sliding surface shall be designed to meet the following .
The stainless steel shall cover the PTFE in all operating positions such that the stainless steel will have a minimum of inch edge clearance beyond the PTFE . .
The thickness shall be not less than .
inch or greater than .
inch . .
When a center guided key is utilized a recess shall be machined in the sole plate and the vertical sliding surfaces of the recess shall be covered with stainless steel .
The guide bars shall be designed to meet the following .
The guide bars shall be designed for the maximum horizontal load as indicated on the Plans but not less than of the vertical capacity of the bearing . .
The guided member shall be within the guide bars at all operating positions . .
The overall width of the guide bar and the PTFE sliding surfaces shall be  inch less than the clear width of the keyway in the guided member. . A PTFE sheet inch minimum thickness shall be bonded to the sliding contact surfaces of the guide bars .
The sheets shall be filled PTFE .
Pot Bearings A .
The elastomeric discs shall be designed to meet the following .
The average unit pressure shall be psi for the maximum vertical load indicated on the Plans . .
The average unit pressure shall not be less than psi for the minimum vertical load . .
When utilizing flat brass sealing rings the upper edge of the discs shall be recessed to receive the brass rings. . A PTFE sheet filled or unfilled inch minimum thickness and the same diameter as the design diameter of the disc shall be placed below the discs .
The pot shall be designed to meet the following .
The depth of the cavity shall be equal to or greater than Twice the design rotation plus .
inch plus the thickness of the elastomeric disc and the PTFE sheet . .
The inside diameter shall be the same as the design diameter of the elastomeric disc . .
The pot shall be mounted to provide a tight fit in a  inch minimum depth recess in the steel masonry plate or distribution plate and shall be capable of being removed for inspection and repairs .
B .
The piston shall be designed to meet the following .
The outside diameter shall be .
inch less than the inside diameter of the pot . .
The minimum thickness shall be not less than .
times the design diameter . .
When utilizing round brass sealing rings the lower outside edge shall be beveled to accept and retain the brass ring and to permit full design rotation. . Laterally restrained pot bearings shall have a keyway in the sole plate .
The top surface of the piston shall have a keyway slot and a cold finished steel guide bar press fitted into it and welded at the ends. . A PTFE sheet filled or unfilled inch minimum thickness and the same diameter as the bottom surface of the piston shall be bonded to the bottom surface of the piston .
C. The elastomer sealing rings shall be brass and shall be designed to meet the following .
Flat brass sealing rings if utilized shall a .
Have a width of  inch minimum with bearings up to a kip capacity and a  inch width with bearings over a kip capacity .
b .
Have a minimum thickness of .
inch .
c. Have two rings with a bearing capacity up to kip three rings with a bearing capacity over kip but less than kip and four rings with a bearing capacity of over kip .
d. Have the ends cut at with a minimum gap in the installed position of .
inch and shall fit the inside diameter of the pot snugly .
e. Have the ring gaps staggered apart . .
Round brass sealing rings if utilized shall a .
Be of one piece with the ends brazed to make a solid ring .
b .
Have the outside of the ring fit snug in the inside diameter of the pot .
Disc Bearings A .
The elastomeric discs shall be made from a compound based of polyether urethane using only virgin materials .
The hardness shall be between and on the Shore D scale .
B .
The disc shall be designed such that .
Its instantaneous deflection under total load does not exceed of the thickness of the unstressed disc and the additional deflection due to creep does not exceed of the unstressed disc . .
The components of the bearing do not lift off each other at any location . .
The average compressive stress on the disc does not exceed .
ksi .
If the outer surface of the disc is not vertical the smallest plan area shall be used for computing stress. . Materials Materials shall conform to Section .
Materials and the following Sealing rings shall be brass .
Flat rings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B half hard .
Round sealing rings shall conform to the requirements of Federal Specification QQB Composition half hard .
Elastomeric Disc hardness shall be Shore A Durometer scale between and for Pot Bearings Shore D Durometer scale between and for Disc Bearings .
Fabrication Bonding of PTFE sheets to the piston shall be under factorycontrolled conditions and in accordance with written instructions of the manufacturer of the adhesive .
After completion of the bonding operation the PTFE surface shall be smooth and free from bubbles .
PTFE surfaces shall not be polished but shall be wiped clean using a solvent appropriate for the material .
The stainless steel sliding surfaces shall be seal welded around the entire perimeter .
The surfaces shall be smooth and flat and the back of the stainless steel shall remain in intimate contact with the sole plate .
Pots shall be machined from a solid plate or fabricated by welding a cut shape to a plate .
Fabricated pots shall be ultrasonically tested at the inside weld and magnetic particle tested at the exterior weld .
The elastomeric discs in pot bearings shall be manufactured from no more than three pieces .
Each bearing shall be assembled at the plant and following assembly shall be sealed at the joint between the piston and the pot with a continuous  inch minimum bead of a flexible silicone rubber sealing compound approved by the Fabrication Engineer .
Each bearing shall have permanent match marks to indicate the neutral F position of the bearing .
Each bearing shall also be marked for identification by die stamping on all steel parts edge of sole plate piston masonry plate and top edge of pot .
Each bearing shall be shipped and stored in moistureproof and dustproof covers until they are to be erected . .
Fabrication Tolerances Tolerances shall comply with Section .
Fabrication Tolerances and as noted below .
Brass sealing rings shall have finished surfaces of less than mils ANSI B .. .
Testing and Certification The manufacturer of the pot or disc bearings shall furnish test facilities for testing and inspection of the completed bearings .
The Fabrication Engineer or an authorized representative shall be allowed free access to the manufacturers plant and test facility .
The Fabrication Engineer will select two completed bearings for testing .
The test shall be arranged so that the static coefficient of friction on the first movement can be determined .
The test shall first be conducted at an average bearing pressure of psi on the PTFE surface with the test load applied continuously for not less than hours nor more than hours prior to measuring the friction .
The first movement static coefficient of friction shall then be determined .
The above test shall then be repeated for the minimum vertical load indicated on the Plans for the bearings selected .
The results shall not exceed that specified for the design .
A proof load test shall also be performed on each test bearing by applying a load equal to of the maximum vertical load indicated on the Plans for the bearings selected for a period of one hour .
The test bearings shall show no sign of failure or other defects while under load or subsequently upon disassembly and inspection .
Before testing the testing equipment and procedure shall be submitted to the Fabrication Engineer for review. . thru .
Reserved Spherical Bearings .
Method of Measurement Bearings will be measured for payment by each unit tested and accepted .
Bearing installation will be measured for payment by each unit in place and accepted . .
Basis of Payment Bearings will be paid for at the contract unit price each which price shall be full compensation for the design fabrication testing and delivery .
Bearing installation will be paid for at the contract unit price each which price shall be full compensation for installation including all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary for installing the bearings in accordance with the Plans and this specification .
Removal of the existing bearings if present including all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary for jacking the superstructure removal of the existing bearings and preparation of the bridge seat in accordance with the Plans and this Specification shall be considered incidental to bearing installation .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bearing Installation Each .
Steel Bearings Fixed Sliding Plate Each .
Steel Bearings Expansion Sliding Plate Each .
Steel Bearings Fixed Rocker Each .
Steel Bearings Expansion Rocker Each .
Laminated Elastomeric Bearings Fixed Each .
Laminated Elastomeric Bearings Expansion Each .
Plain Elastomeric Bearings Each .
Pot or Disc Bearings Fixed Each .
Pot or Disc Bearings Expansion Each .
Spherical Bearings Each SECTION TEMPORARY STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS .
Description This work shall consist of the designing fabricating erecting maintaining and dismantling of temporary structural supports as called for on the Contract Plans all in conformity with these specifications .
Temporary structural supports proposed by the Contractor to facilitate the work shall also conform to these specifications. . Materials Materials used may be either sawn timber or steel or a combination of both at the Contractors option and whether new or used shall be sound and of adequate cross section for the intended loads .
Blocking needed below the temporary supports to accommodate differences in elevation andor pads required to distribute loads to the soil may additionally incorporate plain and reinforced concrete. . Design Temporary structural supports shall be designed to support all vertical loading including live load and impact differential settlement forces horizontal and longitudinal forces and shall account for any temporary unbalanced loading due to jacking forces and other loading during load transfer .
Sufficient redundancy shall be designed into the support structure so that failure of one member will not cause the collapse of the entire system and the supported structure .
Temporary supports shall be designed by a licensed Professional Engineer and all plans computations and working drawings shall be signed by that Engineer and shall be submitted to the Resident for approval .
Temporary supports which are adjacent to traveled ways or which support structures carrying traffic shall additionally be designed to resist any vibration or impact forces due to traffic and shall incorporate sufficient protection against impact by errant vehicles. . Erection and Removal The erection of temporary supports shall be in strict conformance with the approved design and details and shall use only the materials approved for use .
No loads shall be placed on the temporary supports until the Contractors Professional Engineer has provided written certification to the Resident that the system was erected in conformance with the approved plans and design details .
The consent of the Department regarding design construction or use of temporary supports shall not be construed in any way as relieving the Contractor of its responsibility to provide supports that are adequately designed and constructed to carry the loads that will be placed upon them .
The work shall be entirely at the Contractors risk .
Upon completing the work requiring the use of the temporary structural supports the temporary support structures shall be removed and the area under and around them shall be restored to its original condition . .
Method of Measurement Temporary structural supports will be measured as the number of individual units called for on the Plans satisfactorily designed erected and dismantled .
Temporary supports used by the Contractor for their convenience will not be measured for payment .
The work associated with removal and reinstallation of existing highway appurtenances e.g .
guardrails sign supports etc .
to facilitate the erection of temporary supports will not be measured for payment but will be considered incidental to the Temporary Structural Support Pay Item . .
Basis of Payment Temporary structural supports will be paid for at the contract unit price each which price shall be full compensation for all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary for the design erection maintenance and dismantling of such supports in accordance with these specifications .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Temporary Structural Support Each SECTION GRANITE MASONRY .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing granite pier facing in accordance with these specifications and as shown on the Plans. . Materials The granite shall be obtained from a quarry approved by the Department and be free from materials which by weathering would cause discoloration or deterioration .
The granite for the entire Project shall be uniform in color and free from seams cracks and other structural defects .
Caulking of joints shall be accomplished with a twocomponent epoxyresin system designed for the intended use .
A quartzite aggregate shall be added in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The material shall be moisture insensitive of low modulus of elasticity and of a gellike nonsag viscosity .
Color shall be gray .
The materials shall be subject to the approval of the Resident .
Anchors shall be of either ASTM A steel galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A or ASTM A Type stainless steel  inch diameter as indicated on the Plans .
Other types of anchors may be used with prior approval of the Resident .
Joint mortar shall comply with Section .
Joint Mortar except that it shall contain an additive to insure watertightness .
The additive shall not contain a retarding agent or hydrated lime and shall be approved by the Resident. . General Granite masonry shall have all stones dressed and cut to exact dimensions and laid up in joint mortar with joints  inch  inch in thickness .
A complete setting plan shall be submitted to the Department for approval before ordering any stone .
The arrangement and the length of the stones shall be approved by the Department. . Stones The finish on exposed surfaces of the stones shall be free from tool marks .
Irregular projections shall be limited to a maximum of inches for any one stone measured from the pitch line .
Irregular depressions shall be limited to a maximum of inch for any one stone measured from the pitch line .
Stones shall have their edges pitched to a true line with tops and bottom parallel and cut to lie on their natural beds .
The top and bottom beds shall be the full size of the stone and hollow beds shall not be permitted .
The beds of stone shall be sawn or fine finished full depth .
The vertical face joints shall be sawn or fine finished for a depth of not less than inches with the balance not to fall away more than inches .
The top layer of granite shall have a  inch wide chisel draft line along the top face adjacent to concrete .
All stones shall be so finished that no holes or portions of holes shall show on surfaces that will be exposed in the finished work .
The depth of the stone shall be not less than inches and not more than inches measured from the back face of the stone to the pitch line .
The Contractor shall use extreme care when placing the concrete within the boundaries of the stone facing to avoid causing air pockets due to overhanging stones .
Stone heights shall be a minimum of inches . .
Anchors Holes for anchors shall be drilled in the stones before they are placed .
There shall be a minimum of anchors at a maximum spacing of inches in the top and bottom beds of each piece and grooves shall be cut from the anchor holes to the back of the stones .
Stones greater than inches in height shall have additional anchors located in the back face of the pieces such that there will be a maximum spacing both vertical and horizontal of inches between anchors .
Anchors in the top and bottom beds of each stone shall be located such that an anchor will be not greater than inches from each end of the piece .
Anchors in the back face of each stone shall be located such that an anchor will be not greater than inches from each end of the piece. . Mortar Joint mortar shall be machine mixed for not less than  minutes after all ingredients are in the mixer .
Mortar shall be used within minutes after mixing and the retempering of mortar will not be permitted .
The mixing and placing of mortar shall be discontinued when the atmospheric temperature is below degrees Fahrenheit in the shade and dropping and shall not be resumed until the atmospheric temperature is as high as degrees Fahrenheit in the shade and rising unless otherwise authorized by the Resident . .
Setting Stones Stones shall be thoroughly cleaned before being set and the bed to receive the stones shall be well cleaned .
The thickness of all joints and beds shall be uniform throughout .
Spalls shall not be used as pinners in mortar beds or joints .
When any stone is disturbed or mortar joint broken the stone shall be taken up and after all mortar has been cleaned from the stone bed and joints the stone shall be reset in fresh mortar .
All stones shall be well bedded with the face joints properly raked before the mortar has set .
The masonry shall be kept wet during the pointing and in hot or dry weather shall be protected from the sun and kept wet for a period of days after completion of setting unless otherwise permitted or directed .
Face surfaces of stone shall not be smeared with mortar and after pointing has been completed and set the masonry shall be thoroughly cleaned to the satisfaction of the Resident .
Stones shall not be set when the stones contain frost or during freezing weather unless otherwise permitted .
Concrete backing shall be of the class shown on the Plans .
The concrete shall be so worked and compacted that all spaces around stones are completely filled and an adequate bond with the stone is secured .
Construction joints in the concrete required by intermittent placing shall be located not less than inches below the top bed of any course of the stone facing .
The stones shall be secured and the concrete so placed as approved by the Resident to prevent movement of the stones during placement of the concrete . .
Joints All joints shall be raked  inches deep and caulked with an approved two component epoxyresin system .
All caulking shall be done in such a manner as to produce a tight durable and impervious seal at all joints .
All caulking shall be accomplished as soon as possible to avoid exposure at joints to salt water .
The twocomponent epoxyresin system shall be proportioned mixed and applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
The joint below the bottom layer of granite shall be inch  inch in thickness . .
Method of Measurement Granite masonry will be measured for payment by the number of square feet of exposed granite masonry including joints in the completed work and measured from the pitch lines as shown on the plans . .
Basis of Payment Granite masonry will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot complete in place and accepted .
This price shall include all materials equipment labor and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The cost of the anchors completed and in place shall be included in the Contract unit price of this item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Granite Masonry Square Foot SECTION CONCRETE BARRIER .
Description This work shall consist of the furnishing constructing erecting setting resetting and removal of concrete barrier and associated elements in accordance with these specifications the Standard Details and the lines and grades shown on the Plans or established by the Resident .
The types of concrete barrier are designated as follows Temporary Concrete Barrier Type I Double faced removable concrete barrier of the shape shown on the Plans .
Permanent Concrete Barrier Type II Double face barrier of a shape shown on the Plans .
Permanent Concrete Barrier Type IIIa Single face barrier inches high of a shape shown on the Plans .
Permanent Concrete Barrier Type IIIb Single face barrier inches high of a shape shown on the Plans .
Permanent Concrete Transition Barrier Barrier of various heights joining steel bridge rail to steel guardrail .
Permanent Texas Classic Rail Barrier either traffic rail or sidewalk rail as shown on the Plans. . Materials a .
Concrete Concrete shall meet the provisions of Section Structural Concrete and Portland cement shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type I II or III .
Concrete for permanent barriers shall be Class LP in accordance with Section .
Composition and Proportioning .
Concrete for temporary barriers shall be Portland cement concrete with a minimum compressive strength of psi .
The Department reserves the right to take test core samples from the barriers in accordance with ASTM C. Average compressive test strengths below psi will result in rejection of the barriers .
b .
Reinforcing Steel Reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of Section Reinforcing Steel .
c. Structural Steel Plate steel shall meet the requirements specified in Section .
Structural Steel .
Hot dipped galvanizing of plate steel shall be in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A. d. Bolts Bolts shall meet the requirements specified in Section .
High Strength Bolts .
e. Connecting Pin for Temporary Concrete Barrier For all projects on the NHS including the Interstate System temporary concrete barriers must be connected using a  inch diameter rod with a washer and cotter pin on the bottom per Standard Detail The Contractor has the option to use a hex nut and washer connection at the top of the rod as shown on the Standard Detail or the top of the rod may be hooked over the top connector .
The connecting pin must be smooth not deformed i.e .
reinforcing bar may not be used and shall meet the strength requirements of ASTM A steel minimum .
For projects not on the NHS temporary concrete barriers must be connected in accordance with Standard Detail except that the top of the rod may be hooked over the top connector instead of using a hex nut and washer .
The connecting pin shall meet the strength requirements of ASTM A steel minimum. . Construction Requirements Permanent Concrete barrier shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of Standard Specification Section .
Composition and Proportioning through Section .
Curing Concrete inclusive with the following additions a .
Permanent concrete barrier may be formed by castinplace or slip forming methods .
b .
Concrete finish shall be equal to a steel form finish .
c. Liquid membraneforming compounds may be used for curing concrete barriers if approved by the Resident .
If a membraneforming compound that contains fugitive dye or other agents which will discolor the concrete is used the curing compound shall be removed to the satisfaction of the Resident prior to Final Acceptance .
When the slip forming method is used a dissipating curing compound shall be applied to the concrete during placement and then wet curing shall proceed in accordance with Section .
In addition to the foregoing methods of curing concrete barrier may be cured by an accelerated curing method using lowpressure steam or radiant heat in a moist environment .
Other methods of curing may be used if approved by the Resident .
If called for protective coating shall be applied in accordance with Standard Specification Section Protective Coating for Concrete Surfaces .
Temporary concrete barrier shall be generally free from fins and porous areas and shall present a neat and uniform appearance .
Permissible dimensional tolerances for all concrete barriers shall be as follows a. Crosssectional dimensions shall not vary from design dimensions by more than  inch .
The vertical centerline shall not be out of plumb by more than  inch .
b. Longitudinal dimensions shall not vary from the design dimensions by more than  inch per feet of barrier section and shall not exceed  inches per section .
c. Location of anchoring holes shall not vary by more than  inch from the dimensions shown in the concrete barrier details on the Plans .
d. Surface straightness shall not vary more than  inch under a foot straightedge .
e. The barrier shall have no significant cracking .
Significant cracking is defined as fractures or cracks passing through the section or any continuous crack extending for a length of inches or more regardless of position in the section . .
Method of Measurement Concrete Barrier Type II IIIa IIIb and Texas Classic Rail will be measured for payment by lump sum complete in place .
Temporary concrete barrier will be measured for payment by the lump sum .
Lump sum measurement will include verification of the installation and removal of all concrete barrier required by the plans for the Contractors operations .
The Contractor shall replace sections of temporary concrete barrier damaged by the traveling public when directed by the Resident .
Replacement sections will be measured for payment .
Transition barrier will be measured by each barrier connecting bridge rail to guardrail complete in place . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of Texas Classic Rail Type II IIIa and IIIb concrete barrier will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price for the type specified complete in place .
The accepted quantities of Temporary Concrete Barrier Type I will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price .
Such payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials assembling moving resetting transporting temporarily storing and removing barrier furnishing new parts as necessary and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Temporary barrier shall become the property of the Contractor upon completion of the use of the barrier on the project and shall be removed from the project site by the Contractor .
Transition barrier will be paid for at the Contract price each complete in place .
The accepted quantity of all types of concrete barrier whether temporary or permanent will be paid for at the lump sum or per each price as applicable which payment shall be full compensation for all materials including reinforcing steel steel plates and hardware equipment labor and incidentals required as necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Temporary Concrete Barrier Type I Lump Sum .
Permanent Concrete Barrier Type II Lump Sum .
Permanent Concrete Barrier Type IIIa Lump Sum .
Texas Classic Rail Lump Sum .
Permanent Concrete Barrier Type IIIb Lump Sum .
Permanent Concrete Transition Barrier Each SECTION ENERGY ABSORBING UNIT Work Zone Crash Cushion .
Description The Contractor shall furnish and install Work Zone Crash Cushions as specified in Special Provision or as directed by the Resident. . Materials Work Zone Crash Cushions must comply with NCHRP Report .
Work Zone Crash Cushions meeting NCHRP include but are not limited to the following The NEAT from Energy Absorption Systems of Chicago Illinois AdiemII from Syro Inc. of Dallas Texas Clusters of the Energite III sand barrels from Energy Absorption Systems of Chicago Illinois or an approved equal. . Construction Requirements Work Zone Crash Cushions shall be provided and installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations for the specific application and the posted speed limit .
Work Zone Crash Cushions which are damaged or destroyed shall be repaired or replaced promptly .
The Contractor shall have on hand one complete set of replacements . .
Method of Measurement The Department will measure Work Zone Crash Cushions by the Unit complete in place and accepted .
A cluster of Portable Crash Barrels or a cluster of Energite III sand barrels is considered a Unit .
Each NEAT or Adiem II is considered a Unit . .
Basis of Payment The Department will pay for the accepted quantity of Work Zone Crash Cushions at the Contract unit price for each Unit which price shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing the Work Zone Crash Cushion including all incidentals and for resetting as many times as required .
Replacements for the Work Zone Crash Cushions damaged beyond functionability by collisions will be paid for as new Work Zone Crash Cushions and the removal of the impacted devices and debris will be considered incidental to the replacement units .
Replacement Work Zone Crash Cushions on hand but unused will not be paid for directly .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Work Zone Crash Cushions Unit SECTION STRUCTURAL TIMBER Reserved SECTION NAVIGATIONAL AIDS Reserved SECTIONS to VACANT SECTION PRECAST STRUCTURAL CONCRETE .
Description The Contractor shall design manufacture furnish and install precast structural concrete arches box culverts or three sided frames and associated wingwalls headwalls toe walls cutoff walls and appurtenances in accordance with the Contract Documents. . Materials Structural precast elements for the arch box culvert or three sided frame and associated precast elements shall meet the requirements of the following Standard Specification Subsection except as noted otherwise in this specification Structural Precast Concrete Units .
New concrete mix designs and mix designs not previously approved by the Fabrication Engineer shall be qualified by trial batches prepared in accordance with AASHTO T ASTM C. The test results shall demonstrate that the concrete meets the requirements of the Contract Documents .
Bedding and backfill material shall conform to the requirements of Standard Specification .
Granular Borrow Material for Underwater Backfill with the additional requirement that the maximum particle size shall be limited to inches or as shown on the Plans . .
Drawings Prepare shop detail erection and other necessary Working Drawings in accordance with Standard Specification Section .
Working Drawings .
The Department will review the drawings in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section .
Working Drawings .
Changes and revisions to the reviewed Working Drawings shall require further review by the Fabrication Engineer .
Working Drawings shall include the following minimum details .
Fully dimensioned views showing the geometry of the units including all projections recesses notches openings block outs keyways and chamfers . .
Details and bending schedules of reinforcing steel including the size spacing and location .
Reinforcing provided under lifting devices shall be shown in detail . .
Details and locations of all items to be embedded. . Total weight of each unit .
Concrete mix designs shall be part of the Working Drawing submittal .
Include aggregate specific gravity absorption percent fracture fineness modulus and gradation as part of the mix design .
Provide the mix design calculations demonstrating how the batch weights watercement ratio and admixture dosage rate were determined. . Design Requirements The Contractor shall design the precast structural concrete structure in accordance with the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications latest edition .
The HL live load specified in the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications shall be used for all limit states except for Strength I .
The live load used for the Strength I limit state shall be the Maine Modified live load which consists of the standard HL Live Load with a percent increase in the Design Truck only .
Wheel loads based on the Design Truck shall be increased percent .
Additionally if the governing load rating factor based on the HL live load is equal to or less than .
and the span is feet or greater then a load rating based on the Maine legal truck Configuration shall also be checked to insure the rating factor is equal to or greater than ..
The live load deflection check per AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications for the top slab of box culverts and frames with clear spans of feet or greater and cover depths of feet or less is mandatory .
The live load deflection check shall be documented in the design computations submittal .
Design calculations that consist of computer program generated output shall be supplemented with at least one hand calculation and graphics demonstrating the design methodology used .
The hand calculation shall document at a minimum the Strength I load case flexural design check of the top slab positive moment reinforcing steel .
Design calculations shall provide thorough documentation of the sources of equations used and material properties .
The design shall be load rated in accordance with the AASHTO Manual for Bridge Evaluation latest edition by the LRFR method and in accordance with the MaineDOT Load Rating Guide .
The Contractor shall submit design calculations and load rating if applicable for the precast structure to the Department for review .
A Professional Engineer licensed in accordance with State of Maine laws shall sign and seal all design calculations and drawings .
The Contractor shall submit the following items for review by the Department at least forty five Working Days prior to production A .
The name and location of the manufacturer B .
Method of manufacture and material certificates C. Description of method of handling storing transporting and erecting the units D. Design computations bound and indexed E. Load rating computations and completed load rating form bound and indexed .
Facilities for Inspection Provide a private office at the fabrication plant for the Departments inspection personnel or Quality Assurance Inspectors QAIs in accordance with Section .
Facilities for Inspection .
Failure to comply with the above requirements will be considered denial of access to the Work for the purpose of inspection .
The Department will reject all Work done when access for inspection is denied. . Notice of Beginning Work Refer to Section .. . Quality Control Quality Control QC is the responsibility of the Contractor .
Provide a copy of the Quality System Manual QSM to the Fabrication Engineer if requested .
Inspect all aspects of the Work in accordance with the Contractors QSM .
Reject materials and workmanship that do not meet Contract requirements .
Record measurements and test results on the appropriate forms from APPENDIX E of PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Structural Precast Concrete Products MNL or an equivalent form prepared by the user .
Provide copies of measurements and test results to the QAI as follows Type of Report When Provided to QAI Aggregate gradationsfine aggregate and coarse aggregate Prior to beginning work and at least once a week thereafter Material certifications calibration certifications Prior to beginning work anticipate adequate time for review by QAI Preplacement inspection report Prior to the concrete placement Concrete batch slips The morning of the next work day Results of concrete testing The morning of the next work day Concrete temperature records Provide with compressive strength testing Nonconformance reportsrepair procedures Within hours of discovery Results of compressive strength testing for design strength Prior to stopping curing Prior to final acceptance Postplacement inspection report Prior to final acceptance The Contractor and QAI may by mutual agreement modify any part of the schedule however failure to provide the documentation when required by the Fabrication Engineer will result in the product being deemed unacceptable .
The Contractor may perform testing in addition to the minimum required .
The results of all testing shall be made available to the Department. . Quality Assurance Quality Assurance QA is the prerogative of the Department .
Refer to Section .. . Nonconforming Work Refer to Section .. . Forms Construct forms in accordance with the Working Drawings .
The forms shall be well constructed carefully aligned and sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar .
Reject forms that do not maintain the dimensions shown on the Working Drawings .
Seal wooden forms to prevent absorption of water .
Apply and cure the sealer in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
Remove all paint adherent material foreign matter and debris prior to placing concrete .
Apply a nonstaining bondbreaking compound to the forms in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
Solvent clean reinforcing steel and welded steel wire fabric contaminated with the bondbreaking compound . .
Reinforcing Steel and Welded Steel Wire Fabric Refer to Sections .
and for fabrication packaging handling storing placing splicing and repair of reinforcing steel welded steel wire fabric and mechanicalwelded reinforcing steel splices .
The concrete cover over the outside circumferential reinforcement shall be inches minimum and the concrete cover over the inside reinforcement shall be  inches minimum .
The clear distance of the end of circumferential wires shall not be less than inch or more than inches from the end of the units .
Use sufficient supports and spacers to maintain the minimum concrete cover .
The supports and spacers shall be made of a dielectric material or other material approved by the Fabrication Engineer .
Welded steel wire fabric shall meet the spacing requirements and contain sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the unit to maintain the shape and position of the reinforcement .
Longitudinal distribution reinforcement may be welded steel wire fabric or deformed steel bars which meet the spacing requirements .
The ends of the longitudinal distribution reinforcement shall not be more than inches from the ends of the units .
Do not use more than three layers of reinforcing to form a single mat .
If reinforcing steel is cut to install lifting devices install additional reinforcing adjacent to the cut steel as shown on the Working Drawings .
Tension splices in the reinforcement will not be permitted .
For splices other than tension splices the overlap shall be a minimum of inches for welded steel wire fabric and as specified in Standard Specification Section for deformed steel bars .
The centertocenter wire spacing in wire fabric sheets shall not be less than inches or more than inches for the circumferential wires and shall not be more than eight inches for the longitudinal wires .
The centertocenter spacing of the longitudinal distribution steel for either line of reinforcing in the top slab shall not be more than inches . .
Inserts Refer to Section .. .
Concrete Placement Do not batch or place concrete until all the forms for any continuous placement have been inspected and accepted by the Quality Control Inspector QCI and the QAI concurs .
Test concrete in accordance with the Standards included in Section .. Test the first two loads of concrete for temperature air entrainment and slump flow for Self Consolidating Concrete SCC .
If the first load is unacceptable test the second load as the first .
Continue this process until two consecutive loads are acceptable .
After two consecutive loads are acceptable the frequency of testing shall be at the discretion of the QAI .
If there is a change in the dosage rate of any admixture or a change of more than F in mix temperature then test the concrete for temperature air entrainment and slump flow for SCC .
Test every load of cubic yard or less from a stationary mixer or cubic yards or less from a transit mixer for temperature air entrainment and slump flow for SCC prior to placing the concrete in the forms .
Perform all testing in the presence of the QAI .
The QAI will designate the loads to be tested .
Make cylinders used to determine stripping strength during the last of the placement .
Place the concrete as nearly as possible to its final location .
Control the depth of each lift in order to minimize entrapped air voids .
The maximum depth of an unconsolidated lift shall be inches .
Vibrate the concrete with internal or internal and external vibrators .
Do not use external vibrators only .
Insert internal vibrators vertically and penetrate the lower layer of concrete by at least inches .
Insert the vibrators in the concrete to assure that the radii of action of the vibrators overlap .
Hold the vibrators in position from to seconds vibration time shall be reduced by percent when placing SCC .
Do not use vibrators to move concrete horizontally .
Each lift of concrete shall have sufficient plasticity to be consolidated with subsequent lifts .
Do not retemper the concrete with water after discharging has begun .
The Contractor may add High Range Water Reducing admixture to the concrete after batching if that practice conforms to the manufacturers product data sheet .
Discard concrete that becomes unworkable .
Do not use water or waterbased products to aid in finishing fresh concrete .
After the concrete has been placed and finished and before the forms are covered remove all concrete from projecting reinforcing steel . .
Process Control Test Cylinders Refer to Section .. .
Manufacture of Precast Units The units shall be free of fractures .
The ends of the units shall be normal to the walls and centerline of the unit within the limits of variation provided except where beveled ends are specified .
The surfaces of the units shall be a smooth steel form or troweled surface finish unless a form liner is specified .
The ends and interior of the assembled structure shall make a continuous line of units with a smooth interior surface .
Defects which may cause rejection of precast units include but are not limited to the following A .
Any discontinuity crack rock pocket etc .
of the concrete which could allow moisture to reach the reinforcing steel .
B .
Rock pockets or honeycomb over square inches in area or over inch deep .
C. Edge or corner breakage exceeding inches in length or inch in depth .
D. Any other defect that clearly and substantially impacts the quality durability or maintainability of the structure as determined by the Fabrication Engineer .
The manufacturer of the units shall sequentially number and shop fit each adjacent unit to ensure that they fit together in the field .
This fit up shall be witnessed by the QAI .
Any non fitting units shall be corrected or replaced at no cost to the Department .
The manufacturer of the units shall keep accurate records of aggregate gradations concrete batching testing curing and inspection activities to verify that forms reinforcing and unit dimensions conform to these requirements .
Copies of reports shall be furnished to the Resident when requested. . Tolerances Dimensional tolerances shall be in conformance with the following A .
The internal dimensions shall not vary by more than percent from the design dimensions or  inches whichever is less with the exception of the cross diagonal dimension which shall not vary by more than onehalf inch from the design dimension .
B .
The haunch dimensions shall not vary by more than threequarters inch from the design dimension .
C. The dimension of the legs shall not vary by more than onequarter inch from the dimension shown on the reviewed Working Drawings .
D. The slab and wall thickness shall not be less than the design thickness by more than one quarter inch .
A thickness greater than the design thickness shall not be cause for rejection .
E. Variations in laying lengths of two opposite surfaces shall not be more than fiveeights inch in any unit except where beveled ends for laying of curves are specified .
F. The underrun in length of any unit shall not be more than onehalf inch. . Finishing Concrete Products shall be finished to meet the ordinary finish requirements of Standard Specification Section .
Units or portions of units that will be exposed to view in their final location shall receive a rubbed finish per Section .
The Contractor may use alternative methods of achieving an acceptable finish on exposed units if approved by the Fabrication Engineer .
Marking The date of manufacture the production lot number and the type of unit shall be clearly and indelibly scribed on a rear unexposed portion of each unit . .
Repairing Defects Defects requiring repair will be considered either nonstructural or structural .
NonStructural Defects Exposed surfaces shall be of uniform appearance only minor repairs to remove and blend fins patch minor spalls and to repair small entrapped air pockets shall be permitted .
Repair honeycombing ragged or irregular edges and other nonstructural or cosmetic defects using a patching material from the MaineDOT Qualified Products List QPL .
The repair including preparation of the repair area mixing and application and curing of the patching material shall be in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
Corners not exposed in the final product may be ground smooth with no further repair necessary if the depth of the defect does not exceed onehalf inch .
Remove form ties and other hardware to a depth of not less than one inch from the face of the concrete and patch the holes using a patching material from the MaineDOT QPL .
Structural Defects Repair structural defects only with the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Submit a nonconformance report NCR to the Fabrication Engineer with a proposed repair procedure .
Do not perform structural repairs without an NCR that has been reviewed by the Fabrication Engineer .
Structural defects include but are not be limited to exposed reinforcing steel cracks in bearing areas through cracks and cracks .
inch in width that extend more than inches in length in any direction .
Give the QAI adequate notice prior to beginning any structural repairs. . Handling Storage and Transportation Handle store and transport units in a manner as to eliminate the danger of chipping cracks fracture and excessive bending stresses .
Any units found damaged upon delivery or damaged after delivery shall be subject to rejection .
Do not place precast units in an upright position until a compressive strength of at least psi is attained .
Precast units may be handled and moved but not transported until the day design strength has been attained .
Support stored precast units above the ground on dunnage in a manner to prevent twisting or distortion .
Protect the units from discoloration and damage .
Set precast units on onehalf inch thick neoprene pads during shipment to prevent damage to the unit legs .
The Contractor shall repair any damage to precast units resulting from shipping or handling this shall be accomplished by saw cutting a minimum of onehalf inch deep around the perimeter of the damaged area removing any loose concrete out to the saw cut perimeter and installing a polymermodified cementitious patching material from the Departments QPL per the manufacturers product data sheet . .
Installation of Precast Units When footings are required install the precast units on concrete footings that have reached a compressive strength of at least psi .
Construct the completed footing surface to the lines and grades shown on the Plans .
When checked with a foot straightedge the surface shall not vary more than onequarter inch in feet .
The footing keyway shall be filled with a Departmentapproved nonshrink flowable cementitious grout with a design compressive strength of at least psi .
Three sided frame and box culvert joints shall be sealed with a Departmentapproved flexible joint sealant in accordance AASHTO M ASTM C. Joints shall be closed tight .
Culvert units shall be equipped with joint closure mechanisms to draw units together and close joints to the required opening .
Completely fill the exterior face of joints between precast units with a material from the MaineDOT QPL and cover with a minimum inch wide joint wrap .
Additionally for box culverts and three sided frames cover the entire top surface with waterproofing membrane waterproofing membrane shall extend one foot from the top down the sides of the units .
The surfaces shall be free of dirt and deleterious materials before applying the filler material and joint wrap .
Install the external wrap in one continuous piece over each unit joint taking care to keep the joint wrap in place during backfilling .
Seal the back of joints between the end unit and attached elements with a nonwoven geotextile .
Install and tighten the bolts fastening the connection plates between the elements that are designed to be fastened together as designated by the manufacturer .
Fill holes that were cast in the units for handling with either Portland cement mortar or with precast plugs secured with Portland cement mortar or other approved adhesive .
Place and compact the bedding material as shown on the Plans prior to lifting and setting the culvert units .
Backfilling of the structure shall be done in accordance with the manufacturers instructions and the Contract Documents .
Uniformly distribute backfill material in layers of not more than inches in depth loose measure and thoroughly compact each layer using approved compactors before successive layers are placed .
Compact the Granular Borrow bedding and backfill in accordance with Section .
Construction of Earth Embankment with Moisture and Density Control except that the minimum required compaction shall be percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D. Place and compact the backfill without disturbance or displacement of the structure keeping the fill at approximately the same elevation on both sides of the structure .
Whenever a compaction test fails the Contractor shall not place additional backfill over the area until the lift is recompacted and a passing test achieved .
Use handoperated compactors within five feet of the precast structure as well as over the top until it is covered with at least inches of backfill .
Take appropriate precautions to protect the top of the culvert from damage during backfilling andor paving operations .
Any damage to the top of the precast structure shall be repaired or units replaced at no cost to the Department . .
Method of Measurement Precast Structural Concrete Arches including threesided frames and Precast Concrete Box Culverts will be measured as one lump sum complete in place and accepted . .
Basis of Payment The accepted Precast Structural Concrete Arches including three sided frames or Precast Concrete Box Culverts will be paid for at the respective Contract lump sum price .
The lump sum price shall include associated wingwalls headwalls toe walls cutoff walls and appurtenances and shall be full compensation for all labor equipment materials professional services and incidentals necessary for designing manufacturing furnishing and installing the precast concrete elements and accessories .
Falsework reinforcing steel welded steel wire fabric joint wrap geotextile repair material grout castinplace concrete fill or grout fill for anchorage of precast wings andor other appurtenances will not be measured and paid for separately but will be incidental to the lump sum pay item .
Castinplace concrete reinforcing steel in castinplace elements and waterproofing membrane will be measured and paid for separately under the provided Contract Pay Items .
Pay adjustments for quality level will not be made for precast concrete .
Excavation for precast structural concrete structures including excavation below culverts for bedding and backfilling will be measured and paid for as provide in Section Structural Excavation .
When the minimum cover material extends above the subgrade line the removal of the cover material necessary to complete the work will not be paid for directly but shall be considered incidental to the precast structural concrete lump sum pay item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Precast Structural Concrete Arch Lump Sum .
Precast Concrete Box Culvert Lump Sum SECTION PRECAST PRESTRESSED CONCRETE SUPERSTRUCTURE .
Description This work shall consist of casting and erecting precastprestressed concrete products and related material .
Materials work inspection and documentation not specifically addressed by this Specification shall be done in accordance with the applicable sections of the PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute PCI Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Structural Precast Concrete Products MNL including Commentary .
ALL REQUIREMENTS IN THIS SPECIFICATION ARE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CONTRACTOR UNLESS NOTED OTHERWISE. . Materials Materials for precastprestressed concrete products shall meet the requirements of the following Subsections of the Standard Specifications Portland Cement and Portland Pozzolan Cement .
Water .
AirEntraining Admixtures .
Water Reducing Admixtures .
High Range Water Reducing Admixture HRWR .
SetRetarding Admixtures .
Fly Ash .
Calcium Nitrite Solution .
Silica Fume .
Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete Class A AA or Latex .
Reinforcing Steel .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric .
Steel Strand .
Portland cement shall conform to AASHTO M ASTM C Type I Type II or Type III or AASHTO M . Supply the Department with copies of Certified Mill Test Reports for the cement .
Provide a Materials Certification from the manufacturer of the prestressing strand .
The certification shall include a representative load elongation curve for each coil .
The manufacturer shall identify each coil of strand .
Do not remove the identification from the coil .
Partial coils may be used with the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Failure to maintain traceability of a coil will be cause for rejection .
Provide Certified Mill Test Reports for the reinforcing steel welded wire fabric and fusion bonded epoxy coating . .
Working Drawings Prepare shop detail erection and other necessary Working Drawings in accordance with Section .
Working Drawings .
The Department will review the drawings in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section .
Working Drawings .
Changes and revisions to the reviewed Working Drawings will require further review by the Fabrication Engineer .
Concrete mix designs shall be part of the Working Drawing submittal .
Include aggregate specific gravity absorption percent fracture fineness modulus and gradation as part of the mix design .
Provide the mix design calculations demonstrating how the batch weights watercement ratio and admixture dosage rate were determined. . Plant The plant shall be a PCI Certified facility. . Facilities for Inspection Provide a private office at the fabrication plant for the Departments inspection personnel or Quality Assurance Inspectors QAIs .
The office shall be in close proximity to the Work .
The office shall be climate controlled to maintain the temperature between F and F and have the exits closed by a doors equipped with a lock and keys which shall be furnished to the QAIs .
The QAIs office shall meet the following minimum requirements Description Quantity Office area minimum ft Drafting table surface ft Drafting stoolseach Office desk Ergonomic swivel chairs Folding chairs Highspeed internet connection ports or wireless Fluorescent lighting of ftcandles minimum for all work areas Volt cycle electric wall outlets Wall closet Waste basket with trash bags Broom Dustpan Water cooler Cleaning materialsfloor surfaces windows for duration of the project The Contractor will be responsible for disposing of trash and supplying commercially bottled water for the water cooler .
The QAI will have the option to reject any furniture or supplies provided to the QAIs office based on general poor condition .
Provide parking space for the QAIs in close proximity to the entrance to the QAIs office .
Maintain the pathway between the parking area and the QAIs office so that it is free of obstacles debris snow and ice .
The facilities and all furnishings shall remain the property of the Contractor upon completion of the Work .
Payment for the facilities heating lighting internet connection and monthly internet charges and all furnishings shall be incidental to the Contract .
Failure to comply with the above requirements will be considered denial of access to the Work for the purpose of inspection .
The Department will reject all Work done when access for inspection is denied. . Notice of Beginning Work Give the Department a minimum of two weeks notice for inMaine work and three weeks notice for outofMaine work prior to beginning production .
If the production schedule changes notify the Fabrication Engineer no less than working days prior to the initial startup date .
Any Work done without the QAI present will be rejected .
Advise the Fabrication Engineer of the production schedule and any changes to it .
If Work is suspended on a project the Fabrication Engineer will require hours notice prior to the resumption of Work. . Quality Control Quality Control QC is the responsibility of the Contractor .
Provide a copy of the Quality System Manual QSM to the Fabrication Engineer if requested .
Calibrate all production equipment in accordance with MNL except that stressing jacks shall be calibrated every months .
Provide calibration certifications to the QAI prior to beginning fabrication .
Calibrate scales admixture dispensers and water gauges at the frequency specified in MNL .
Use proving rings load cells and solid standard weights as applicable .
The calibration shall be performed by a testing laboratory acceptable to the Department using calibration equipment the accuracy of which is traceable to a National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST standard .
Quality Control Inspectors QCIs shall have a valid PCI Quality Control Certification Level I Level II or Level III .
Personnel performing concrete testing shall hold a current ACI Field Testing Technician Grade I Certification or equivalent .
Inspect all aspects of the Work in accordance with the Contractors QSM .
Reject materials and workmanship that do not meet Contract requirements .
Record measurements and test results on the appropriate forms from APPENDIX E of MNL or an equivalent form prepared by the user .
Provide copies of measurements and test results to the QAI as follows Type of Report When Provided to QAI Aggregate gradationsfine aggregate and coarse aggregate Prior to beginning work and at least once a week thereafter Material certifications stressing calculations calibration certifications Prior to beginning work anticipate adequate time for review by QAI Tensioning report The same work day Preplacement inspection report Prior to the concrete placement Concrete batch slips The morning of the next work day Results of concrete testing The morning of the next work day Results of compressive strength testing for release The same work day Concrete temperature records Provide with compressive strength testing for release Nonconformance reportsrepair procedures Within hours of discovery Results of compressive strength testing for design strength Prior to stopping curing Postplacement inspection report Within hours of achieving design strength The Contractor and QAI may by mutual agreement modify any part of the schedule however failure to provide the documentation when required by the Fabrication Engineer will result in the product being deemed unacceptable .
The Contractor may perform testing in addition to the minimum required .
The results of all testing shall be made available to the Department. . Quality Assurance Quality Assurance QA is the prerogative of the Department .
The QAI will witness or review documentation workmanship and testing to assure the Work is being performed in accordance with the Contract Documents .
The QAI has the authority to reject materials and products that do not meet the Contract requirements including Work rejected due to denial of access or the lack of adequate notice of the beginning of production .
The acceptance of material or workmanship by the QAI will not preclude subsequent rejection if found unacceptable by the Department at a later date. . Nonconforming Work Correct or replace nonconforming material andor workmanship .
Generate a nonconformance report NCR describing the nonconformance and the proposed corrective action provide a copy to the QAI and forward a copy to the Fabrication Engineer for review .
In the event that an item does not meet the Contract requirements but is deemed suitable for use by the Department said item may be accepted in accordance with Section .
Non Conforming Work of the Standard Specifications. . Forms and Casting Beds Construct forms in accordance with the Working Drawings .
The forms shall be well constructed carefully aligned and sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar .
Reject forms that do not maintain the dimensions shown on the Working Drawings .
Inspect the bulkheads after each cast and repair or replace worn or damaged pieces .
Seal wooden forms to prevent absorption of water .
Apply and cure the sealer in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
Remove all paint adherent material foreign matter and debris prior to placing concrete .
Apply a nonstaining bondbreaking compound to the forms in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
Solvent clean reinforcing steel and strand contaminated with the bondbreaking compound . .
Reinforcing Steel Fabricate package handle store place splice and repair reinforcing steel in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications .
Accurately locate and securely anchor the reinforcing steel to prevent displacement during concrete placement .
Install and secure all reinforcing steel prior to beginning the concrete placement .
The concrete cover shown on the reviewed Working Drawings shall be the minimum allowable cover .
Use sufficient bar supports and spacers to maintain the minimum concrete cover .
The bar supports and spacers shall be made of a dielectric material or other material approved by the Fabrication Engineer. . Voids and Inserts Voids shall be nonabsorbent .
The outtoout dimensions of the voids shall be within percent of Plan dimensions .
Repair damaged voids in a manner acceptable to the Fabrication Engineer .
Store handle and place voids in a manner that prevents damage .
Accurately locate and securely anchor securely cap and vent the voids in the form .
Any portion of a void that is displaced beyond the allowable dimensional tolerances shall be cause for rejection of the slab or beam .
Open the void drains immediately upon removing the product from the form .
Recess inserts inch unless noted otherwise on the Plans .
The Department is not responsible for verifying the location of inserts or other hardware installed for the convenience of the Contractor . .
Concrete New concrete mix designs and mix designs not previously approved by the Fabrication Engineer shall be qualified by trial batches prepared in accordance with AASHTO T ASTM C. The test results shall demonstrate that the concrete meets the requirements of the Plans and this Specification .
If accelerated curing is to be used in production the test specimens shall be similarly cured .
The concrete mix design shall meet the following requirements Minimum cement content lbs.cubic yard Watercement ratio .
maximum Air entrainment  to  Allowable Slump Flow for Self Consolidating Concrete SCC inches to inches Visual Stability IndexVSI for SCC VSI of or per ASTM C. If a mortar paste halo is present it shall not exceed .
inch .
Corrosion inhibitor gal .
c.y .
unless otherwise specified Silica Fume when used to of cement content by weight Fly Ash when used of cementitious material maximum Slag when used of cementitious material maximum For the purpose of calculating water cement ratios one U.S. gallon of water shall be considered to weigh .
pounds .
The water in the corrosion inhibitor solution shall be included when calculating the watercement ratio .
The concrete mix design shall be proportioned so that the concrete achieves transfer strength within twenty four hours of the completion of the placement if the release strength is psi or less .
If two consecutive placements fail to meet the above requirements no further placements shall take place until corrective action is taken by the Contractor . .
Concrete Placement Do not batch or place concrete until all the forms for any continuous placement have been inspected and accepted by the QCI and the QAI concurs .
Test concrete in accordance with the following Standards AASHTO T ASTM C Test Method for Compressive Strength of Cylindrical Concrete Specimens AASHTO T ASTM C Practice for Making and Curing Concrete Test Specimens in the Field AASHTO T ASTM C Practice for Sampling Freshly Mixed Concrete AASHTO T ASTM C Test Method for Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Pressure Method AASHTO T ASTM C Standard Test Method for Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Volumetric Method ASTM C Test Method for Temperature of Freshly mixed Portland Cement Concrete ASTM C Standard Test Method for Slump Flow of SelfConsolidating Concrete Test the first two loads of concrete for temperature air entrainment and slump flow for SCC .
If the first load is unacceptable test the second load as the first .
Continue this process until two consecutive loads are acceptable .
After two consecutive loads are acceptable the frequency of testing shall be at the discretion of the QAI .
If there is a change in the dosage rate of any admixture or a change of more than F in mix temperature then test the concrete for temperature air entrainment and slump flow for SCC .
Test every load of cubic yard or less from a stationary mixer or cubic yards or less from a transit mixer for temperature air entrainment and slump flow for SCC prior to placing the concrete in the forms .
Perform all testing in the presence of the QAI .
The QAI will designate the loads to be tested .
Make cylinders used to determine release strength during the last onethird of the placement .
Place the concrete as nearly as possible to its final location .
Control the depth of each lift in order to minimize entrapped air voids .
The maximum depth of an unconsolidated lift shall be inches .
Vibrate the concrete with internal or internal and external vibrators .
Do not use external vibrators only .
Insert internal vibrators vertically and penetrate the lower layer of concrete by at least inches .
Insert the vibrators in the concrete to assure that the radii of action of the vibrators overlaps .
Hold the vibrators in position from to seconds vibration time shall be reduced by percent when placing SCC .
Do not use vibrators to move concrete horizontally .
Each lift of concrete shall have sufficient plasticity to be consolidated with subsequent lifts .
Do not retemper the concrete with water after discharging has begun .
The Contractor may add HRWR to the concrete after batching if that practice conforms to the manufacturers product data sheet .
Discard concrete that becomes unworkable .
Do not use water or waterbased products to aid in finishing fresh concrete .
After the concrete has been placed and finished and before the forms are covered remove all concrete from projecting reinforcing steel .
Measure and record the concrete cover at each void location after void holddowns have been removed .
The QAI will indicate the number and location of the measurements . .
Process Control Test Cylinders Make concrete test cylinders for each days cast and each form bed used .
Cylinders tested to determine strand release strength and design strength shall be field cured in accordance with AASHTO T ASTM C. day cylinders shall be standard cured .
Record unit identification entrained air content watercement ratio slump flow and temperature of the sampled concrete at the time of cylinder casting .
At least once per week the Contractor shall make concrete cylinders cylinders when the Contract includes permeability requirements for use by the Department cylinders shall be standard cured in accordance with AASHTO T ASTM C. If the Contractor fails to make enough cylinders to demonstrate that the product meets the Contract requirements the product will be considered nonconforming work .
The compressive strength of the concrete will be determined by averaging the compressive strength of two test cylinders made from the same sample .
For the purpose of detensioning prestressed products neither of the test cylinders shall have a compressive strength less than the minimum required transfer strength .
For the purpose of determining design strength the average of two cylinders shall meet or exceed the design strength and the difference in strength between the two shall be no more than percent of the higher strength cylinder .
Perform compressive strength testing to determine transfer and design strength in the presence of the QAI .
Cylinder tests not witnessed by the QAI will not be acceptable. . Curing by Moisture Retention Cure the concrete in accordance with MNL Section .. Moist cure the concrete until it has reached design strength .
Do not use membrane forming curing compounds without the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
If membraneforming curing compounds are authorized follow the requirements of MNL and the curing compound manufacturers published recommendations . .
Accelerated Curing of Concrete Optional Cure the concrete in accordance with MNL Section .
except as modified herein .
After initial set the temperature gain of the concrete shall not exceed F per hour .
Initial set shall be determined in accordance with ASTM C Standard Test Method for Time of Setting of Concrete Mixtures by Penetration Resistance a strength gain of psi indicates initial set .
The maximum allowable concrete temperature shall be F. Concrete temperature shall be measured near each end of the casting bed and at intervals not to exceed feet .
In order to qualify for accelerated cure the concrete temperature shall attain a minimum temperature of F that temperature shall be maintained for a minimum of hours and the concrete shall achieve a minimum of percent of design strength .
Detension precastprestressed products immediately after the completion of the curing cycle while the products are warm and moist .
The accelerated curing cycle shall be considered complete when the method of supplying heat is stopped andor the concrete temperature drops below F. Two cylinders shall be tested immediately upon completion of the accelerated cure cycle .
Products that have not achieved all of the above criteria shall be moist cured until the concrete has achieved design strength .
If the precastprestressed concrete products have achieved percent of design strength during the accelerated curing cycle no further curing will be required. . Prestressing Tension the strands in accordance with MNL and this Specification .
Provide stressing calculations to the QAI prior to tensioning strands .
Do not tension the strands until the QAI has reviewed the calculations .
Apply initial force and final force to the strands in the presence of the QAI .
The QCI shall be present to monitor and document the application of initial force final force and the elongation of the strands .
Tension strands in an orderly sequence to avoid snags and entanglements .
When strands from two or more coils are used identify the locations of the different strand lots .
Calculate the elongation and adjusted gauge pressure readings for each modulus of elasticity and cross sectional area of the strands .
Prior to tensioning cycle the hydraulic jacking devices until the hydraulic fluid reaches normal operating temperature .
After initial tensioning establish a permanent and clearly visible reference mark on the strand to determine strand elongation after final tensioning .
Measure the strand elongation to the nearest inch .
If the strands have been tensioned for more than hours without concrete being placed in the forms test a minimum of percent of the strands but not less than two strands in each row and not less than two strands in draped strand arrays by applying the theoretical force used during the final tensioning to each of the strands .
If additional elongation is gained subtract the amount gained from the theoretical elongation .
If the result of the theoretical elongation minus the gain in elongation is less than the minimum allowable elongation for any of the strands tested apply the final force to all strands .
Do not measure total elongation from the original reference mark .
Accept properly tensioned strand based on the force applied to the strands .
Measure and record the chucktochuck distance on selfstressing beds after tensioning the first setup and at any time the number of strands or strand array changes .
Confirm that the measurement used in the stressing calculations is the same as the field measurement. . Detensioning Detension the strands in accordance with MNL and this Specification .
Use a carburizing flame .
Heat a minimum length of inches of the strand slowly so that only one wire is released at a time .
Cut both ends and any intermediate points simultaneously .
Failure to maintain symmetry of cutting or causing sudden shock to the product will make it subject to rejection .
Detension the strands in the presence of the QAI and QCI .
Measure any strand slippage on all precastprestressed concrete products .
Mark all strands prior to detensioning .
Measure a minimum of four strands per row .
The QAI will choose the strands to be measured. . Finishing Concrete and Repairing Defects Precastprestressed concrete products fabricated under this Section shall meet Standard Grade finish requirements as defined in MNL except that the Contractor shall rub fascia units in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications .
Abrasive blast fascia surfaces prior to finishing .
The Contractor may use alternative methods of achieving an acceptable finish on fascia units if approved by the Fabrication Engineer .
Repair honeycombing ragged or irregular edges and other nonstructural or cosmetic defects using a patching material from the MaineDOT Qualified Products List QPL .
The repair including preparation of the repair area mixing and application and curing of the patching material shall be in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
Corners that are not exposed in the final product may be ground smooth with no further repair necessary if the depth of the defect does not exceed inch .
Remove form ties and other hardware to a depth of not less than inch from the face of the concrete and patch the holes using a patching material from the MaineDOT QPL .
Repair structural defects only with the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Submit a nonconformance report NCR to the Fabrication Engineer with a proposed repair procedure .
Do not perform structural repairs without an NCR that has been reviewed by the Fabrication Engineer .
Structural defects include but are not be limited to exposed reinforcing steel or strand cracks in bearing areas through cracks and cracks .
inch in width that extend more than inches in length in any direction .
Give the QAI adequate notice prior to beginning any structural repairs .
Make chamfers and drip notches smooth and uniform .
Sandblast keyways to remove mortar paste prior to shipping .
Recess strand ends inch and patch the holes with a patching material from the MaineDOT QPL .
Coat the entire ends of the precastprestressed concrete units with a bituminous protective coating unless otherwise specified on the Plans or as directed by the Fabrication Engineer. . Precastprestressed Deck Panels Produce precastprestressed deck panels in accordance with the Plans and Specifications .
Cure the deck panels in accordance with Sections .
or .. . Tolerances Product dimensional tolerances shall be in conformance with the latest edition of MNL Appendix B as applicable to the particular product e.g .
slab Igirder .
box beam the Plans and this Specification .
Use Box Beam fabrication tolerances for voided slabs and use Double T tolerances for NEXT beams .
In case of dispute the Fabrication Engineer shall determine the allowable tolerance. . Transportation and Storage Handle and store material using lifting devices .
Handle and transport precastprestressed units so that the reactions with respect to the unit shall be approximately the same during transportation and storage as in its final position .
Do not transport units until the day design strength has been attained .
Support stored precastprestressed units above the ground on dunnage in a manner to prevent twisting or distortion .
Protect the units from discoloration and damage .
Repair or replace precastprestressed concrete units damaged by improper storing hoisting or handling . .
Installation of Slabs Beams and Girders Finish bearing areas to the elevations shown on the Plans and in accordance with Section Bearings as applicable .
Lift the units using the lifting devices cast into them .
Support IGirders at the abutments and piers to prevent overturning .
Place beams and slabs in their final location in a manner that assures that the keyways are spaced properly and the posttensioning ducts are in alignment .
Use compressible gaskets around duct openings within keyways to prevent blocking of the duct with grout .
Prior to grouting initially posttension slabs or beams to lbs .
force per strand .
Make a permanent and clearly visible reference mark on each strand after it has been initially post tensioned in order to determine strand elongation after final posttensioning .
Immediately prior to grouting clean the keyways between slab or box units and soak the keyways with water in order to prevent absorption of water from the grout .
Seal the bottom of the keyways to prevent the loss of grout .
Fill longitudinal keyways between slabs or beams with a nonshrink flowable cementitious grout with a minimum design compressive strength of psi at days .
The grout shall be a material for keyways from the MaineDOT QPL .
Mix place and cure the grout in accordance with the manufacturers product data sheet .
The Contractor may propose the use of an alternate grout material supplied from a MaineDOT approved ready mixed concrete batch plant .
Ready mixed grout shall achieve a design compressive strength of psi at days have an entrained air content of between .
and .
percent be nonshrink flowable and contain a non shrink additive listed on the MaineDOT QPL for expansive cements .
The proposed grout mix design shall be submitted to the Department for approval .
Do not perform final posttensioning of slabs or beams less than hours after completion of the grouting operation .
Final posttension precastprestressed concrete slabs or beams to lbs .
force per strand unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
Provide a jacking device that has been calibrated in accordance with MNL .
Provide calibration documentation a calibration curve and stressing calculations to the Resident allowing adequate time for review .
Do not posttension slabs or beams until the documentation has been reviewed by the Department .
Posttension the slabs or beams in the presence of the Resident .
No vehicular traffic including the Contractors equipment shall be allowed on the bridge until posttensioning is complete .
Saw cut or abrasive cut the posttensioning strand of slabs or beams no closer than  inches from the wedges after tensioning is complete .
Coat the strand ends and wedges with a corrosion inhibiting grease and cap the ends with a watertight cover .
Pack and neatly finish the posttensioning recesses of slabs or beams with a grout made of the same brand and type of cement used to cast the slabs or beams .
Clean the posttensioning recesses prior to packing the grout . .
Installation of PrecastPrestressed Deck Panels Erect deck panels as shown on the Plans or reviewed Working Drawings as applicable .
Adjust the bottomofslab elevation using threaded jacking devices cast into the panels or by other means approved by the Resident .
Fill the voids between the top of the beam and the bottom of the panels as shown on the Plans reviewed Working Drawings or Standard Details as applicable with a nonshrink flowable cementitious grout with a minimum design compressive strength of psi at days .
The grout shall be a material for keyways from the MaineDOT QPL .
Mix place and cure the grout in accordance with the manufacturers published product data sheet .
Provide vent holes at foot intervals to avoid air locks .
The Contractor may propose the use of an alternate grout material supplied from a MaineDOT approved ready mixed concrete batch plant .
Ready mixed grout shall achieve a design compressive strength of psi at days have an entrained air content of between .
and .
percent be non shrink flowable and contain a non shrink additive listed on the MaineDOT QPL for expansive cements .
The proposed grout mix design shall be submitted to the Department for approval .
Prevent concrete leakage between the deck panels using caulking backer rod or other methods approved by the Resident .
Remove all visible contaminants from the deck panels and protruding reinforcing steel by abrasive blast cleaning or high pressure minimum of psi water cleaning prior to placing the deck concrete . .
Method of Measurement Prestressed structural concrete items will be measured by the lump sum except that precast deck panels will be measured as part of the structural concrete slab Pay Items . .
Basis of Payment Acceptable work done under Precast Prestressed Concrete Superstructure will be paid for at the Contract lump sum price for the respective Pay Item all work associated with precast deck panels will be considered incidental to the structural concrete slab Pay Items .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor and equipment in the precastprestressed work including concrete strand reinforcing steel anchor dowels and related items .
Related items will include but not be limited to Working Drawings preformed pads transportation erecting the units drilling and grouting of anchor dowels grouting of keyways panels and ducts tensioning and posttensioning operations and required concrete admixtures .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Prestressed Structural Concrete Slab Lump Sum .
Prestressed Structural Concrete IGirders Lump Sum .
Prestressed Structural Concrete Box Beams Lump Sum .
Prestressed Structural Concrete NEXT Beam Lump Sum Chapter DIVISION MISCELLANEOUS CONSTRUCTION SECTION GABIONS AND MATTRESSES .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing assembling filling with stones and lacing wire mesh baskets hereafter called gabions or mattresses constructed in accordance with these specifications and placed in conformity with the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or established. . Materials Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials .
Gabion .
Stones for Gabions .
Mattresses .
Stones for Mattresses . .
Fabrication Gabions and mattresses shall be manufactured so that their sides ends lid and diaphragms can be assembled to form rectangular units of the specified dimensions .
Gabions shall be of a single unit construction .
The front base back and lid shall be woven into a single unit .
The ends and diaphragms shall be factory connected to the base .
The base sides and two ends of mattresses shall be of a single unit construction woven into a single unit .
Diaphragms shall be factory connected to the base .
The lid may be a separate unit .
Perimeter edges of the mesh forming the gabion or mattress shall be securely fastened so that joints have at least the same strength as the wire mesh itself .
The wire mesh shall be fabricated to be nonraveling .
Nonraveling is defined as the ability to resist pulling apart at any of the twists or connections forming the mesh when a single wire in a section of mesh is cut and the section of mesh then subjected to the load test described in the materials specification .
The gabion length shall be  or times its horizontal width .
The horizontal width shall not be less than in .
However all gabions furnished by the manufacturer shall be of uniform width .
Where the gabion length exceeds  times its horizontal width the gabion shall be equally divided into cells by diaphragms of the same mesh and gauge as the gabion body .
Mattresses shall be at least ft by ft and equally divided by transverse diaphragms . .
Assembling Gabions and mattresses shall be supplied folded flat tied in pairs and packed in bundles .
Single units shall be removed from the bundle unfolded flat on the ground and all kinks and bends flattened .
The units shall be assembled individually by erecting the front side back side ends and diaphragms assuring that all creases are in the correct position and the tops of all sides level .
The four corners of each unit shall be laced first followed by the edges of internal diaphragms to the sides .
The lacing procedures for lacing corners and units together shall consist of cutting a length of lacing wire approximately  times the distance to be laced not to exceed ft securing the wire terminal at the corner by looping and twisting then proceeding to lace with alternating single and double loops at approximately in intervals and securely fasten the other wire terminal .
The mattresses shall not be assembled in their final location except as required for lacing adjacent units together .
This is to maintain a uniform bedding surface for installation as described in Section .. At the option of the Contractor approved locking wire fasteners may be used in lieu of lacing wire provided they are used in every mesh opening along the joint each ring is formed such that the ends interlock and the fasteners be of stainless steel construction with a minimum thickness of .
in meeting the requirements of ASTM A Type . .
Installation of Gabions The assembled gabion units shall be placed in the proper location .
All adjoining empty gabions shall be placed along the perimeter of the gabion contact surfaces to obtain a monolithic structure .
Once the gabion units are laced together they shall be stretched to effective alignment .
This operation shall be carried out after several empty gabion units have been positioned .
The first gabion in the line shall be partially filled to provide the necessary anchorage prior to stretching .
Stretching shall be carried out using a means of stretching of at least ton capacity .
While under tension the gabion shall be carefully controlled against any possible unraveling .
Whenever gabion structures require more than one tier the upper empty gabion tier while under tension shall be laced to the top of the lower one . .
Installation of Mattresses If the mattress is to be placed in the dry the assembled unit shall be placed in the proper location after it is assembled as described in Section .. Several empty units shall be laced together along the contact surfaces to obtain a monolithic structure .
Care shall be taken to maintain a uniform surface on the bedding material .
If the mattresses are to be placed underwater they may be laced together filled in the dry and then placed in final position .
If the mattresses are polyvinyl chloride coated they shall not be dragged but shall be placed in a manner so as not to damage the coating. . Filter Fabric A filter fabric in accordance with Section .
Drainage Geotextile shall be placed on the subgrade backslope and sides of the excavation .
If earthfill is to be placed over the gabions filter fabric shall be placed top of the gabions before earthfill placement . .
Filling Gabions and mattresses shall be filled in strict accordance with the manufacturers recommendations one copy of these recommendations will be supplied to the Resident .
Care shall be taken when placing stones inside gabions and mattresses in an effort to prevent distortion and ensure proper alignment .
Care shall be taken when placing fill material to assure that the sheathing on coated units will not be broken or damaged .
Gabions shall be filled in layers ft at a time .
Two connecting wires shall be placed between each layer in all cells along all exposed faces of the gabion structure .
All connecting wires shall be looped around two mesh openings and the wire terminals shall be securely twisted to prevent their loosening .
The cells in any row shall be filled in stages so that local deformation will be avoided .
At no time shall any cell be filled to a depth exceeding ft more than the adjoining cell .
Along all exposed gabion faces the outer layer of stone shall be carefully placed and packed by hand to ensure proper alignment and a neat compact square appearance .
No sharp edges of stone shall protrude through the wire mesh .
The last layer of stone shall be leveled with the top of the gabion or mattress to allow proper closing of the lid and provide an even surface for the next course .
Gabions and mattresses shall be well packed and full without excessive bulging . .
Filling of Hand Filled Gabions The assembled gabion units shall be placed in the proper location .
A form shall then be placed along the front face and any side face not adjacent to an already placed gabion and anchored to formwork on the back face to provide a rigid frame rectangle before filling with stone .
The forms shall be sufficiently braced and tied to prevent distortion while the stones are being placed .
On all exposed gabion faces the outer layer of stone shall be carefully placed and packed by hand to ensure proper alignment and a neat compact square appearance .
No sharp edges of stone shall protrude through the wire mesh .
Care shall be taken when placing fill material to assure that the sheathing on coated units will not be broken or damaged .
Gabions shall be filled by hand in ft layers .
Two connecting wires shall be placed between each layer in all cells along all exposed faces of the gabion structure .
All connecting wires shall be looped around two mesh openings and the wire terminals shall be securely twisted to prevent their loosening .
The cells in any row shall be filled in stages so that local deformation will be avoided .
At no time shall any cell be filled to a depth exceeding ft more than the adjoining cell .
The last layer of stone shall be leveled with the top of the gabion or mattress to allow proper closing of the lid and provide an even surface for the next course .
At no time will any stones be placed by machine .
Complete gabions shall have a maximum deviation from the designated shape of inch in ft. Gabions not meeting this tolerance will be emptied adjustments made and refilled. . Lid Closing The lids shall be stretched tightly over the filling using crowbars or lid closing tools until the lid meets the perimeter edges of the front and end panels .
The lid shall then be tightly laced along all edges ends and diaphragms in the same manner as described above for assembly . .
Cutting and Folding Mesh Where shown on the drawings or when otherwise directed the mesh shall be cut folded and wired together to suit existing site conditions .
The mesh must be cleanly cut and the surplus mesh cut out completely or folded back and neatly wired to an adjacent face .
The cut edges of the mesh shall be securely laced together with lacing wire in the manner as described above for assembling . .
Method of Measurement Gabions and mattresses will be measured for payment by the cubic yard to the neat line dimensions shown on the plans . .
Basis of Payment Payment for gabions and mattresses will be made at the contract unit price per cubic yard in place .
Payment will be full compensation for excavating to place gabions and backfill material for preparing and fine grading the foundations area for furnishing and placing backfill material under and behind the gabions and for furnishing and placing all necessary gabion units including wire mesh baskets lacing wire rock fill and all labor and equipment necessary to complete the work .
Pay Item Pay Unit .
Gabions Galvanized Cubic Yard .
Gabions Galvanized and Hand Filled Cubic Yard .
Gabions PVC Coated Cubic Yard .
Gabions PVC Coated and Hand Filled Cubic Yard .
Mattresses Galvanized ________ Cubic Yard .
Mattresses PVC Coated _______ Cubic Yard SECTION PIPE LINING Reserved SECTION PIPE CULVERTS AND STORM DRAINS .
Description This work shall consist of constructing or reconstructing pipe culverts and storm drains in accordance with these specifications the Standard Detail plans and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
The word pipe in these specifications shall include both round pipe and pipe arches. . Materials Meet Sections Joint Mortar .
Flexible Gaskets .
Flexible Culvert Polyvinylchloride PVC Pipe .
Polypropylene Pipe .
Corrugated Steel Metallic Coated Pipe .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Pipe Arches .
Polymer Precoated Galvanized Corrugated Steel .
Pipe Pipe Arches Aluminum Coated Type Corrugated Steel Pipe .
ZincCoated Galvanized Corrugated Steel Pipe .
Rigid Culvert Reinforced Concrete Pipe .
Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe .
Flexible culverts with a diameter of inches or more shall have the ends cut to a partial bevel as called for on the plans .
The cut ends of galvanized steel pipe shall be regalvanized or painted with a zinc aluminum paint conforming to Federal Specification TTPA or an approved equal .
Helical corrugated pipe shall be rerolled to form angular corrugations on the ends .
The corrugated bands for connecting pipe with inches by  inch corrugations shall be not less than  inches wide .
Rigid culverts designated to have the ends shaped to a partial bevel shall be either cast or cut to the required shape and dimensions .
In either case the edges of the pipe shall be even and true with no exposed reinforcing. . Construction Requirements .
General Culvert pipe and pipe arches shall be furnished under the following options unless otherwise specified .
Option I The Contractor shall furnish any of the following type of pipe under Option I Corrugated Steel Metallic zinc or aluminum Coated Pipe Reinforced Concrete Pipe Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe Any of the metal pipes allowed under Option III .
Option III The Contractor shall furnish any of the following types of pipe under Option III .
Corrugated pipe used under this option shall be adequate to equal the flow capacity of comparable smoothlined pipe Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe Polyvinylchloride PVC Pipe PolymerPrecoated Galvanized Corrugated Steel Pipe Reinforced Concrete Pipe Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe Polypropylene Pipe Within any single run of culvert pipe including extensions of existing culverts the type of pipe shall be the same unless otherwise specified or as directed by the Resident .
In a closed drainage system a run of culvert pipe shall be considered from catch basin to catch basin .
In an open drainage system a run of culvert shall be considered from inlet to outlet .
Option III polyvinylchloride PVC pipe shall only be used in closed drainage systems between catch basins . .
Corrugated Polyethylene and Polypropylene Pipe for Option III If inspection by the Resident reveals an unsatisfactory installation the Resident may direct the contractor to test installed Smooth Lined Corrugated Polyethylene and Polypropylene Pipe for Option III to ensure the vertical deflection does not exceed the maximum allowable deflection .
Maximum allowable deflection shall be percent of the sum of the nominal inside diameter minus a . percent undersize tolerance .
Deflection tests shall not be performed until at least days after completion of installation and compaction of backfill .
The pipe shall be cleaned and inspected for offsets and obstructions before testing .
For all pipes inches and smaller a mandrel shall be pulled through the pipe by hand to ensure the maximum allowable deflections have not been exceeded .
The mandrel shall be certified by the Department prior to use .
If the mandrel fails to pass through the pipe the pipe will be deemed overdeflected .
For pipes greater than inches deflections shall be determined by a method submitted and approved by the Department .
If a mandrel is selected the minimum diameter and length and other requirements shall conform to the dimensions and requirements stated below .
If other methods are used the measurements shall meet the minimum mandrel diameter requirements .
Any overdeflected pipe shall be uncovered and if not damaged as determined by the Department shall be allowed for reinstallation .
Damaged pipe shall not be reinstalled and shall be removed from the work site .
The mandrel shall be a rigid nonadjustable odd numberedleg legs minimum mandrel having an effective length not less than its nominal diameter and having a minimum diameter at any point along the full length as follows Nominal Size inches Minimum Mandrel Diameter inches .
. . . . . . . .
When deflection testing reveals over deflected pipe all costs incurred by the Contractor including mandrel and deflection testing reinstallation of pipe and delays shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
When deflection testing reveals satisfactory pipe all costs for deflection testing will be paid for by the Department. . Excavation Trenches shall be excavated in accordance with the requirements of Section Structural Excavation and wide enough to allow joining the culvert and compacting the bedding and backfill material under and around the culvert .
Unless otherwise designated trench walls shall be as nearly vertical as possible and the trench width no greater than necessary for installation of the culvert. . Bedding Culverts less than inches in diameter shall be bedded on a firm foundation of uniform density .
After placing the culvert pipe backfill material shall be placed along the bottom of the trench thoroughly tamped against the lower portion of the pipe with special care taken not to move the bedded pipe .
For culverts inches in diameter and larger the bottom of the trench shall be compacted to uniform density and shaped to fit a template with reasonable closeness for at least percent of the culverts total height .
On all bedding when bell and spigot pipe is used the portion of trench at the joints shall be shaped to fit the bell . .
Laying Culvert The Contractor shall not install nor backfill culverts between December th and April st without written permission .
Installing shall begin at the downstream end of the culvert line .
Bell or groove ends of rigid culverts shall be placed facing upstream .
Elliptically shaped culverts shall be placed with the major axis within degrees of vertical .
Elliptically reinforced concrete pipe shall be placed with the vertical axis indicated by the manufacturer within degrees of vertical . .
Joining Culverts The method of joining rigid culvert sections shall be such that the ends are fully entered and the inner surfaces are reasonably flush and even .
Joints shall be made with Portland cement mortar Portland cement grout rubber ring gaskets or flexible plastic gaskets .
The pipe ends shall be thoroughly cleaned before the joint is made .
Mortared joints shall be made with an excess of mortar to form a bead around the outside of the culvert and finished smooth inside .
For grouted joints molds or runners shall be used to retain the poured grout .
Joints with rubber ring gasket or flexible plastic gasket shall be made in accordance with the manufacturers recommended procedures .
When Portland cement mixtures are used the completed joints shall be covered to protect against drying .
Flexible culvert section and metal end sections shall be firmly jointed by coupling bands .
These bands shall meet the same applicable requirements as the flexible culvert being joined. . Shop Strutting All flexible circular culvert pipe inches in diameter and larger shall be elongated along the vertical diameter in accordance with one of the following two methods a The pipe shall be elongated by the manufacturer after fabrication by increasing the diameter along the vertical axis approximately percent with a corresponding decrease along the horizontal axis .
The elongation shall be obtained by installing rods and tightening the rods uniformly from end to end of the pipe obtaining approximately one quarter of the required elongation each time throughout the length of the pipe .
The rods shall be  inch diameter threaded inches at both ends with washers and nuts .
The length of the rods shall be the diameter of the pipe plus inches .
The rods shall be placed on the horizontal axis of the pipe at foot spacing and located halfway between the circumferential riveting .
A block of soft wood inches by inches by inches long shall be placed over the rods at each end to provide contact against the outside of the pipe .
The long dimension of the blocks shall be parallel with the horizontal axis of the pipe .
The rods shall be left in the pipe until the fill is completed and compacted unless for some unusual condition their removal is ordered .
The rods shall be removed by cutting from the inside adjacent to the pipe .
b The pipe shall be elongated by the manufacturer by increasing the diameter along the vertical axis approximately percent with a corresponding decrease along the horizontal axis by applying sufficient pressure to the sides of the pipe after fabrication to produce the specified distortion .
The elongation shall be maintained by drilling holes in the ends of the pipe sections and placing and tightening horizontal wires .
After the pipe sections have been installed with coupling bands the wires shall be removed .
Helically corrugated culvert sections shall be match marked before being elongated by the manufacturer or before the  inch diameter rods are installed. . Backfilling Culverts and Storm Drains After the pipe is installed it will be inspected before any backfill material is placed .
All pipe found to be out of alignment unduly settled or damaged to the extent that full performance is impaired shall be taken up and relaid or replaced .
Trenches shall be backfilled in accordance with Section .
and as follows .
The backfill material shall be thoroughly rammed under the haunches of the pipe with power or pneumatic operated hand tampers .
The remainder of the backfill shall be thoroughly compacted with power tampers or vibratory compactors or other approved equipment or combination of equipment .
When the top of the pipe is exposed above the top of the trench the embankment material around the pipe shall be placed and compacted on each side of the pipe in the aforementioned manner described for backfilling trenches for a width of feet measured from the outside diameter of the pipe .
Only that portion of the embankment on each side and top of the pipe for a minimum distance of inches measured from the outside diameter of the pipe must be of material conforming to the requirements described for backfilling in Section .. Backfill material beyond these limits may contain stones larger than inches but no greater than the thickness of the layer being placed .
The embankment construction around the pipe shall continue up to an elevation inches above the top of the pipe .
Beyond these limits the embankment shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the embankment construction requirements specified for the work except where the induced trench method is called for on the plans .
When construction equipment is used or traffic is maintained the Contractor shall provide a minimum cover of feet over all pipes if possible .
Whenever this cover extends above the subgrade the Contractor shall temporarily place earth which shall be removed when necessary to complete the work in accordance with the plans or as directed .
Any deviation from this practice shall have prior approval . .
Induced Trench Under this method for designated rigid pipes only the embankment shall be completed as specified above to a height above the culvert equal to the vertical outside diameter of the pipe plus foot .
A trench equal in width to the outside horizontal diameter of the pipe shall then be excavated to within foot of the top of the pipe .
Trench walls shall be as nearly vertical as possible .
Hay bales shall be used to fill the lower to of the trench .
Construction of the embankment above shall then proceed in a normal manner .
The trench shall be loosely filled with highly compressible soil . .
Removing and Relaying Culverts The pipe shall be carefully removed from its existing location transported to and installed in the new location in accordance with these specifications for the particular type of pipe involved .
Pipe damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced with pipe of similar type by the Contractor without additional compensation .
New metal bands or joint material shall be supplied and installed when necessary . .
Method of Measurement Culvert and storm drain pipe of the different types and sizes both new and relaid will be measured by the length in linear feet along the invert laid as directed complete in place and accepted .
Pipe laid in excess of the authorized length will not be included .
When the ends of a pipe are sloped or skewed the amount to be included for payment shall be the length along the invert of the pipe .
When elbows tees wyes or other special fittings are required each fitting shall be included for payment as additional linear feet of the largest pipeline involved .
Inlet grate units will be measured by each unit installed complete in place and accepted .
Concrete pipe ties shall be measured per Group ties per Group . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of pipe for culverts and storm drains will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the types and sizes specified complete in place .
No payment will be made for pipe ordered without written approval of the Resident when such pipe is not required to be installed for completion of the work .
Excavation for culverts and storm drains including excavation below the pipe for induced trench and for bedding and backfilling will be considered incidental except as provided in Section Structural Excavation .
Whenever minimum cover material extends above the subgrade removal of the cover material necessary to complete the work will not be paid for directly but shall be considered part of the work specified herein .
Coupling bands and joint material will not be paid for separately but shall be considered included in the unit bid price for the type of pipe being used or relaid .
Existing culverts to be relaid salvaged or wasted shall be removed and disposed of as directed .
The excavation for removal of these culverts that is not paid for under other items or incidental to other items shall be paid for as Common Excavation .
Inlet grate units will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the size specified complete in place .
The accepted quantity of concrete pipe ties will be paid for at the contract unit price per Group .
Such payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing and all other necessary incidentals for satisfactory completion of the work .
Any grout or mortar necessary to repair chipping shall be incidental to the installation of the pipe ties .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
inch Culvert Pipe Option I Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option I Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option I Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option I Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option I Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option I Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option I Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch Culvert Pipe Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch span by inch rise Pipe Arch Option III Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
inch Reinforced Conc .
Pipe Class IV Linear Foot .
Concrete Pipe Ties Group .
Remove and Relay Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Metal Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
Remove and Relay inch Concrete Pipe Linear Foot .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each .
inch Inlet Grate Unit Each SECTION MANHOLES INLETS AND CATCH BASINS .
Description Construct manholes inlets and catch basins. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Portland Cement .
Clay or Shale Brick .
Concrete Masonry Blocks .
Joint Mortar .
Reinforcing Steel .
Stone Curbing and Edging .
Precast Concrete Units .
Tops and Traps .
Corrugated Metal Units .
Catch Basin and Manhole Steps .
Except as otherwise provided on the plans concrete for these structures shall meet the requirements of Section Structural Concrete .
Catch basin grates shall be either the type of grate shown on the Standard Details or an approved equal .
The corners shall be notched by the Contractor at the project site by grinding the corner to fit the cast iron frames. . Construction Requirements Concrete catch basins and manholes shall be constructed of precast units except that concrete blocks may be used around inlet and outlet pipes .
Joints for precast concrete units shall be of Portland cement mortar rubber gaskets flexible plastic rings mastic joint filler or other approved types to form a watertight joint .
Joints for concrete blocks shall be of Portland cement mortar not more than  inch wide completely filled and neatly tooled on the inside of the structure .
Metal catch basins shall be corrugated metal pipe units mounted on a Portland cement concrete foundation .
Catch basins and manholes shall be placed to the required grade on a compacted foundation of uniform density .
Inlet and outlet pipe elevations may vary from the elevations shown on the plans depending upon field conditions .
Pipe sections entering catch basins shall be firmly connected to the structure wall with no part of the pipe projecting more than inches inside the wall .
When a section of culvert is cut the end shall be finished in a skillful manner .
Metal frames and traps when called for shall be set in a bed of clay bricks or shale bricks and mortar or otherwise secured as shown on the plans .
Castings shall be set to the correct elevation before the next final course of paving material has been placed .
Upon completion each catch basin and manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulation of silt debris or foreign matter and shall be kept clean until final acceptance of the work . .
Altering Adjusting and Rebuilding Catch Basins and Manholes Existing catch basins and manholes shall be dismantled sufficiently to allow altering adjusting or rebuilding in accordance with the applicable requirements as shown on the Standard Detail plans for complete catch basins and manholes .
When existing frames covers and grates are used they shall be thoroughly cleaned of existing mortar before placing to the new grade .
a .
Altering Catch Basin The existing top assembly shall be removed and replaced with a new Type A or Type B frame and special grate set to the required grade using approved clay brick and mortar .
b .
Adjusting Catch Basins and Manholes The existing top assembly shall be removed thoroughly cleaned and reset to the new grade using approved clay brick and mortar .
c. Rebuilding Catch Basins and Manholes The existing top assembly cone section and barrel section shall be removed down to the outlet flow line grade to the extent required as determined by the Resident and shall be rebuilt and a new frame and grate furnished and installed at the required line and grade directed .
Concrete blocks may be used to rebuild the barrel section if necessary due to existing conditions .
All salvaged material not reused including grates and frames and curb inlets will remain the property of the present owner unless otherwise specified .
Each catch basin and manhole altered adjusted or reconstructed shall be cleaned of all accumulated silt debris and other foreign matter before final acceptance of the work .
Resetting the curb inlet will be included in the adjusting or rebuilding catch basin items .
Method of Measurement Catch basins manholes and accessories of the respective types will be measured by the number of units measured as follows complete and accepted in place .
a .
Complete Structures Each catch basin and manhole having a depth up to feet from the top of the grate or cover to the top of the floor measured to the nearest foot will be one unit .
 of a unit will be added for each additional foot over feet measured to the nearest foot .
Depth measurements in excess of the dimensions authorized will not be included .
b .
Existing Structures Existing catch basins and manholes to be altered adjusted or rebuilt will be one unit each .
Existing catch basins and manholes that are cleaned will be one unit each .
c. Trap Each trap included in the completed structure will be one unit each .
d. Step Each step included in the completed structure will be one unit each .
e. Grate Each grate changed under item .
will be measured by each unit complete in place and accepted . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of catch basins manholes altered grates traps and steps will be paid for at the contract unit price each of the respective types complete in place .
Payment for rebuilding adjusting or altering catch basins and manholes shall include furnishing all materials including new blocks bricks mortar metal tops covers and curb inlets when required .
Frames grates and covers for new or rebuilt catch basins or manholes shall be considered part of the structure and no separate payment will be made .
Payment for cleaning existing catch basins and manholes will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
There will be no payment for cleaning new altered adjusted or rebuilt catch basins and manholes .
Payment will be full compensation for supplying all equipment and labor to clean the basins and manholes and to dispose of the waste .
Excavation and backfill will be considered incidental except as provided in Section Structural Excavation .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Catch Basin Type AC Each .
Catch Basin Type AC Each .
Catch Basin Type B Each .
Catch Basin Type BC Each .
Catch Basin Type BC Each .
Catch Basin Type BC Each .
Catch Basin Type B Each .
Catch Basin Type BC Each .
Catch Basin Type C Each .
Catch Basin Type C Each .
inch Catch Basin Type E Each .
inch Catch Basin Type E Each .
Manhole Each .
Altering Catch Basin to Manhole Each .
Altering Catch Basin Each .
Rebuilding Catch Basin Each .
Rebuilding Manhole Each .
ChangeCatch Basin Grate to Cascade Grate Each .
Altering Manhole to Catch Basin Each .
Adjusting Manhole or Catch Basin to Grade Each .
Cleaning Existing Catch Basin and Manhole Each .
inch Trap Each .
inch Trap Each .
inch Trap Each .
inch Trap Each .
Step Each .
Catch Basin Type F Each .
Catch Basin Type FC Each .
Catch Basin Type F Each .
Catch Basin Type FC Each .
Catch Basin Type F Each .
Catch Basin Type FC Each .
Catch Basin Type F Each .
Catch Basin Type FC Each .
Catch Basin Type A Each .
Catch Basin Type AC Each .
Catch Basin Type B Each .
Catch Basin Type BC Each SECTION UNDERDRAINS .
Description This work shall consist of the construction of underdrain using pipe and filter material and pipe outlets in accordance with these specifications and the standard detail plans and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established. . Materials .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Granular Borrow .
Underdrain Backfill Material .
Underdrain Pipe Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe .
Polyvinylchloride PVC Perforated Pipe .
Corrugated Steel Metallic Coated Pipe for Underdrain .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe for Underdrain .
Underdrain Outlet Pipe Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe .
Corrugated Steel Metallic Coated Pipe for Underdrain .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe .
Connections for polyethylene pipe shall be made with external wraparound split couplings screwon type couplings external snapon couplings or bell and spigot and ring gasket .
External wraparound split couplings shall be secured with heavy duty splicing tape or plastic or wire ties placed on each side of the coupling .
External snapon couplings shall comply with the appropriate section of AASHTO Specifications .
Connections for other plastic underdrain pipe shall be made with bell and spigot and ring gasket .
Connections for metallic underdrain pipe shall be made with corrugated metal bands secured with bolts .
Dimpled bands shall not be used .
Other types of connectors for underdrain may be used upon approval by the Resident. . Fittings The material for elbows tees and wyes for Underdrain pipe shall be at least as thick as the largest size pipe being connected. . General Underdrain pipe for Underdrain Type B shall at the Contractors option consist of any one of the following types Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe for Underdrain Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe for Underdrain Smoothlined Metallic Coated Zinc or Aluminum Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe for Underdrain Polyvinylchloride PVC Perforated Pipe At the Contractors option underdrain pipe for Underdrain Type C shall consist of any one of the following types Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe for Underdrain Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe Smoothlined Metallic Coated Zinc or Aluminum Coated Corrugated Steel Pipe for Underdrain Polyvinylchloride PVC Perforated Pipe .
Underdrain Construction a. Underdrain Type B The trench shall be excavated to the required width and depth and a bed of the specified granular material inches in depth prepared in the trench .
inch perforated pipe shall be laid on this bed with the perforations as shown on the Standard Detail plans .
After the pipe has been firmly bedded and joints securely connected it will be inspected before any backfill is placed .
The remaining backfill shall be granular material meeting the same requirements as that used for bedding the pipe .
For underdrain placed under areas of proposed pavement the material shall be placed in inch layers loose measure and thoroughly compacted except that the initial layer of backfill around the pipe may be placed in a layer not exceeding inches .
For underdrains placed under areas not proposed to be paved the initial layer of backfill shall not exceed inches and the remaining material may be placed in one lift to the elevation of the subgrade and compacted with heavy rubber tired or vibratory compaction equipment to the satisfaction of the Resident .
The upstream end of all completed underdrain pipe shall be sealed with cement mortar or other acceptable material .
Care shall be taken that soil does not enter the pipe .
Pipe contaminated before backfilling shall be removed cleaned and relaid .
b. Underdrain Type C The trench shall be excavated to the width and depth as determined by the size and depth of the pipe to be installed .
The perforated pipe shall be laid to line and grade centered on the bottom of the trench with the perforations as shown on the Standard Detail plans .
After the pipe has been firmly bedded and all joints securely connected it will be inspected before any backfill is placed .
The backfill shall be placed in accordance with Section .
and as shown on the Standard Detail plans using the materials specified .
When Underdrain Type B or Underdrain Type C is constructed backfill material beyond the underdrain trench lateral limits designated on the plans shall be material conforming to the requirements of Granular Borrow Underwater Backfill .
Material within the underdrain trench limits shall conform to the requirements of the type underdrain being constructed .
The Contractor shall take precautions to prevent the underdrain backfill material from becoming contaminated with clay silts organic matter or other foreign matter .
Methods of placing backfill material shall be limited to the use of equipment that will place material directly into the trench .
Pushing material into the trench will not be allowed .
When underdrain is to be constructed in embankment fill the excavation for the trench shall be done after the embankment has been completed to subgrade elevation. . Underdrain Outlets Trenches for underdrain outlets shall be excavated to the required width and depth .
These outlets shall be of the same size and wall thickness used in the underdrain except that the perforations may be omitted .
The pipe shall be laid in the trench with all ends firmly joined by the applicable methods and means .
After inspection and approval of the pipe installation the trench shall be backfilled with suitable material in layers and compacted as provided for in Section .. .
Method of Measurement Underdrain and underdrain outlets will be measured by the length in linear feet along the centerline of underdrains and underdrain outlets of the types and sizes completed and accepted .
When elbows tees wyes or other special fittings are required in underdrain each fitting shall be included for payment as additional linear feet of the largest pipe size involved . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of underdrains and underdrain outlets will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of each type and size specified complete in place .
Outlet pipe for Underdrain Type C will be paid for under Section Pipe Culverts and Storm Drains .
Within and beyond the trench limits backfill couplings and bands and other related items will not be paid for separately but shall be considered included in the unit bid price for the type of underdrain being installed .
Excavation will be considered incidental except as provided in Section Structural Excavation .
No allowance for payment will be made for excavating or material excavated beyond the horizontal dimensions shown for Underdrain Type B or Underdrain Type C. Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
inch Underdrain Type B Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Outlet Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Type C Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Type C Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Type C Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Type C Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Type C Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Type C Linear Foot .
inch Underdrain Type C Linear Foot SECTION GUARDRAIL .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing guardrail components in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or as established .
The types of guardrail are designated as follows Type Galvanized steel w beam wood posts or galvanized steel posts .
Type aGalvanized steel w beam wood posts wood or composite offset blocks .
Type aaCorrosion resistant steel w beam wood posts wood or composite offset blocks .
Type bGalvanized steel w beam galvanized steel posts galvanized steel offset blocks .
Type cGalvanized steel w beam wood posts or galvanized steel posts wood or composite offset blocks .
Type dGalvanized steel w beam galvanized steel posts wood or composite offset blocks .
Thrie BeamGalvanized steel thrie beam wood posts or galvanized steel posts wood or composite offset blocks .
Median barriers shall consist of two beams of the above types mounted on single posts .
Except for thrie beam median barriers may include rub rails when called for .
Bridge mounted guardrail shall consist of furnishing all labor materials and equipment necessary to install guardrail as shown on the plans .
This work shall also include drilling for and installation of offset blocks if specified and incidental hardware necessary for satisfactory completion of the work .
Remove and Reset and Remove Modify and Reset guardrail shall consist of removing the existing designated guardrail and resetting in a new location as shown on the plans or directed by the Resident .
Remove Modify and Reset guardrail and Modify guardrail include the following guardrail modifications Removing plate washers at all posts except at anchorage assemblies as noted on the Standard Details Adding offset blocks and other modifications as listed in the Construction Notes or General Notes .
Modifications shall conform to the guardrail Standard Details .
Bridge Connection shall consist of the installation and attachment of beam guardrail to the existing bridge .
This work shall consist of constructing a concrete end post or modifying an existing end post as required furnishing and installing a terminal connector necessary hardware and incidentals required to complete the work as shown on the plans .
Bridge Transition shall consist of a bridge connection and furnishing and installing guardrail components as shown in the Standard Details. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Timber Preservative .
Metal Beam Rail .
Guardrail Posts .
Guardrail Hardware .
Guardrail components shall meet the applicable standards of A Guide to Standardized Highway Barrier Hardware prepared and approved by the AASHTOAGCARTBA Joint Cooperative Committee Task Force Report .
Posts for underdrain delineators shall be U channel steel ft long  lbft minimum and have inch round holes inch center to center for a minimum distance of ft from the top of the post .
Reflectorized Flexible Guardrail Markers shall be mounted on all guardrails .
A marker shall be mounted onto guardrail posts at the flared end treatments terminal and its tangent point both at the leading and trailing ends of each run of guardrail .
The markers flexible posts shall be grey with either silverwhite or yellow reflectors to match the edge line striping at the tangents red at leading ends and green at trailing ends .
Whenever the end treatment is not flared markers will only be required at the end treatments terminal .
These shall be red or green as appropriate .
Markers shall be installed on the protected side of guardrail posts unless otherwise approved by the Resident .
Reflectorized flexible guardrail markers shall be from the MaineDOTs Qualified Products List of Guardrail Material .
The marker shall be grey flexible durable and of a non discoloring material to which inch by inch reflectors shall be applied and capable of recovering from repeated impacts .
Reflective material shall meet the requirements of Section .
for ASTM D Type III reflective sheeting .
The marker shall be secured to the guardrail post with two fasteners as shown in the Standard Details .
Reflectorized beam guardrail butterflytype delineators shall be mounted on all w beam guardrail .
The delineators shall be mounted within the guardrail beam at guardrail posts .
Delineators shall be fabricated from highimpact ultraviolet weather resistant thermoplastic .
Reflectorized beam guardrail delineators shall be placed at approximately .
ft intervals or every tenth post on tangents and at approximately .
ft intervals or every fifth post on curves .
Exact locations of the delineators shall be as directed by the Resident .
On divided highways the left hand delineators shall be yellow and the right hand delineators shall be silverwhite .
On two directional highways the right hand side shall be silverwhite and no reflectorized delineator used on the left .
All reflectors shall have reflective sheeting applied to only one side of the delineator facing the direction of traffic as shown in the Standard Detail .
Reflectorized sheeting for guardrail delineators shall meet the requirements of Section ..
Single wood post shall be of cedar white oak or tamarack wellseasoned straight and sound and have been cut from live trees .
The outer and inner bark shall be removed and all knots trimmed flush with the surface of the post .
Posts shall be uniform taper and free of kinks and bends .
Single steel post shall conform to the requirements of Section .
b .
Single steel pipe post shall be galvanized seamless steel pipe conforming to the requirements of ASTM A Schedule No .
Standard Weight .
Acceptable multiple mailbox assemblies shall be listed on the Departments Qualified Products List and shall be NCHRP tested and approved .
The Guardrail Flared Terminal shall be a terminal with a ft offset as shown in the Manufacturers installation instructions .
Existing materials damaged or lost during adjusting removing and resetting or removing modifying and resetting shall be replaced by the Contractor without additional compensation .
Existing guardrail posts and guardrail beams found to be unfit for reuse shall be replaced when directed by the Resident. . Posts Posts for guardrail shall be set plumb in holes or they may be driven if suitable driving equipment is used to prevent battering and distorting the post .
When posts are driven through pavement the damaged area around the post shall be repaired with approved bituminous patching .
Damage to lighting and signal conduit and conductors shall be repaired by the Contractor .
When set in holes posts shall be on a stable foundation and the space around the posts backfilled in layers with suitable material thoroughly tamped .
The reflectorized flexible guardrail markers shall be set plumb with the reflective surface facing the oncoming traffic .
Markers shall be installed on the protected side of guardrail posts .
Markers which become bent or otherwise damaged shall be removed and replaced with new markers .
Single wood posts shall be set plumb in holes and backfilled in layers with suitable material thoroughly tamped .
The Resident will designate the elevation and shape of the top .
The posts that are not pressure treated shall be painted two coats of good quality oil base exterior house paint .
Single steel posts shall be set plumb in holes as specified for single wood posts or they may be driven if suitable driving equipment is used to prevent battering and distorting the post .
Additional bolt holes required in existing posts shall be drilled or punched but the size of the holes shall not exceed the dimensions given in the Standard Details .
Metal around the holes shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted with two coats of approved aluminum rust resistant paint .
Holes shall not be burned. . Rails Brackets and fittings shall be placed and fastened as shown on the plans .
Rail beams shall be erected and aligned to provide a smooth continuous barrier .
Beams shall be lapped with the exposed end away from approaching traffic .
End assemblies shall be installed as shown on the plans and shall be securely attached to the rail section and end post .
All bolts shall be of sufficient length to extend beyond the nuts but not more than  inch .
Nuts shall be drawn tight .
Additional bolt holes required in existing beams shall be drilled or punched but the size of the holes shall not exceed the dimensions given in the Standard Details .
Metal around the holes shall be thoroughly cleaned and painted with two coats of approved aluminum rust resistant paint .
Holes shall not be burned . .
Offset Blocks The same offset block material is to be provided for the entire project unless otherwise specified . .
Shoulder Widening At designated locations the existing shoulder of the roadway shall be widened as shown on the plans .
All grading paving seeding and other necessary work shall be in accordance with the Specifications for the type work being done. . Mail Box Post Single wood post shall be installed at the designated location for the support of the mailbox .
The multiple mailbox assemblies shall be installed at the designated location in accordance with the Standard Details and as recommended by the Manufacturer .
Attachment of the mailbox to the post will be the responsibility of the home or business owner. . Abraded Surfaces All galvanized surfaces of new guardrail and posts which have been abraded so that the base metal is exposed and the threaded portions of all fittings and fasteners and cut ends of bolts shall be cleaned and painted with two coats of approved rust resistant paint . .
Method of Measurement Guardrail will be measured by the linear foot from center to center of end posts along the gradient of the rail except where end connections are made to masonry or steel structures in which case measurement will be as shown on the plans .
Terminal section low volume end NCHRP end treatments reflectorized flexible guardrail marker terminal end bridge transition bridge connection multiple mailbox post and single post will be measured by each unit of the kind specified and installed .
Widened shoulder will be measured as a unit of grading within the limits shown on the plans .
Excavation in solid rock for placement of posts will be paid under force account unless otherwise indicated in the Bid Documents . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the type specified complete in place .
Reflectorized beam guardrail butterflytype delineators will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to guardrail items .
Terminal section buffer end NCHRP end treatment bridge connection single post and reflectorized flexible guardrail markers will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the kind specified complete in place .
NCHRP end treatments and low volume guardrail ends will be paid for at the contract price each complete in place which price shall be full payment for furnishing and installing all components including the terminal section posts offset blocks w beam cable foundation posts plates and for all incidentals necessary to complete the installation within the limits as shown on the Standard Details or the Manufacturers installation instructions .
Each end treatment will be clearly marked with the manufacturers name and model number to facilitate any future needed repair .
Such payment shall also be full compensation for furnishing all material excavating backfilling holes assembling and all incidentals necessary to complete the work except that for excavation for posts or anchorages in solid ledge rock payment will be made under .. Force Account .
Type III Retroreflective Adhesive Sheeting shall be applied to the approach buffer end sections and sized to substantially cover the end section .
On all roadways the ends shall be marked with alternating black and retroreflective yellow stripes .
The stripes shall be in wide and sloped down at an angle of degrees toward the side on which traffic is to pass the end section .
Guardrail flared terminal shall also include a set of installation drawings supplied to the Resident .
Anchorages to bridge end posts will be part of the bridge work .
Connections thereto will be considered included in the unit bid price for guardrail .
Guardrail to be placed on a radius of curvature of ft or less will be paid for under the designated radius pay item for the type guardrail being placed .
Widened shoulder will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place and will be full compensation for furnishing and placing grading and compaction of aggregate subbase and any required fill material .
Adjust guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter and will be full compensation for adjusting to grade .
Payment shall also include adjusting terminal end treatments where required .
Modify guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter and will be full compensation for furnishing and installing offset blocks additional posts and other specified modifications removing modifying installing and adjusting to grade existing posts and beams removing plate washers and backup plates and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment shall also include removing and resetting terminal ends where required .
Remove and Reset guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per meter and will be full compensation for removing transporting storing reassembling all parts necessary cutting furnishing new parts when necessary reinstalling at the new location and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment shall also include removing and resetting terminal ends when required .
No payment will be made for guardrail removed but not reset and all costs for such removal shall be considered incidental to the various contract pay items .
Remove Modify and Reset guardrail will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot and will be full compensation for the requirements listed in Modify guardrail and Remove and Reset guardrail .
Bridge Connections will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Payment shall include attaching the connection to the endpost including furnishing and placing concrete and reinforcing steel necessary to construct new endposts if required furnishing and installing the terminal connector and all miscellaneous hardware labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Bridge Transitions will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Payment shall include furnishing and installing the thrie beam or wbeam terminal connector doubled beam section and transition section where called for posts hardware precast concrete transition curb and any other necessary materials and labor including the bridge connection as stated in the previous paragraph .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Guardrail Type aSingle Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type aaSingle Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type bSingle Rail Linear Foot .
Bridge Transition Type I Each .
Bridge Transition Type II Each .
Bridge Connection Type I Each .
Bridge Connection Type II Each .
Guardrail Beam Linear foot .
Guardrail Type b Double Rail Linear foot .
Guardrail Type a ft radius and less Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type aa ft radius and less Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type a over ft radius Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type aa over ft radius Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type b ft radius and less Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type b over ft radius Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type c Single Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type c Double Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type c ft radius and less Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type c over ft radius Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type d Single Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type d Double Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type d ft radius and less Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type d over feet radius Linear Foot .
Terminal Connector Each .
Terminal Connector Thrie Beam Each .
Terminal EndSingle Rail Galvanized Steel Each .
Terminal EndSingle Rail Corrosion Resistant Steel Each .
Terminal EndDouble Rail Galvanized Steel Each .
Terminal EndDouble Rail Corrosion Resistant Steel Each .
Reflectorized Flexible Guardrail Marker Each .
Remove and Reset Reflectorized Flexible Guardrail Marker Each .
Underdrain Delineator Post Each .
Guardrail Modify Type b to c Linear Foot .
Guardrail Modify Existing to Type d Linear Foot .
Guardrail Adjust Linear Foot .
Guardrail Remove Modify and Reset Type b to c Linear Foot .
Guardrail Remove Modify and Reset Existing to Type d Linear Foot .
Guardrail Removed and Reset Type c Linear Foot .
Replace Unusable Existing Guardrail Posts Each .
Single Wood Post Each .
Single Galvanized Steel Post Each .
Single Steel Pipe Post Each .
Multiple Mailbox Support Each .
Guardrail Type Single Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type Single Rail with Rub Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type Double Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type Double Rail with Rub Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Modify Type c Double Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type ft radius and less Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type over ft radius Linear Foot .
Thrie Beam Rail Beam Linear Foot .
Guardrail Thrie Beam Double Rail Linear Foot .
Guardrail Thrie Beam Single Rail Linear Foot .
Terminal End Thrie Beam Each .
Transition Section Thrie Beam Each .
Guardrail Thrie Beam ft radius and less Linear Foot .
Guardrail Thrie Beam over ft radius Linear Foot .
Guardrail Thrie Beam Single Rail Bridge Mounted Linear Foot .
Guardrail Type Single Rail Bridge Mounted Linear Foot .
Widen Shoulder for Low Volume Guardrail End Type Each .
Widen Shoulder for Guardrail Flared Terminal Each .
Low Volume Guardrail End Type Each .
Guardrail Flared Terminal Each SECTION FENCES .
Description Construct fence and gates. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Barbed Wire .
Woven Wire .
Chain Link Fabric .
Cedar Rail Fence .
Fence Posts and Braces .
Bars for barways shall be of eastern hemlock northern white pine Norway pine spruce cedar or tamarack equal in quality to the wood posts .
The bark shall be removed and all knots hewn flush .
Metal gates shall be of galvanized steel .
Staples shall be of galvanized or aluminum coated steel .
Concrete for anchoring metal posts metal braces and wooden gate posts shall meet the requirements of Section Structural Concrete except air entraining will not be required .
The class of concrete shall be optional .
Drive anchors shall be an approved anchorage consisting of two steel angles driven diagonally into the ground through metal clamps bolted to the post .
All parts shall be galvanized. . General The Contractor shall perform clearing and grubbing necessary to construct the fence to the required grade and alignment .
Posts shall be spaced as called for on the plans except that a variation of feet back or ahead on line may be allowed at approved locations .
The tops of posts shall be set to the required grade and alignment .
Cutting off the posts may be allowed with approval .
Posts for cedar rail fence shall be set plumb in drilled or hand dug holes .
After posts are placed rails installed and the posts aligned the post holes shall be backfilled .
The completed fence shall have the tops of the posts at uniform height above ground following the gradient of the ground .
Posts for woven wire fence and barbed wire fence shall be braced with Type I or Type II bracing at designated location as hereafter specified .
Type I bracing shall include diagonal brace and one post of the designated size .
Type II bracing shall include two diagonal braces and one post of the designated size .
When the plans require posts or braces to be anchored into the soil concrete anchors or metal drive anchors shall be used .
If concrete is used temporary guys to hold the posts in position shall be installed until the concrete has set .
Unless otherwise permitted no material shall be installed on posts or strain placed on guys and bracing set in concrete until hours after the concrete has been placed .
If metal drive anchors are used they shall be installed according to the manufacturers instructions so all parts will be below the ground surface .
One drive anchor shall be used on line posts two drive anchors shall be used on bracing assemblies .
Where two drive anchors are used they shall be placed perpendicular to each other .
Backfill with earth placed in inch layers loose measure and each layer thoroughly tamped .
Metal posts to be set in solid rock shall be placed in drilled holes and grouted with a cement grout composed of part Portland cement and two parts sand mixed with water .
All surplus material and other debris shall be removed and disposed of. . Woven Wire or Barbed Wire Fencing Wood posts shall be set plumb in holes dug to full depth .
Metal posts shall be set plumb by an approved post driver .
Posts which are bent or otherwise damaged shall be removed and replaced .
a. Bracing At changes in horizontal alignment in excess of  bracing will be required .
At changes in horizontal alignment of  to  bracing may be called for on the plans or required by the Resident .
At changes in horizontal alignment angles of less than  bracing will not be required except at intervals of feet .
In depressions where tension in the fencing may cause lifting the post will require bracing .
End corner gate barway and intermediate posts shall be braced and anchored as shown in the Standard Details .
If metal posts are to be placed in concrete the concrete shall be allowed to set before the space around the base is backfilled .
Backfill with satisfactory material thoroughly tamped .
If directed the Contractor shall place a minimum of inches of gravel in the bottom of the post hole .
b .
Gates All gates and the bracing assemblies at gates shall be constructed of metal .
c. Barways Barways shall be constructed of posts corresponding to the type of fence posts used .
Wood crossbars shall be furnished .
d. Erection of Fabric or Wire Fabric or wire shall be stretched taut .
Each strand of barbed wire shall be attached to wood posts with staples .
Top and bottom strands of woven wire shall be attached to each post and alternate interior strands of woven wire fencing shall be attached to alternate posts .
Staples shall not be driven into line posts to restrict the horizontal movement of wire except at corner posts end posts and bracing where staples shall be fully driven .
When attaching fencing to metal posts approved stay fasteners shall be used .
Except as otherwise provided splicing wire will be permitted at posts only with each horizontal strand of wire wrapped completely around the post .
The wire strand shall be fastened by winding the wire about the same strand where it leads to the post .
This type of fastening shall be used at each end post corner post and gate post and at barway posts .
Other devices designed specifically to splice fencing wire may be used subject to approval. . Chain Link Fence Foundations for posts for chain link fence shall be castinplace Portland cement concrete placed in approved forms or shall be approved metal drive anchors .
If wood forms are used they shall be removed before backfilling .
If fiber forms are used they need not be removed .
a .
Braces Fences less than feet in height that are installed with a top rail shall not require any brace rails .
Fences less than feet in height installed without a top rail and all fences with heights of feet or more shall have brace rails installed midway between the top and bottom of the fabric as shown on the plans .
Braces shall be securely fastened to the posts then trussed from the line post to the base of the end intermediate or corner post with a  inch diameter truss rod and tightened .
At changes in horizontal alignment of less than  bracing will not be required except at intervals of feet .
At changes in alignment of  to  bracing may be required as called for on the plans or requested .
At changes in alignment in excess of  bracing will be required .
One brace assembly shall be furnished with each end or gate post and two assemblies with each corner or intermediate post and at grade changes specified above .
b .
Gates Where gates are required for chain link fence they shall be constructed of metal .
c. Erection of Chain Link Fabric The grade of fence shall be approximately parallel with the grade of the ground .
When directed abrupt depressions shall be filled .
Top rails when required shall pass through post caps and be securely fastened to end corner brace and gate posts .
Joints in top rails shall be made with expansion sleeve couplings .
On curves with a radius of less than feet the top rail shall be bent to the arc .
The fabric shall be pulled taut the ends attached to the posts with stretcher bars and bands or other approved devices .
When required wire fabric shall be joined by weaving a single strand of mesh wire into the ends of the rolls to form a continuous mesh .
d. Tension Wire When called for on the plans a tension wire of seven gage galvanized wire shall be used in place of the top rail . .
Method of Measurement Fence will be measured by the linear foot accepted in place .
Measurement will be along the gradient of the fence from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence and shall include fence at bracing assemblies but shall not include space at gates and barways .
Gates barways and bracing assemblies will be measured by the unit of the size and type specified .
Excavation in rock for placement of fence posts in drilled holes will be measured by the cubic yard determined from the actual depth of the drilled hole in the rock and a hypothetical circle diameter of feet . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of fence will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot of the type and size specified complete in place .
Barways gates and bracing assemblies will be paid for at the contract unit price for each type specified complete in place .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and assembling all materials for excavating and backfilling holes and for all incidentals necessary to complete the work except that in rock payment for drilled holes will be made under .. Force Account .
Excavation of earth to exposed rock shall be incidental to the several items for erection of the fence .
Payment for bracing assemblies shall include furnishing and installing the various larger size and longer length posts diagonal bracing ties anchors and all incidental hardware necessary to complete the type of assembly required all as shown in the Standard Details .
At gateways payment will be made for bracing assemblies and there will be no separate payment for the gate posts .
All extra costs incurred for furnishing and installing the oversize posts at gateways shall be considered included with the various contract items .
Clearing or removal of trees stumps or boulders required to install the fence shall be included in the work of the respective pay items of this section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Woven Wire Fence Wood Posts Linear Foot .
Woven Wire Fence Metal Posts Linear Foot .
Barbed Wire Fence Wood Posts Linear Foot .
Barbed Wire Fence Metal Posts Linear Foot .
Barway Wood Posts Each .
Barway Wood Posts Each .
Walk Gateway foot Metal Each .
Drive Gateway foot Metal Each .
Chain Link Fence foot Linear Foot .
Chain Link Fence foot PVC Coated Linear Foot .
Chain Link Fence foot without Top Rail Linear Foot .
Chain Link Fence foot Linear Foot .
Chain Link Fence foot PVC Coated Linear Foot .
Chain Link Fence foot without Top Rail Linear Foot .
Cedar Rail Fence Linear Foot .
Chain Link Fence Gate Each .
Remove and Reset Fence Linear Foot .
Remove and Reset Chain Link Fence Linear Foot .
Bracing Assembly Type I Wood Posts Each .
Bracing Assembly Type II Wood Posts Each .
Bracing Assembly Type I Metal Posts Each .
Bracing Assembly Type II Metal Posts Each .
Bracing Assembly Chain Link Fence Each .
Bracing Assembly Chain Link Fence PVC Coated Each SECTION SIDEWALKS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing all materials for and constructing sidewalks of either Hot Mix Asphalt HMA pavement brick or concrete and curb ramp detectable warning plates with truncated domes in conformance with this specification and all other applicable Contract Documents. . Materials General All new Portland cement concrete surfaces shall have protective coating applied in accordance with Section Protective Coating for Concrete Surfaces. . Sidewalk Materials Materials for sidewalks shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course .
Brick for Paving .
Preformed Expansion Joint Filler .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric .
Portland cement concrete shall be Class A and meet the requirements of Section Structural Concrete with the following modifications The permeability requirements and the requirements of Section .
Alkali Silica Reactive Aggregates are waived and use of Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag shall not be allowed .
HMA pavement shall meet the requirements of Section Hot Bituminous Pavement .
New aggregate required to build new sidewalk shall meet the requirements of Standard Specification .b Aggregate for Base and Subbase Type D. New aggregate for regrading existing sidewalk shall meet the requirements of Section .
Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course .
Standard compacting will be required for all sidewalk areas where six inches or more of new or disturbed aggregate is placed .
Where less than six inches is placed compaction will be achieved by use of a plate compactor hand tamp or other means approved by the Resident. . Detectable Warnings Materials Detectable warning plates shall be new cast iron as manufactured by one of the manufacturers listed on MaineDOTs Qualified Products List of Cast Iron Detectable Warning Plates .
Each plate shall match the width of the ramp unless otherwise indicated in the Contract Documents and shall have a natural finish .
Prior to starting this work the Contractor shall submit to the Department the name of the selected supplier the manufacturers literature describing the product installation procedures and routine maintenance requirements .
Concrete shall meet the requirements of Section .
Sidewalk Materials of this specification. . Sidewalk Construction .
Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks a. Excavation Excavation shall be to the depth and width that will permit the installation and bracing of the forms .
The foundation shall be shaped and compacted to a firm even surface conforming to the section shown in the Contract Documents .
All soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material .
b .
Forms Forms shall be of wood or metal and shall extend for the full depth of the concrete .
All forms shall be true free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the concrete without springing .
Bracing and staking of forms shall be such that the forms remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment until their removal .
c. Placing Concrete The foundation shall be thoroughly moistened immediately prior to placing the concrete .
The proportioning mixing and placing of the concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section Structural Concrete .
d. Finishing The sidewalk surface shall receive a float finish in accordance with Section Structural Concrete .
Additionally a light broom finish shall be applied perpendicular to the sidewalk .
No plastering of the mortar will be permitted .
All outside edges of the slab and all joints shall be finished with a sidewalk edging tool two inches in width with a  inch radius lip .
e. Joints Joints shall be located as shown in the Contract Documents .
Slabs shall be placed alternately and the joints coated with an approved bituminous material before placing the adjacent slab .
When a concrete sidewalk is constructed adjacent to a building retaining wall or other fixed structure preformed joint filler  inch thick shall be used between the slab and the structure .
f. Curing Concrete shall be cured for at least hours .
Curing shall be by moist burlap or mats or by application of a curing compound listed on the Departments Qualified Products List .
The curing compound shall be applied continuously by approved mechanical pressure spraying or distributing equipment at a rate necessary to obtain an even continuous membrane meeting the manufacturers recommendations but at a rate of not less than gallon per ft of surface at a minimum two coats shall be applied using a pressurized sprayer with the first coat being applied within minutes after finishing is complete and the second coat being applied within minutes of and at right angles to the first hand pump sprayers rollers or brushes shall not be used .
During the curing period all traffic both pedestrian and vehicular shall be excluded .
Vehicular traffic shall be excluded for such additional time as may be deemed necessary by the Resident. . HMA Pavement Sidewalk a. Excavation Excavation shall be to the required depth and width .
The foundation shall be shaped and compacted to a firm even surface conforming to the section shown in the Contract Documents .
All soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material .
b .
Base Course Base course material shall be placed as shown in the Contract Documents and each layer thoroughly compacted .
c. Placing HMA Sidewalk Material HMA sidewalk material shall be placed on the compacted base course in two courses to provide the required depth when rolled .
Compaction shall be by a power roller having a minimum total weight of ton with a minimum of lbin of width of the drive roll or by satisfactory power vibratory compaction equipment .
In areas inaccessible to other equipment hand tamping will be permitted .
In any case the HMA sidewalk material shall be uniformly compacted . .
Brick Sidewalk Remove and Rebuild This work shall consist of the following unless otherwise indicated in the Contract Documents Removal storage and disposal as necessary of existing brick shaping and compacting the foundation to a firm even surface conforming to the section shown in the Contract Documents all soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material regrading compacting and furnishing of Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course as necessary furnishing of new or reused brick to match the existing sidewalk furnishing and applying joint filler material sand and compacting with water and refilling until joint material is at the same surface as the brick all necessary grading and restoration at the back edge of sidewalk removal and disposal of unused materials and debris . .
Brick Sidewalk Excavation shall be to the required depth and width and the foundation shaped and compacted to a firm even surface conforming to the section shown in the Contract Documents .
All soft and yielding material shall be removed and replaced with acceptable material. . Construct Sidewalk This work shall consist of excavating the existing ground and placing and compacting new aggregate as necessary to build the sidewalk in the new location as shown in the Contract Documents. . Regrading Sidewalk This work shall consist of removing the existing pavement adding and compacting new aggregate as necessary and regrading the gravel base to conform to the grading limits shown in the Contract Documents. . Detectable Warnings Construction New plates shall be set square with the curb edge and the base of the truncated domes shall be set flush with adjacent surfaces to allow for proper drainage .
All concrete required for detectable warnings shall be cured in accordance with Section .f Curing of this specification . .
Existing Concrete Curb Ramps Existing concrete shall be sawcut to a dimension inches larger than the detectable warning plates .
New concrete shall be placed in the resulting opening and finished and the new plates set into the wet concrete according to the manufacturers recommendations. . New Concrete Curb Ramps New concrete shall be placed and finished for the ramp and the new plates set into the wet concrete according to the manufacturers recommendations. . New HMA Pavement Ramps HMA pavement shall be saw cut and removed to provide an opening that will allow for the dimensions of the cast iron plate surrounded by an additional inch border on all sides of the plate .
New concrete shall be placed in the resulting opening and finished and the new plates set into the wet concrete according to the manufacturers recommendations . .
Method of Measurement Construct sidewalk regrading sidewalk concrete sidewalk brick sidewalk remove and rebuild brick sidewalk and brick driveway aprons will be measured by the square yard of finished surface .
HMA pavement sidewalks will be measured by the ton of HMA mixture placed .
Detectable warning plates will be measured for payment by the square foot of actual plate area only not including the surrounding concrete . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of sidewalk will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square yard for concrete sidewalk brick sidewalk and brick driveway aprons and per ton for HMA pavement sidewalk complete and in place .
Excavation will be paid for under Section Excavation and Embankment .
Base and subbase material will be paid for under Section Aggregate Base and Subbase Course .
HMA mixture for sidewalks will be paid for under Section Hot Bituminous Pavement .
Expansion joint material joint filler and other related items will not be paid for separately but shall be considered incidental to related Pay Items .
For construct sidewalk payment will be for excavation new aggregate and necessary incidentals to bring the grade to prepave grade .
For regrading sidewalk payment will be for removing existing pavement regrading existing gravel base and adding new material as necessary .
For brick sidewalk remove and rebuild payment will be for all work outlined in Section .
Brick Sidewalk Remove and Rebuild except that any necessary excavation will be paid for under Section Excavation and Embankment any necessary base and subbase material will be paid for under Section Aggregate Base and Subbase Course and any specified HMA mixture will be paid for under Section Hot Bituminous Pavement .
The accepted quantity of detectable warnings will be paid for at the Contract Unit Price per square foot for all labor materials and equipment required to install the detectable warning plates complete and in place .
This shall include surface preparation and removal of concrete or HMA pavement and necessary replacement concrete .
For new concrete ramps concrete shall be paid for under related sidewalk Pay Items .
Welded steel wire fabric for reinforced concrete sidewalks will not be paid for separately but shall be included in the Contract Unit Price for reinforced concrete sidewalk .
Protective coating shall be paid for under Section Protective Coating for Concrete Surfaces .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Plain Concrete Sidewalk Square Yard .
Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk Square Yard .
Brick Sidewalk Remove and Rebuild Square Yard .
Brick Sidewalk with Bituminous Base Square Yard .
Brick Driveway Aprons with Bituminous Base Square Yard .
Curb Ramp Detectable Warning Field Square Foot .
Construct Sidewalk Square Yard .
Regrading Sidewalk Square Yard SECTION CURB .
Description Construct or reset curb gutter or combination curb and gutter paved ditch and paved flume .
The types of curb are designated as follows Type Stone curbing of quarried granite stone Type Bituminous curbing Type Stone edging of quarried granite stone .
Materials Except as provided below the materials used shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials Joint Mortar .
Reinforcing Steel .
Concrete Curb .
Stone Curbing and Edging .
Epoxy Resin .
Bituminous Curbing .
Circular curb terminal sections and transition sections shall be in reasonably close conformity with the shape and dimensions shown on the plans and to the applicable material requirements herein for the type of curb specified .
Dowels shall be reinforcing steel deformed bars. . Vertical Stone Curb Terminal Section and Transition Sections and Portland Cement Concrete Curb Terminal Sections and Transition Sections a .
Installation The curb stone shall be set on a compacted foundation so that the front top arris line conforms to the lines and grades required .
The foundation shall be prepared in advance of setting the stone by grading the proper elevation and shaping to conform as closely as possible to the shape of the bottom of the stone .
The required spacing between stones shall be assured by the use of an approved spacing device to provide an open joint between stones of at least  inch and no greater than  inch .
b. Backfilling All remaining spaces under the curb shall be filled with approved material and thoroughly hand tamped so the stones will have a firm uniform bearing on the foundation for the entire length and width .
Any remaining excavated areas surrounding the curb shall be filled to the required grade with approved materials .
This material shall be placed in layers not exceeding inches in depth loose measure and thoroughly tamped .
When backfill material infiltrates through the joints between the stones small amounts of joint mortar or other approved material shall be placed in the back portion of the joint to prevent such infiltrating .
c. Protection The curb shall be protected and kept in good condition .
All exposed surfaces smeared or discolored shall be cleaned and restored to a satisfactory condition or the curb stone removed and replaced .
d. Curb Inlets Curb placed adjacent to curb inlets shall be installed with steel dowels cemented into each stone with epoxy grout as shown in the Standard Details .
The epoxy grout shall be used in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
The grout shall be forced into the hole after which the dowel shall be coated with grout for one half its length and inserted into the grout filled hole .
The hole shall be completely filled with grout around the dowel .
All tools and containers must be clean before using. . Bituminous Curb a .
Preparation of Base Before placing the curb the foundation course shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign and objectionable material .
String or chalk lines shall be positioned on the prepared base to provide guide lines .
The foundation shall be uniformly painted with tack coat at a rate of .
to .
galyd .
b .
Placing The curb shall be placed by an approved power operated extruding type machine using the shape mold called for .
A tight bond shall be obtained between the base and the curb .
The Resident may permit the placing of curbing by other than mechanical curb placing machines when short sections or sections with short radii are required .
The resulting curbing shall conform in all respects to the curbing produced by the machine .
c. When required the curb shall be painted and coated with glass beads in accordance with Section Pavement Marking .
Curb designated to be painted shall not be sealed with bituminous sealing compound .
d. Acceptance Curb may be accepted or rejected based on appearance concerning texture alignment or both .
All damaged curb shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
e. Polyester fibers shall be uniformly incorporated into the dry mix at a rate of .
percent of the total batch weight .
Certification shall be provided from the supplier with each shipment meeting the following requirements Average Length .
inches .
Average Diameter .
inches .
Specific Gravity .. Melting Temperature F Minimum .
Stone Edging The curb shall be installed backfilled and protected in accordance with Section .
except as follows a. Slope The edging shall be set on a slope as shown on the plans or as directed .
b .
Joints Joints shall be open and not greater than  inch in width. . Stone Bridge Curb a .
Installation Each stone and the bed upon which it is to be placed shall be cleaned and thoroughly wetted with water before placing the mortar for bedding and setting the stone .
The stone shall be set on a fresh bed of joint mortar and well bedded before the mortar has set so that the front top arris line conforms to the line and grade required .
Whenever temporary supporting wedges or other devices are used in setting the stones they shall be removed before the mortar in the bed has become set and the holes left by them shall be filled with mortar .
Concrete behind the stones shall not be placed until the stones have been in place at least two days .
Bedding and pointing mortar for joints shall be cured as required under Section Structural Concrete .
b .
Joints Vertical joints shall be  inch in width plus or minus  inch .
Whenever possible the face and top of the joint shall be pointed with joint mortar to a depth of  inch before the bedding mortar has set .
Joints which can not be so pointed shall be prepared for pointing by raking them to a depth of  inch before the mortar has set .
Joints not pointed at the time the stone is laid shall be thoroughly wetted with clean water and filled with mortar .
The mortar shall be well driven into the joint and finished with an approved pointing tool flush with the pitch line of the stones. . Resetting Stone or Portland Cement Concrete Curb Including Terminal Sections and Transitions The curb shall be installed backfilled and protected in accordance with Section .
except as follows a .
Removal of Curbing The Contractor shall carefully remove and store curb specified on the plans or designated for resetting .
Curb damaged or destroyed because of the Contractors operations or because of their failure to store and protect it in a manner that would prevent its loss or damage shall be replaced with curbing of equal quality at the Contractors expense .
b .
Cutting and Fitting Cutting or fitting necessary in order to install the curbing at the locations directed shall be done by the Contractor . .
Method of Measurement Curb both new and reset will be measured by the linear foot along the front face of the curb at the elevation of the finished pavement complete in place and accepted .
Curb inlets at catch basins including doweling will not be measured for payment but shall be considered included in the cost of the catch basin .
New transition sections and terminal curb will be measured by the unit .
Reset transition sections and terminal curb will be included in the measurement for resetting curb . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of curbing will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for each kind and type of curbing as specified .
Payment for terminal curb shall include only that portion of the curbing modified for installation at ends of curb runs shown in the Standard Details .
Curb adjacent to terminal ends shall be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the type of curb installed .
Vertical Curb Type is required to have a radius of feet or less will be paid for as Vertical Curb Type Circular .
Curb Type required to have a radius of feet or less will be paid for as Curb Type Circular .
There will be no separate payment for cement reinforcing steel anchors tack coat drilling for and grouting anchors pointing and bedding of curbing and for cutting and fitting but these will be considered included in the work of the related curb .
Removal of existing curb and necessary excavation for installing new or reset curbing will not be paid for directly but shall be considered to be included in the appropriate new or reset curb pay item .
Base and Subbase material will be paid for under Section Aggregate Base and Subbase Course .
Backing up bituminous curb is incidental to the curb items .
Loam as directed will be paid under Loam .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Vertical Curb Type Linear Foot .
Vertical Curb Type Circular Linear Foot .
Vertical Bridge Curb Type Linear Foot .
Vertical Bridge Curb Type A Linear Foot .
Vertical Bridge Curb Type B Linear Foot .
Vertical Bridge Curb Type B Circular Linear Foot .
Sloped Curb Type Linear Foot .
Sloped Curb Type Circular Linear Foot .
Terminal Curb Type Each .
Terminal Curb Type foot Each .
Terminal Curb Type foot Each .
Terminal Curb Type foot Circular Each .
Terminal Curb Type foot Each .
Curb Transition Section B Type Each .
Curb Type Linear Foot .
Curb Type Linear Foot .
CurbType Circular Linear Foot .
Reset Curb Type Linear Foot .
Reset Curb Type Linear Foot .
Reset Curb Type Linear Foot SECTION STONE FILL RIPRAP STONE BLANKET AND STONE DITCH PROTECTION .
Description This work shall consist of excavating for and constructing a protective covering of stone .
The types of protective covering of stone are designated as follows a .
Stone fill Machine placed embankment for fill slope b .
Plain Riprap Machine placed stones on earth bedding c. Hand Laid Riprap Hand placed stones on earth bedding d. Stone Blanket Machine placed stones around piers and Abutments e. Heavy Riprap Machine placed stones on earth bedding f. Stone Ditch Protection Machine placed ditch protection of rock .
Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials Stone Fill .
Plain and Hand Laid Riprap .
Stone Blanket .
Heavy Riprap . . General Suitable material removed when excavating for the placing of riprap stone fill stone blanket or stone ditch protection shall be used in the formation of embankments subgrade and for backfilling as shown on the plans or as directed . .
Placing Stones a .
Stone Fill and Stone Blanket Material for stone fill shall be deposited to provide a compact mass .
The exposed slope shall be finished to the line and grade required without special handling or handwork .
Material for stone blanket shall be deposited for protection around piers or abutments as shown on the plans .
The stones shall be placed individually to form a reasonably compact mass .
Spaces between the larger stones shall be filled with stone or spall of suitable size to leave an even surface conforming to the contour required .
Stone fill and stone blanket shall be placed on the slope in a wellknit compact and uniform layer .
The surface stones shall be chinked with smaller stone from the same source .
b. Riprap Stones for riprap shall be placed upon a slope properly graded and compacted as called for .
When required the bottom of the riprap shall be placed in a trench at the toe of the slope .
Plain riprap shall be placed full depth in one operation without special handwork and shall be placed approximately true to the required slope line and grade and be uniform in appearance .
Hand laid riprap shall be random rubble hand laid stones for the full depth placed in one operation to secure interlocking of all face stones and stones placed as backing .
Larger stones shall be laid at the base of the slope .
The stones shall be laid in close contact with the longer axis perpendicular to the plane of the slope to stagger joints .
Except when required to be grouted the openings between the stones in all riprap shall be filled with spall or rocks securely rammed into place .
Riprap shall be placed on the slope in a well knit compact and uniform layer .
The surface stones shall be chinked with smaller stone from the same source .
Stones for heavy riprap shall be placed to the full depth in one operation without special handwork or machine work upon a properly graded and compacted slope .
Above the low water elevation stones shall be placed to form an approximate uniform surface free from humps or depressions with no excessively large stones projecting from the general surface .
Loose stones or excessively large stones tending to extend above the average general surface shall be embedded reoriented or discarded .
The openings between stones on the face of heavy riprap shall be filled with spall or small rocks securely rammed into place .
c. Stone Ditch Protection The ditch shall be excavated below the flow line to allow placement of the rock material to the specified depth .
The stone ditch protection shall be placed full depth in one operation without special handwork shall be approximately true to line and grade and shall be uniform in appearance .
d. Inspection The grading of riprap stone fill stone blanket and stone ditch protection shall be determined by the Resident by visual inspection of the load before it is dumped into place or if ordered by the Resident by dumping individual loads on a flat surface and sorting and measuring the individual rocks contained in the load .
A separate reference pile of stone with the required gradation will be placed by the Contractor at a convenient location where the Resident can see and judge by eye the suitability of the rock being placed during the duration of the project .
The Resident reserves the right to reject stone at the job site or stockpile and in place .
Stone rejected at the job site or in place shall be removed from the site at no additional cost to the Department . .
Method of Measurement Stone fill plain riprap hand laid riprap stone blanket heavy riprap and stone ditch protection will be measured by the cubic yard complete in place except that when placed under water the quantity may be measured by truck load count with no reduction in volume . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of stone fill plain riprap hand laid riprap stone blanket heavy riprap and stone ditch protection and materials to fill the voids will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard complete in place .
Costs of all required excavation below the slope line for the placement of bedding riprap stone fill stone blanket stone ditch protection and for furnishing and placing the bedding material itself will be considered incidental to the contract items and no separate payment will be made .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Stone Fill Cubic Yard .
Plain Riprap Cubic Yard .
Hand Laid Riprap Cubic Yard .
Stone Blanket Cubic Yard .
Heavy Riprap Cubic Yard .
Stone Ditch Protection Cubic Yard SECTION Reserved SECTION BITUMINOUS SEALING .
Description This work shall consist of sealing bituminous mix surfaces with emulsified bituminous sealing compound of the specified color applied at locations shown on the plans or designated. . Materials Bituminous material for sealing shall conform to the requirements of Emulsified Bituminous Sealing Compound Section .. . General The sealing compound shall be applied in two coats .
The first coat shall be diluted by the addition of up to water to a liquid consistency and applied with brooms or other approved methods at a rate of .
gal to .
gal of diluted sealer per square yard .
The second coat shall be diluted only to the extent necessary to obtain workability and applied at a rate of .
gal to .
gal of diluted sealer per square yard . .
Method of Measurement Bituminous sealing will be measured by the square yard of surface sealed measured parallel to the surface . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of bituminous sealing will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete in place .
Pay Item Pay Unit .
Bituminous SealingBlack Square Yard SECTION EROSION CONTROL BLANKETS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing erosion control blankets on previously prepared areas in accordance with the manufacturer instructions or as called for on the plans or otherwise authorized .
Erosion control blankets shall be installed on critical slopes shoulder berms esplanade strips curb sections in ditches and drainage ways and other previously prepared areas or as shown. . Materials Erosion control blanket shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials .
Erosion Control Blankets .
Ground Anchors . . Site Preparation The area for erosion control blankets shall be prepared as follows Soil must be loose or scarified smoothly raked and free of stones litter and any abrupt ground surface roughness under the blanket. . Seeding All seed shall be sown before installing erosion control blankets .
No loam will be required for Seeding unless called for on plans or designated .
Seeding Method Number will be used unless otherwise specified . .
Installation On Slopes and in ditches blankets shall be aligned in the direction of water flow and along the contours of berms .
The uphill end of blanket shall be anchored in a trench no less than inches deep and overlapped on the adjoining ends no less than inches .
Parallel strips shall be overlapped inches on the sides .
Approved anchor staples shall be placed at a maximum spacing of feet on center or as required by the manufacturer whichever is closer . .
Method of Measurement Erosion control blanket will be measured by the square yard based on the width and length of the blanket measured on the ground . .
Basis of Payment Erosion control blankets of the type specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete in place and accepted .
Such payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the blankets and initial seeding under blanket in accordance with this specification and for all required maintenance .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Erosion Control Blanket Square Yard SECTION GEOCELL SLOPE PROTECTION .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing a geocell slope protection system in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans as specified herein and as directed by the Resident .
The geocell slope protection system consists of geocell material into which select infill material is placed .
It is referred here after as geocell confinement system. . Submittals Submittals shall comply with MaineDOT Section General Scope of Work .
All information shall be submitted to the Resident thirty days prior to the geocell section installation .
A .
Product Data .
Submit manufacturers product data .
B .
Supplier Design .
Submit manufacturers projectspecific design recommendations or engineering design for cell size stake anchor length and stake anchor spacing .
C. Shop Drawings .
Submit manufacturers shop drawings including section layout direction of expansion and anchor stake locations .
D. Samples .
Submit manufacturers samples of geocell sections anchors and end caps .
E. Material Certification .
Submit manufacturer certification of polyethylene used to make geocell material including percentage of carbon black polyethylene density and ESCR .
MATERIALS .
Geocell Confinement System The complete geocell confinement system includes the geocell sections cell infill anchors and a surface treatment .
A. Geocell Sections .
The geocell sections shall be a polyethylene sheet strip assembly connected by a series of offset full depth ultrasonic welded seams aligned perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the strips which when expanded form walls of flexible dimensional cellular confinement system .
The geocell material shall be manufactured by Presto Products Company Appleton Wisconsin Webtec Geosynthetics Charlotte North Carolina or an approved equal .
Sections shall be in conformance with manufacturers design recommendations or engineering design for this project. . Geocell base material a .
The geocell material shall be polyethylene stabilized with black carbon with the following properties i. Density ASTM D pcf .
ii .
Environmental stress crack resistance ESCR ASTM D hours .
iii .
Ultraviolet light stabilization carbon black .
iv .
Carbon Black Content .
to percent by weight through the addition of a carrier with a certified carbon black content .
v. Homogeneously distributed through material. . Geocell Strip Properties and Assembly a. Perforated StripCell i .
Strip sheet thickness ASTM D mil minus plus .
Determine thickness in the flat before surface disruption .
ii .
Sheet thickness mil mil .
iii .
Polyethylene Strips Perforated with horizontal rows of .
in diameter holes .
iv .
Perforation Within Each Row .
to .
in on center .
v. Horizontal Rows staggered and separated .
in relative to hole centers .
vi .
Edge of strip nearest edge of perforation .
in minimum .
vii .
Centerline of spot welds to nearest edge of perforation .
in minimum .
b .
Assembly of Cell sections i .
Fabricated using strips of sheet polyethylene each with a length of ft and a width equal to cell depth .
ii .
Connect strips using fulldepth ultrasonic spotwelds align perpendicular to longitudinal axis of strip .
iii .
Ultrasonic weld meltpool width .
in maximum. . Geocell Properties a .
Individual Cells Uniform in shape and size when expanded .
Over or under expansion of uniform individual cells will be allowed on curved slopes .
b .
Individual Cell Dimensions i .
Length .
in ii .
Width .
in iii .
Nominal area .
sq in iv .
Nominal depth in .
Cell Seam Strength Tests a .
The seams for geocell sections shall consist of carbonblack stabilized strips welded together .
b .
Short Term Seam Peel Strength Test i .
Cell Seam Strength Uniform over full depth of cell .
ii .
Minimum seam peel strength lbf for in depth .
c. Long Term Seam Peel Strength Test i .
Conditions Minimum of hours days in a temperaturecontrolled environment that undergoes change on a hour cycle from room temperature to  F. ii .
Room temperature ASTM E . iii .
Test Samples Weld two in wide strips together .
iv .
Test Test sample consisting of carbon black stabilized strips shall support a lb load for the test period .
B. Anchoring Components .
The anchoring system shall consist of Straight No .
steel reinforcing rods with an ATRA clip or an approved equal as end cap .
Length shall be as specified in the manufacturers recommendations or an engineering design .
C. Granular Borrow .
Granular Borrow shall meet the requirements of MaineDOT Section .
Granular Borrow Material for Embankment Construction .
D. Geocell Infill Material .
Geocell infill material shall be as specified in the Notes or shown on the plans and shall meet the requirements of the following specifications Dirty Borrow .
Loam Aggregate for crushed stone surface .
E. Surface Treatment .
For slopes with Loam infill the surface treatment shall consist of seed and an erosion control blanket .
The seed shall meet the requirements MaineDOT Section Seeding Method Number or as indicated on the plans and notes .
The erosion control blanket shall meet the requirements of MaineDOT Section Erosion Control Blanket .
When infill other than loam is specified the surface treatment shall be as indicated on the plans or details .
CONSTRUCTION .
Construction Requirements A. Subgrade Preparation . .
Prepare the subgrade by removing the all existing vegetation and loose surficial soils from the slope. . Excavate and the slope section as needed. . Place compact and shape Granular Borrow as needed so that when placed the top of installed geocell section is flush with or slightly lower that the final grade as indicated on the plans . .
Install nonwoven erosion control geotextile underlayer if required on the prepared surface ensuring required overlaps are maintained and outer edge of geotextile are buried a minimum of in .
below grade .
B .
Placement and Anchoring. . Anchor geocell sections at the crest of the slope or as per manufacturers recommendations .
Use type of anchor and frequency of anchoring as indicated on the shop drawings . .
Expand geocell sections down slope .
Confirm each geocell section is expanded uniformly to required dimensions and outer cells of each layer are correctly aligned. . Interleaf edges of adjacent sections .
Ensure that the upper surface of adjoining geocell sections are flush at the joint and adjoining cells are fully anchored .
Anchor with specified anchors in prescribed pattern throughout the slope surface .
C. Placement of Infill. . Place infill in expanded cells with suitable material handling equipment such as a backhoe frontend loader conveyor or crane mounted skip .
Limit drop height to a maximum of ft. Avoid displacement of the geocell sections by infilling from crest to toe of slope. . Overfill and compact infill in accordance with consistency of material and cell depth as follows a .
For geocell slopes with loam infill overfill the geocell with to in loam and lightly tamp or roll to leave soil flush with top edge of cell walls .
b .
For geocell slopes with Aggregate for Crushed Stone Surface or Dirty Borrow infill overfill the cells approximately inch and compact with a plate tamper or backhoe bucket .
Remove loose surface material so infill is flush with top edges of cells . .
Apply specified surface treatment . .
Delivery Storage and Handling A .
Delivery .
Deliver material to site in manufacturers original unopened containers and packaging with labels clearly identifying product name and manufacture .
B .
Storage .
Store materials in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Store material out of direct sunlight .
C. Handling .
Protect materials during handling and installation to prevent damage . .
Method of Measurement The Geocell Confinement System measurement will be by the square foot of material installed . .
Basis of Payment The Geocell Confinement System will be paid for at the Contract unit price per square foot which shall be full compensation for all labor and materials including the geocell sections anchoring components granular borrow infill and surface treatments .
The unit price shall be full compensation for subgrade preparation and placing and compacting Granular Borrow to the subgrade .
Pay Item Pay Unit .
Geocell Confinement System for Slope Protection Square Foot SECTION LOAM .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing loam or dirty borrow for seeding or sodding in reasonably close conformity with the thicknesses called for on the plans or as authorized. . Materials Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Common Borrow .
Humus .
Loam shall meet the following requirements Organic Content Percent by Volume Humus as determined by Ignition Test pH . .
Mineral Content Percent passing sieve The loam shall be screened loose friable and shall be free from admixture of subsoil refuse large stones clods roots or other undesirable foreign matter .
It shall be reasonably free of weeds roots or rhizomes .
Dirty Borrow shall meet the requirements of Section .
Common Borrow with the following addition and deletions .
Second sentence delete the word peat Dirty Borrow shall contain no particles or fragments with a maximum dimension in excess of the compacted thickness of the layer being placed .
Mineral Content Percent passing sieve Dirty Borrow must have an organic content of to as determined by ignition test .
The Contractor may elect to manufacture loam or dirty borrow from a combination of project materials that the Contractor is entitled to use combined with other suitable materials furnished by the Contractor .
The Resident shall obtain a sample from loam stockpiles identified by the Contractor Samples will be submitted to MaineDOT testing facility .
Only loam from passing stockpiles shall be used .
The Contractor may elect to manufacture loam from a combination of project materials that the Contractor is entitled to use combined with other suitable materials furnished by the Contractor . .
Preparing Areas All slopes and other areas where loam or dirty borrow is to be placed shall be shaped to the required grade .
Before placing the loam on hard or compacted soils the areas under preparation shall be scarified and loosened to a depth of at least inches. . Placement of Loam Loam shall be spread uniformly on prepared areas to the depth shown on the plans or as directed .
Any remaining clods roots stones over inches in its greatest diameter and all other foreign matter shall be removed .
On areas to be seeded under Method Number all rocks over inch in diameter shall be removed .
All loam shall be brought to a true even surface meeting the required grade .
The Contractor shall compact the loam with a pound roller or other approved means .
Loam thickness shall meet the specified depth after compaction .
Dirty Borrow shall be spread evenly and uniformly on prepared areas to the depth shown on the plans or as directed and shall be brought to a true even surface meeting the required grade . .
Method of Measurement Loam or dirty borrow will be measured by the cubic yard complete in place after finishing to the required depths as shown on the plans or directed .
Lateral measurements will be parallel with the slope of the ground .
Removal of existing topsoil salvaged from within the lines of improvement will be measured for payment in accordance with Section ..
The depth of the salvaged topsoil to be included for payment shall be the depth authorized .
There will be no deduction from borrow quantities resulting from the authorized excavation of salvaged topsoil . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of loam or dirty borrow will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard complete in place .
Existing topsoil removed from within the lines of improvement and stockpiled for later use as dirty borrow will be paid for under Pay Item .
Common Excavation after removal and stockpiling and will be paid for under Pay Item .
Dirty Borrow when placed in its final position .
Grading surplus topsoil salvaged but not required for use on slopes as loam or dirty borrow will be paid for under the appropriate items of Section Equipment Rental Section Seeding and Section Mulch .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Loam Cubic Yard .
Loam Plan Quantity Cubic Yard .
Dirty Borrow Cubic Yard SECTION SODDING .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing approved live sod on a bed of friable soil for the replacement of lawns or other areas called for on the plans or authorized. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements in the following Sections of Division Materials Fertilizer .b Agricultural Ground Limestone .
Sod may be either field sod or cultivated sod as approved by the Resident .
Field sod shall consist of a dense wellrooted vigorous growth of turf forming perennials indigenous to the locality where it is to be used .
Field sod shall be taken from approved sources where the sod will not break or crumble during cutting transporting and laying .
Field sod shall be reasonably free from noxious weeds large stones tree roots or other materials harmful to growth or subsequent maintenance of the sod .
Field sod shall be cut to a uniform thickness of not less than inches .
Cultivated sod shall consist of a Kentucky BluegrassRed Fescue turf obtained from an approved commercial sod farm and shall be substantially free from objectionable grassy and broadleaf weeds .
Cultivated sod shall be cut to a uniform minimum thickness of not less than  inch .
Pegs for holding sod shall be of approved sound wood and at least  inch in thickness and at least inches in length or approved equal . .
Cutting and Transporting The area from which sod is to be cut shall be mowed and cleared of excess clippings and other foreign matter shortly before cutting starts .
The sod shall be freshly cut with an approved sod cutter into strips of uniform thickness having a minimum width of inches and a minimum length of inches and transported in an unbroken condition to the area to be sodded .
Sod shall be placed in its final position within hours after cutting .
No storage of sod will be allowed unless specifically authorized by the Resident .
Cut sod shall be protected from drying during the time between cutting and placing. . Site Preparation Sod shall be placed over inches of moist loam in accordance with Section .
The areas to be sodded shall be brought to the grades shown on the plans allowing for the thickness of the sod .
Areas to be sodded shall be cleared of stones roots clods and other debris that might interfere with laying sod or subsequent maintenance of the sodded area .
The fertilizer shall be incorporated into the soil by a mechanical spreader or other approved method capable of maintaining a uniform measurable rate of application .
Fertilizer shall be applied before laying sod at the rate of lb ft. On hard packed soil the areas under preparation shall be scarified or otherwise loosened to a depth of at least inches before placing loam and laying sod unless otherwise directed . .
Laying Sod Sod shall be moist when laid and shall be placed on a moist soil bed .
The sod shall be placed at a right angle to the slope commencing at the lower end and tightly fitted edge to edge to provide a uniform surface .
Transverse joints shall be staggered .
Sod shall be fitted to produce a tight surface without gaps .
The sod shall be compacted and bonded to the soil with an approved tamper or light roller .
After tamping or rolling the sod shall have a smooth even surface free from humps and depressions .
Unless otherwise directed on areas with a gradient of horizontal to vertical or steeper the sod shall be anchored with wooden pegs or staples as approved by the Resident .
The pegs shall be spaced no more than feet apart in any direction and driven through the sod into the ground perpendicular to the ground surface .
The top of the pegs shall be driven flush with the surface of the sod .
The Contractor shall water the sod as necessary and shall insure continued growth of the sod .
Sod not surviving for months after installation shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at their expense until established .
Frozen sod shall not be used nor shall sod be placed on frozen soil . .
Method of Measurement Sodding will be measured by the square yard measured along the slope complete in place or as otherwise directed . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of sodding will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard completed and accepted in place which shall include supplying and installing sod fertilizer limestone and watering .
Necessary excavation for placing sod will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the contract unit price for sodding .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Sodding Square Yard SECTION SOIL CONDITIONERS Reserved SECTION SEEDING .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and applying seed and other materials to areas shown on the plans or as authorized by the Resident .
a. Seeding Method Number shall consist of the application of Park Mixture fertilizer lime or liquid lime and humic acid soil conditioner to loamed areas which are expected to be maintained by frequent mowing i.e .
private lawns .
b. Seeding Method Number shall consist of the application of Roadside Mixture Number lime or liquid lime humic acid soil conditioner and fertilizer to existing soils dirty borrow or loamed areas which are expected to be maintained by infrequent mowing i.e .
inslopes ditches and rural lawns .
c. Seeding Method Number shall consist of the application of Roadside Mixture Number inoculant and lime or liquid lime humic acid soil conditioner to existing soils erosion control mix or riprap areas which are not expected to be mowed i.e .
backslopes guardrail areas .
d. Special Seeding shall consist of the application of a special seed mix and amendments as defined by Special Provision .
e. Temporary Seeding shall consist of the application of seed to control erosion to slopes and stockpiles that have been disturbed during construction and will be left incomplete for more than days .
Seed for Temporary Seeding shall be oats winter wheat buckwheat or rye .
f. Crown Vetch Seeding shall consist of the application of seed inoculant lime or liquid lime and humic acid soil conditioner to areas that will not be mowed i.e .
riprap or erosion control mix. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following Sections of Division Materials Fertilizer .
Humic Acid .
Agricultural Ground Limestone and Liquid Lime .
Seed . . Rates of Application Application rates are set forth below .
One unit is defined as ft. a .
The Contractor shall apply agricultural ground limestone at the rate of pounds per unit .
For hydroseeding liquid lime shall be applied at the rate of pound dry weight per unit hydraulic method .
These rates shall apply to all Seeding Methods and Crown Vetch .
b .
The fertilizer application rate for seed establishment shall be  pounds unit Seeding Method and only .
c. Humic acid soil conditioner shall be applied at the rate of pounds unit hydraulic method for Seeding Methods and Crown Vetch .
d. The seed mixture sowing rate for Seeding Method and shall be poundsunit .
e. The seed mixture sowing rate for Seeding Method shall be pound unit .
f. The Temporary Seed sowing rate shall be pounds unit .
g. The Crown Vetch Seed sowing rate shall be pound unit. . Time of Initial Seeding The Contractor shall not seed during January February or March or when the ground is frozen or snow covered or at other times as the Department may direct . .
Applying Fertilizer and Agricultural Ground Limestone Conventional Method The Contractor shall apply fertilizer and agricultural ground limestone when the soil is moist and before sowing the seed .
The Contractor shall apply these materials to the soil by an approved method capable of maintaining a measured rate of application thoroughly incorporating materials into the soil to a depth of not less than inch .
The Contractor shall not apply these materials simultaneously unless using an approved hydraulic method. . Sowing Seed Conventional Method The Contractor shall sow seeding materials uniformly at the required rate and mulch seeded areas the same day as sown .
The Contractor shall roll lawn areas with a light lawn roller after seeding but before mulch is applied. . Sowing Seed and Applying Fertilizer and Agricultural Ground Limestone Hydraulic Method The Contractor may use the hydraulic spray method of sowing seed where approved .
The Contractor shall use a commercial machine designed for the hydraulic application of seed fertilizer humic acid soil conditioners liquid lime or limestone and mulch in slurry .
The Contractor shall mix seed and added materials with sufficient water in the tank of the machine and keep the slurry thoroughly agitated so the materials are uniformly mixed and suspended in the water at all times during operation .
The Contractor shall uniformly distribute the seed slurry on the designated areas at the required rate. . Mulching After seeding the Contractor shall place hay mulch straw mulch or erosion control blanket unless cellulose fiber mulch is applied with the seed by the hydraulic method .
The Contractor shall place Mulch as specified in Section and Erosion Control Blankets as specified in Section .
Mulch for Seeding Method Number shall only be cellulose fiber mulch Section .c or straw mulch Section .b .
For other seeding methods where hay mulch has been previously applied for erosion control and there is adequate hay mulch still present on the area at the time of seeding the Department may direct the Contractor to seed over the hay mulch .
Cellulose fiber mulch may be used with Method . . Construction Method a. Seeding Method Numbers and .
After the loamed or unloamed areas to be seeded have been brought to grade the Contractor shall scarify all ground not sufficiently loose and friable to provide bedding for the seed to a depth of at least inches immediately before seeding or mulching .
The Contractor shall remove all stones over inch Method areas and inches Method areas in the greatest dimension tree roots and refuse and dispose of as directed by the Department .
The surface shall be a uniform grade but not smooth . .
The Contractor shall apply fertilizer and agricultural ground limestone to the prepared areas as specified in Sections .
and .. .
The Contractor shall sow the seed as specified in Sections .
and .. .
The Contractor shall apply mulch as specified in Section .. b .
Temporary Seeding .
The Contractor may place seed and limestone directly over existing ground without site preparation . .
The Contractor shall apply agricultural ground limestone as specified in Sections .
and .. .
The Contractor shall sow seed onto existing ground as specified in Sections .
and .. .
The Contractor shall apply mulch as specified in Section .. c. Seeding Method and Crown Vetch Seeding .
The Contractor may place seed and limestone directly over existing ground without site preparation . .
The Contractor shall apply agricultural ground limestone to the areas as specified in Section .. .
The Contractor shall sow seed as specified in Section .. .
The Contractor shall apply mulch as specified in Section ..
The Contractor shall not apply mulch if seeding riprap or erosion control mix . .
Maintenance and Acceptance The Department will accept areas seeded with Seeding Method or upon attainment of a reasonably thick uniform stand of permanent grass species with at least percent coverage free from sizable thin or bare spots .
The Contractor shall perform final reseeding as follows Upon completion of all other work on the project seeded areas that have not been accepted shall within calendar days meet the percent coverage requirement or be reseeded a final time .
Final reseeding shall be done at the end of the day period or at any time within the days as directed by the Resident .
The Contractor will not be allowed to perform final reseeding between September th and April th and the Department will not count this time as part of the day period .
All reseeding shall comply with Sections .
through ..
The Department will accept areas sown with Method Temporary Seed Special Seed or Crown Vetch at the time that areas are satisfactorily completed .
The Contractor shall maintain and protect all seeded areas until acceptance . .
Applied Water The Contractor shall use Applied Water to aid in the establishment of newly planted shrubs trees seedlings and sod during an abnormal drought that requires excessive watering beyond what is expected with each planting in accordance with Sections .
and ..
Applied Water shall be authorized by the Department .
The Contractor shall use Applied Water from approved sources and in a manner to allow the soil to absorb the water without runoff . .
Method of Measurement The Department will measure Seeding for payment by the area of seeded surface in Units of ft along the slope of the ground .
The Department will measure Applied Water for payment by the gallon in calibrated tanks or by accurate water meters .
Delivery slips as specified in Section .. f will be required .
Watering deemed necessary by the Contractor to assure a growth of grass under the guarantee provisions of Section .
Maintenance and Acceptance will not be measured for payment . .
Basis of Payment The Department will pay for the accepted quantities of seeding at the Contract price per Unit for the method specified which price shall be full compensation for furnishing and spreading seed limestone fertilizer and inoculant .
The price shall also include any reseeding watering and maintenance necessary to meet the requirements of Section .
Maintenance and Acceptance .
When fertilizer is omitted from Seeding Method Number or Number at the direction of the Department payment for such seeding will be percent of the Contract price for the appropriate item .
When authorized the Department will pay for Applied Water at the Contract price per gallon .
When seeding is completed amounts due for these items will be payable .
The Department will pay for Loam and Mulch as provided in Section Loam and Section Mulch .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Seeding Method Number Unit .
Seeding Method Number Unit .
Seeding Method Number Unit .
Special Seeding Unit .
Temporary Seeding Pound .
Crown Vetch Seeding Unit .
Applied Water Gallon SECTION MULCH .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and applying hay straw bark erosion control mix or cellulose fiber for covering slopes and other areas with a mulch as shown on the plans or authorized. . Mulch Material shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Mulch .
Mulch Binder . . General Cellulose fiber mulch shall be used with Seeding Method and may be used with Seeding Method in approved areas which may include but are not limited to lawns adjacent to developed property areas subject to high air blasts created by moving vehicles and areas where hay mulch would create a hazard . .
Applying Mulch Mulch shall be any of the following types of material .
a. Hay or straw mulch for both seeded and unseeded areas shall be spread evenly and uniformly over the designated areas .
Unless otherwise directed mulch shall be applied at the rate of to lbsunit .
Too heavy an application of mulch shall be avoided .
Lumps and thick mulch material shall be thinned .
Unless otherwise authorized hay or straw mulch shall be anchored in place by uniformly applying an acceptable mulch binder .
Mulch binder shall be applied as soon as the mulch is placed .
Application of a concentrated stream of mulch binder will not be allowed .
Mulch binder will be paper fiber mulch applied at lbsUnit or approved equal .
Water spray may be used as a temporary binder .
Temporary mulching shall be applied as per the Contractors SEWPCP spread immediately to protect soil from erosion during all stages of construction throughout all seasons of the year .
b. Cellulose Fiber Mulch shall be applied as a waterborne slurry .
The cellulose fiber and water shall be thoroughly mixed and sprayed on the area to be covered so as to form a uniform mat of mulch at the rate of not less than pounds of mulch material per ft unit of area .
Cellulose fiber mulch may be mixed with the proper quantities of seed fertilizer and agricultural limestone as required under Section Seeding or may be applied separately the same day as seeding .
c. Bark mulch not incidental to plantings and erosion control mix shall be placed to cover the slope with a inch deep blanket or as called for on the Plans or by the Resident . .
Maintenance The Contractor shall maintain the hay straw or fiber mulch by repairing all damaged mulch and by correcting all shifting of the mulch due to wind water or other causes until an acceptable growth of grass has been achieved .
If cellulose fiber mulch is used any reseeding will require additional cellulose fiber mulch .
Bark mulch and erosion control mix will be accepted upon completion .
Upon acceptance of each area the Contractor will be relieved of further responsibility for maintaining that area or repairing damage except that resulting from their own or subcontractors operations .
If water spray is used as a temporary binder it shall be maintained in a manner acceptable to the Resident . .
Method of Measurement The Department will measure Mulch for payment by the area of surface in Units of ft along the slope of the ground .
The quantity of bark mulch and erosion control mix measured and accepted for payment will be the number of cubic yards each delivered and installed to the required depth as shown on the plans or as directed .
Measurement will be parallel with the slope of the ground . .
Basis of Payment The accepted areas mulched will be paid for at the contract price per unit which shall be full compensation for furnishing and spreading the hay or straw and mulch binder cellulose fiber mulch bark mulch or erosion control mix .
When mulch is measured by bales each bale will be paid for at of the contract price per unit for Pay Item .. Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Mulch Unit .
Bark Mulch Cubic Yard .
Erosion Control Mix Cubic Yard SECTION GEOTEXTILES .
Description This work shall consist of the furnishing and installing of woven geotextile fabric or nonwoven geotechnical fabric hereinafter called fabric as shown in the Contract or otherwise directed .
This Section is intended for use in conjunction with Section Geotextiles. . Materials Fibers used in the manufacture of geotextiles and the threads used in joining geotextile by sewing shall consist of longchain synthetic polymers composed of percent by weight of polyolefins or polyesters .
They shall be formed into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability relative to each other including salvages .
Geotextiles shall meet the requirements in the following Sections of Division Materials StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile .
Drainage Geotextile .
Erosion Control Geotextile .
Separation Geotextile . . Placement A. StabilizationReinforcement and Separation Geotextile The installation site shall be prepared by clearing grubbing and excavating or filling the area to the design grade .
This includes the removal of topsoil and vegetation .
Soft spots and unsuitable areas identified during site preparation shall be excavated and backfilled with select material and compacted using normal procedures as directed .
The geotextile shall be laid smooth without wrinkles or folds on the prepared subgrade in the direction of construction traffic .
The subbase shall be placed by end dumping onto the geotextile from the edge of the geotextile or over previously placed subbase aggregate .
Construction vehicles shall not be allowed directly on the geotextile .
The subbase shall be placed such that at least the minimum specified lift thickness shall be between the geotextile and equipment tires or tracks at all times .
Turning of vehicles shall not be permitted on the first lift above the geotextile .
Any ruts occurring during construction shall be filled with additional subbase material and compacted to the specified density .
In stabilization applications the use of vibratory compaction equipment is not recommended with the initial lift of subbase as it may cause damage to the geotextile .
When fabric is to be used as a reinforcement geotextile care shall be taken to tension the fabric before completely covering with aggregate .
Cover material shall be placed starting on one edge of the fabric and progress toward the opposite edge in order to maintain tension in the fabric .
When sloped riprap is to be placed on fabric the site shall be prepared to provide an undulating and uneven surface as much as is practical .
The fabric shall be placed loosely to prevent any bridging of the uneven surface .
Fabric to be placed on slopes shall have the long direction oriented up and down the slope as shown on the Standard Detail .
The armor system placement shall begin at the toe and proceed up the slope .
Placement shall take place so as to avoid stretching and subsequent tearing of the geotextile .
Riprap and heavy stone fill shall not be dropped from a height of more than foot .
Stone with a mass of more than pounds shall not be allowed to roll down the slope .
Slope protection and smaller sizes of stone filling shall not be dropped from a height exceeding feet or a demonstration provided showing that the placement procedures will not damage the geotextile .
Following placement of the armor stone grading of the slope shall not be permitted if the grading results in movement of the stone directly above the geotextile .
For Separation Geotextile when the fabric is to be placed in the roadway the cover material shall be dumped on previously placed cover material or at the edges of the fabric and then pushed onto the fabric .
The first layer of cover material shall be greater than inches and first compacted by a track bulldozer .
At no time shall construction equipment be allowed on the fabric when the fabric is covered with less than inches of compacted cover material .
Ruts shall be filled with additional cover material to maintain the minimum inch cover over the fabric .
When fabric is placed in the roadway the fabric roll widths shall be chosen so that there will be a minimum number of overlaps of parallel rolls .
The total width of surface covered is shown on the Standard Details B. Drainage Geotextile Trench excavation shall be done in accordance with details of the project plans .
In all instances excavation shall be done in such a way as to prevent large voids from occurring in the sides and bottom of the trench .
The graded surface shall be smooth and free of debris .
The fabric shall be placed loosely with no wrinkles or folds and with no void spaces between the geotextile and the ground surface .
Placement of the drainage aggregate should proceed immediately following placement of the geotextile .
The geotextile shall be covered with a minimum of foot of loosely placed aggregate prior to compaction .
If a perforated collector pipe is to be installed in the trench a bedding layer of drainage aggregate should be placed below the pipe with the remainder of the aggregate placed to the minimum required construction depth .
The aggregate should be compacted with vibratory equipment to a minimum of Standard AASHTO density unless the trench is required for structural support .
If higher compactive effort is required a Class geotextile as described in Section Geotextiles is needed .
C. Erosion Control Geotextile The geotextile shall be placed in intimate contact with the soils without wrinkles or folds and anchored on a smooth graded surface approved by the Resident .
The geotextile shall be placed in such a manner that placement of the overlying materials will not excessively stretch the geotextile tearing it .
Anchoring of the terminal ends of the geotextile shall be accomplished using key trenches or aprons at the crest and toe of slope .
The geotextile shall be placed with the machine direction parallel to the direction of water flow which is normally parallel to the slope of erosion control runoff and wave action and parallel to the stream or channel in the case of stream bank and channel protection .
When riprap or stone ditch protection is placed on fabric the stones shall be placed so that they do not puncture or otherwise damage the fabric .
When sloped riprap is to be placed on fabric the site shall be prepared to provide an undulating and uneven surface as much as is practical .
The fabric shall be placed loosely to prevent any bridging of the uneven surface .
Fabric to be placed on slopes shall have the long direction oriented up and down the slope as shown in the Standard Details .
The armor system placement shall begin at the toe and proceed up the slope .
Placement shall take place so as to avoid stretching and subsequent tearing of the geotextile .
Riprap and heavy stone fill shall not be dropped from a height of more than foot .
Stone with a mass of more than pounds shall not be allowed to roll down the slope .
Slope protection and smaller sizes of stone filling shall not be dropped from a height exceeding feet or a demonstration provided showing that the placement procedures will not damage the geotextile .
Following placement of the armor stone grading of the slope shall not be permitted if the grading results in movement of the stone directly above the geotextile .
In underwater applications the geotextile and backfill material shall be placed the same day .
All void spaces in the armor stone shall be backfilled with small stone to ensure full coverage . .
Overlap Adjacent lengths of fabric shall be joined by overlapping a minimum of inches at the ends and sides except when sewing is specified or fabric is placed on slopes .
All overlaps on slopes shall be placed as follows A .
For slopes steeper than HV Sewn seams or minimum foot overlaps with no pinning or staking allowed .
B .
For slopes flatter than HV Sewn seams or minimum inch overlaps and pins or stakes may be used to anchor the overlaps per the manufacturers recommended spacing .
C. Overlaps shall be in the direction of flow .
When fabric is placed in the roadway the fabric roll widths shall be chosen so that there will be a minimum number of overlaps of parallel rolls .
The total width of surface covered is shown on the Standard Details .
A. StabilizationReinforcement and Separation Geotextile Adjacent geotextile rolls shall be overlapped shingle style sewn or joined as required in the plans .
Overlaps shall be in the direction shown on the plans .
On curves the geotextile may be folded or cut to conform to the curves .
The fold or overlap shall be in the direction of construction and held in place by pins staples or piles of fill or rock .
The following Table summarizes the minimum overlap for geotextiles in this application AASHTO Classification Minimum Overlap A A A A inches A A A feet or sewna All roll ends feet or sewna aSeams shall be sewn when the soils have a CBR equal to or less than unless otherwise specified .
B. Drainage Geotextile Successive sheets of geotextiles shall be overlapped a minimum of foot with the upstream sheet overlapping the downstream sheet .
In trenches equal to or greater than foot in width after placing the drainage aggregate the geotextile shall be folded over the top of the backfill material in a manner to produce a minimum overlap of foot .
In trenches of less than foot but greater than inches wide the overlap shall be equal to the width of the trench .
Where the trench is less than inches the geotextile overlap shall be sewn or otherwise bonded .
All seams shall be subject to the approval of the Resident .
C. Erosion Control Geotextile Adjacent geotextile sheets shall be joined by either sewing or overlapping shingle style .
Overlapped seams of roll ends shall be a minimum of inches except where placed under water .
In such instances the overlap shall be a minimum of feet .
Overlaps of adjacent rolls shall be a minimum of inches in all instances .
When overlapping successive sheets of the geotextile shall be overlapped upstream over downstream andor upslope over downslope .
In cases where wave action or multidirectional flow is anticipated all seams perpendicular to the direction of flow shall be sewn .
For Erosion Control applications the thread shall also be resistant to ultraviolet radiation. . Seams When sewn seams are to be used field or factory seaming by machine will be allowed .
If a sewn seam is to be used for the seaming of the geotextile the thread used shall consist of high strength polyethylene or polyester and shall have the same or greater durability as the geosynthetic being seamed .
Nylon thread shall not be used .
The thread shall be adjusted in the field to be sufficiently tight but not cut the geotextile .
For Erosion Control applications the thread shall also be resistant to ultraviolet radiation .
The thread shall be of contrasting color to that of the geotextile itself .
Flatprayer seams or JDouble Jtype seams shall be used with doublelocked stitches Class l except the flat seam may be used for repair of damaged in place fabric .
A stitch density of to per foot shall be used for lighterweight geotextiles while heavier geotextiles shall have to per foot .
All field seams shall be double stitched with two parallel passes and the rows of stitching shall be approximately  in apart and shall not cross at any point .
All stitching shall be at least inch from the fabric edge .
For seams that are sewn in the field the Contractor shall provide at least a . foot length of sewn seam for sampling by the Resident before the geotextile is installed .
For seams that are sewn in the factory the Resident shall obtain samples of the factory seams at random from any roll of geotextile that is used on the project .
For seams that are field sewn the seams sewn for sampling shall be sewn using the same equipment and procedures as will be used for the production seams .
If seams are sewn in both the machine and cross machine direction samples of seams from both directions shall be provided .
When sewn seams are required the seam strength as measured in accordance with ASTM D shall be equal to or greater than percent of the specified grab strength .
The Contractor shall submit the seam assembly description along with the sample of the seam .
The description shall include the seam type stitch type sewing thread and stitch density .
To facilitate inspection all seams shall be placed with the seam up so that repairs can easily be made if faulty seams are encountered during inspection as shown on the Standard Detail .
Procedures for testing sewn seams are given in ASTM D Standard Test Method for Seam Strength of Sewn Geotextiles. . Certification The Contractor shall provide to the Resident a certificate stating the name of the manufacturer product name style number chemical composition of the filaments or yarns and other pertinent information to fully describe the geotextile .
This information shall be furnished to the Resident for approval of the fabric before installation .
The Manufacturer is responsible for establishing and maintaining a quality control program to assure compliance with the requirements of Section Geotextiles .
Documentation describing the quality control program shall be made available upon request .
The Manufacturers certificate shall state that the furnished geotextile meets Minimum Average Roll Value MARV requirements of the specification as evaluated under the Manufacturers quality control program .
A person having legal authority to bind the Manufacturer shall attest to the certificate .
Either mislabeling or misrepresentation of materials shall be reason to reject those geotextile products. . Sampling and Acceptance Geotextiles shall be subject to sampling and testing to verify conformance with this specification .
Sampling for testing shall be in accordance with the most current ASTM D using the section titled Procedure for Sampling for Purchasers Specification Conformance Testing .
In the absence of purchasers testing verification may be based on manufacturers certifications as a result of testing by the manufacturer of quality assurance samples obtained using the procedure for Sampling for Manufacturers Quality Assurance MQA Testing .
A lot size for conformance or quality assurance sampling shall be considered the shipment quantity of the given product or a truckload of the given product whichever is smaller .
Testing shall be performed in accordance with the methods referenced in Section Geotextiles for the indicated application .
The number of specimens to test per sample is specified by each test method .
Geotextile product acceptance shall be based on ASTM D . Product acceptance is determined by comparing the average test results of all specimens within a given sample to the specification MARV .
Refer to ASTM D for more details regarding geotextile acceptance procedures . .
Shipment Storage Protection and Repair of Fabric Geotextile labeling shipment and storage shall follow ASTM D . Product labels shall clearly show the manufacturer or supplier name style number and roll number .
Each shipping document shall include a notation certifying that the material is in accordance with the manufacturers certificate .
Each geotextile roll shall be wrapped with a material that will protect the geotextile from damage due to shipment water sunlight and contaminants .
The protective wrapping shall be maintained during periods of shipment and storage .
During storage geotextile rolls shall be elevated off the ground and adequately covered to protect them from the following site construction damage precipitation extended ultraviolet radiation including sunlight chemicals that are strong acids or strong bases flames including welding sparks temperatures in excess of F and any other environmental condition that may damage the physical property values of the geotextile .
To prevent damaging the fabric the Contractor shall exercise necessary care while transporting storing and installing the fabric .
Atmospheric exposure of geotextiles to the elements following laydown shall be a maximum of days to minimize damage potential .
At no time shall riprap stones be rolled down the slope where fabric has been placed .
Before installation the fabric shall be protected from rain from sunlight or other ultraviolet exposure and from dust mud debris or other elements that may affect its performance .
Fabric that is torn punctured or otherwise damaged shall not be placed .
During installation direct weather exposure of the fabric shall be limited to a maximum of days from laydown to covering of the fabric .
A. StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile Before covering the geotextile shall be inspected by the Resident to ensure that the geotextile has not been damaged during installation .
Damaged geotextiles as identified by the Resident shall be repaired immediately .
Cover the damaged area with a geotextile patch that extends an amount equal to the required overlap beyond the damaged area .
If placement of the backfill material causes damage to the geotextile the damaged area shall be repaired as previously described .
The placement procedure shall then be modified to eliminate further damage from taking place .
B. Drainage Geotextile Should the geotextile be damaged during installation or drainage aggregate placement a geotextile patch shall be placed extending beyond the damaged area by a distance of inches or the specified seam overlap whichever is greater .
C. Erosion Control Geotextile The geotextile shall be placed in such a manner that placement of the overlying materials will not excessively stretch the geotextile tearing it .
Care shall be taken during installation so as to avoid damage occurring to the geotextile as a result of the installation process .
Should the geotextile be damaged during installation a geotextile patch shall be placed over the damaged area extending feet beyond the perimeter of the damage .
When riprap or stone ditch protection is placed on fabric the stones shall be placed so that they do not puncture or otherwise damage the fabric .
Field monitoring shall be performed to verify that the armor system placement does not damage the geotextile .
Any geotextile damaged during backfill placement shall be replaced as directed by the Resident at the Contractors expense . .
Method of Measurement The quantity of geotextile will be measured by the number of square yards of surface area covered and in direct contact with the cover material .
Measurement will not be made for overlaps patches and repairs of damaged geotextile unless additional overlap width is required by the Resident in which case measurement will be made for that added overlap area . .
Basis of Payment Geotextiles will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard .
Such payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing geotextile fabric for all required surface preparation for all labor tools materials and equipment for repairing torn and damaged geotextile and when required for sewing seams and for furnishing and placing all pins or stakes or other hold down devices for excavation for and furnishing and placing protective aggregate cushion and for all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile Square Yard .
StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile sewn seams Square Yard .
Drainage Geotextile Square Yard .
Drainage Geotextile sewn seams Square Yard .
Erosion Control Geotextile Square Yard .
Erosion Control Geotextile sewn seams Square Yard .
Separation Geotextile Square Yard .
Separation Geotextile sewn seams Square Yard SECTION LANDSCAPING .
Description This work shall consist of the Contractor furnishing and planting trees shrubs vines and other plants and shall include all planting operations and material as well as the care and replacement of the plants during the Maintenance Period all in accordance with the specifications Standard Details planting plans and schedules and the directions of the Resident .
Planting operations will be divided into two classes .
a .
Class A Planting will consist of planting into the existing soil that has been amended with organic humus peatmoss compost andor other standard horticultural soil amendments as approved by the Resident .
b .
Class B Planting will consists of planting into the existing soil without amendments .
Unless otherwise specified all planting shall be Class A. . Materials General All nonplant material shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials .
Fertilizer .
Mulch .
Organic Humus .
Water shall be free from oil acids alkalines salts or any other substances harmful to plantings. . Plant MaterialAll Classes a .
All plants shall conform to the current edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI Z. unless otherwise indicated in the plans or specifications .
b .
All plants shall be first class representatives of their normal species or varieties unless otherwise specified .
All plants must have a good healthy wellformed upper growth and a large fibrous compact root system .
Plants sheared into stiff or formal shapes will be rejected unless they have outgrown such shearing .
Largegrowing deciduous trees shall have straight trunks and a single leader or as may be characteristic of the species .
Tops shall be thickly branched densely foliated well balanced and in good proportion to the height of the tree .
Trees with weak trunks thinly or irregularly branched or with unnatural shape of proportions due to undesirable pruning or for any other cause will be rejected .
Trees with leaders or branches too severely cut back or with bottom limbs trimmed too high will be rejected .
Smallgrowing deciduous trees shall be thickly branched with a wellbalanced natural shape .
Plants which are poorly furnished or have grown or been pruned into unnatural shapes will be rejected .
Tree Clumps shall have three or more main stems starting from the ground .
c. All plants shall have been grown under climatic conditions similar to those in the locality of the site of the project under construction or have been acclimated to such conditions for at least two years .
All plants must have been grown in a latitude north of Washington D.C .
The Resident may require a sworn affidavit from the contractor stating the source where all plants were grown .
Payment for plants may be withheld until this affidavit is received .
All plants shall be nursery grown unless otherwise stipulated .
No plant will be considered nursery grown unless it has been transplanted at least once and has been growing in a nursery for at least years .
Where collected stock is allowed all plants in addition to meeting all other requirements for nurserygrown stock shall have a diameter of ball or root spread at least onethird greater than that required for nursery stock .
Plants showing signs of lack of root pruning cultivation or other proper nursery care will be classified as collected stock regardless of their source .
d. All plants must be healthy and vigorous free from disease injurious insects and their eggs or larva mechanical wounds broken branches decay or any other defects .
e. All plants shall be true to name .
Each bundle or each plant when not tied in bundles shall be labeled legibly and securely .
The current edition of Standardized Plant Names prepared by the Editorial Committee of the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature shall be the authority for all plant names .
Care shall be taken throughout the operation to keep each plant species or variety segregated and labeled .
The Resident will reject any plants concerning any doubt or confusion arising about nomenclature either at the time of delivery or at any subsequent time .
f. The Contractor shall take all precautions that are customary in good trade practice to insure upon arrival at the planting site the plants are in good condition for successful growth .
All plants must show appearance of normal health and vigor .
Plants with loose or broken balls dried out roots twigs or needles or plants which have become overheated in transit or are found not to comply with these specifications in any way will be rejected .
The Resident will not assume responsibility for such rejected material .
The Resident reserves the right to plainly mark all rejected plants with paint or by other means to ensure that they are not used on the job .
Rejected plants may not be used on the project will not be paid for and must be replaced by the contractor with approved plants .
If plants with communicable diseases are not removed or destroyed immediately upon discovery of the disease all plants that were left in contact will also be rejected. . Plant Size and Root Balls Class A Plants The plant sizes specified in the American Standards for Nursery Stock are the minimum sizes acceptable .
ANSI Z .
Plants which meet the sizes specified but do not have a normal shape and balance between height and spread will be rejected .
Thin poorly branched or sparsely rooted plants will be rejected regardless of whether they meet the minimum technical requirements of the American Standard for Nursery Stock .
Where bare roots are irregular the size of the root spread will be the average root spread considering all sides of the plant and not the maximum root spread .
The Resident may allow moderate deviations from exact sizes of plants that normally have irregular root systems .
Coarserooted plants which lack sufficient fibrous feeding roots will be rejected .
Recently cut stubs of large roots on either balled or bare root stock will be considered evidence of lack of proper nursery care and rootpruning and will be sufficient grounds for rejecting such plants or classifying them as collected stock .
Acceptable roots will retain sufficient fibrous feeding roots .
Where a size range with a maximum and minimum is given an average size is required .
At least percent of the plants in a size range shall be at or above the average for this size range .
A solid ball is referred to as one encompassing the roots of a plant .
A solid ball shall consist of the soil in which the plant was originally grown .
The ball shall have been dug up in such a manner as not to disturb the roots .
Where such a ball is required the designation B and B Balled and Burlapped will be used .
No B and B stock will be accepted if this solid soil ball has disintegrated or if loose soil apparently has been packed around the roots .
Peat Balls and other fiber material will not be acceptable where B and B stock is called for but said root balls may be furnished where bare root stock is called for if approved by the Resident .
Per ASNS Standards the caliper of trees shall be the diameter of the trunk taken inches above the root collar for up to and including fourinch caliper size .
If the caliper at inches exceeds inches in diameter the caliper will be measured at inches above the ground .
Class B Plants Unless otherwise specified plants used in Class B plantings shall be seedlings plugs or lining out stock with heavy fibrous compact root systems .
The comparative size of the plants shall be as stated under the heading Seedling Trees and Shrubs in the American Standard for Nursery Stock .
All conifers must have dormant buds and secondary needles .
Where B and B plants are designated ball sizes shall be the same as Class A plants . .
Inspection A preliminary check of the plants may be made at the time of delivery for condition of the plants and conformity to the specifications .
The Contractor shall inform the Resident at least hours in advance as to what plants are to be planted and in what location .
Inspection will continue throughout the life of the contract up to the time of Final Acceptance .
Plants which are not true to name do not conform to the specifications show evidence of improper handling or lack of proper care or which appear to be in a seriously unhealthy condition must be removed by the Contractor at once and replaced by acceptable plants as soon as the planting season allows .
Any unacceptable plants when pointed out to the Contractor by the Resident shall be removed at once .
If this occurs during the planting season these plants shall be replaced at once if between planting seasons they shall be replaced at the next subsequent planting season unless conditionally directed by the Resident for evergreens and other preferred spring planted items. . General Construction Requirements Planting operations shall be performed in accordance with the plans and specifications and as directed by the Resident . .
Layout The location of plants as shown on the plans shall be considered approximate only .
The exact locations will be designated on the ground by the Resident making such changes as may be required to adjust the planting to local conditions .
Plant quantities may in some cases be increased or decreased as provided in Section .
Changes in Quantities .
Locations for trees and shrubs shall be staked out on the ground by the Resident before herbicides are applied and any plant pits or beds are dug .
The Contractor shall furnish the stakes for use in marking plant locations .
Stakes shall be wire survey flags at least inches tall .
Layout stakes shall be approved by the Resident before the Contractor commences any work on the project .
The Contractor shall mark the stakes legibly with indelible marking material and may also be required to furnish personnel capable of locating plants from plans to carry out the staking under the direction of the Resident .
Before actively starting work on the project the Contractor shall provide the Resident with a planting sequence schedule to be used in establishing priorities in staking plant locations .
The Contractor shall give the Resident at least four days advance notice of any deviations from this schedule .
The Resident will not be responsible for any delay or inconvenience caused by unfinished staking resulting from the Contractors failure to follow the above procedure .
All stakes used to locate plants shall be replaced in the correct plant pits after each operation and shall remain there until the Resident directs their removal .
When plants are set out in wrong locations due to stakes being misplaced during digging and planting operations the Contractor shall be required to move the misplaced plants to the proper location at their own risk and expense. . Plant Pits and Beds a .
Plant Beds Areas designated as plant beds must have the entire surface cultivated cleared of weeds and be completely covered with mulch .
Actual mulch limit will extend  feet out from the center of plant or to the pavement edge bridge wall and roadside face of guardrail .
Cultivation must include complete removal of all weed and grass roots loose stones over inches maximum diameter and any other debris .
Approved herbicides are permitted for weed control in place of sod removal .
b .
Rock Excavation When ledge or boulders over  yd in size are encountered in digging plant pits the Contractor shall notify the Resident who will change the location of the plants .
No excavation of ledge or boulders over  yd in volume will be required and no extra payment will be made for rock excavation or for shifting of plant holes due to rock .
c. Class A Planting Size of plant pits shall bear the following relationship to the spread of roots or root ball diameter of the plants to be planted in them For all plant materials the holes shall be times the diameter of the ball or container size .
The plant pit shall be deep enough so that when installed the top of the root ball is even with to  inch higher than the existing ground .
In all cases the depth shall be sufficient to contain all the roots of the plant without crowding .
In certain areas of poor drainage or heavy soil the Resident may require raising the plant elevation .
When required the raising of the plants shall be included as a part of the cost of the plant .
Excavated soil mixed with organic humus shall be used as backfill around the roots .
Stones larger than inches in maximum diameter large roots roots or rhizomes of weeds or other injurious materials shall be removed and not used as backfill .
Any additional material needed to fill plant pits to the level of the surrounding ground shall be loam Section furnished by the Contractor at their own expense .
d. Class B Planting Class B plants will be planted in the existing soil .
Plant holes must be deep enough to allow room for the full depth of the root without doubling or folding and wide enough to allow room for its normal spread .
Plants must be set straight and at the same depth at which they were previously growing .
Soil must be firmly compacted about the roots leaving no air pockets . .
Planting Seasons Seasons for planting unless otherwise directed shall be within the following dates Bare Root Plants Spring April st to May st Fall Sept. th to Oct. th Evergreens Container or Balled and Burlapped Spring April st to June th Fall August th to September th Potted Container Grown Deciduous Plants Spring April st to June th Fall August th to Nov. th Balled Burlapped Deciduous Plants Spring April st to June th Fall August th to Nov. th Plants will not be planted in frozen soil soil that is excessively wet or excessively dry .
Preparations for planting may begin earlier than the specified season and planting work may continue beyond the specified time limits if approved by the Resident .
However the Resident may require that all plants planted outofseason shall receive special attention as directed .
Any outofseason planting shall be at the Contractors risk and expense . .
Setting Plants a .
Placement Plants shall be set plumb and straight in the prepared pits and beds and at a level such as will result after settlement in the top of the root ball being level with or to within inch above the surrounding ground surface .
b. Staking If the Resident or Landscape Architect determines a tree requires staking the Landscape Contractor will provide staking incidental to the cost of the plant .
Tree staking shall be done in accordance with horticultural industry standards trees shall be staked to allow slight sway and movement all the way to the ground .
Stakes shall not extend into tree branches .
Stakes shall be driven into undisturbed soil and not permitted to penetrate root balls .
Staked trees shall remain in a plumb position throughout the Maintenance Period .
Staking materials shall be removed after one growing season or if longer time is needed at the end of the Maintenance Period. . Backfill Class A For all Class A plants backfill shall consist of parts of soil excavated from the plant pit thoroughly mixed with one part of organic humus andor horticultural amendments as approved by the Resident .
Sods or clods may not be used as backfill .
The backfill material shall be placed and compacted in the bottom of the planting pit and shall be worked around the roots and thoroughly compacted as the backfilling proceeds leaving no air pockets .
The backfill shall be filled in around the root ball to half the depth of the ball and the remaining wire basket shall be removed and the remaining burlap around the ball shall be loosened and spread out away from the plant or if it is too bulky cut away and removed .
The backfilling shall then be completed watered and tamped firm .
Plastic film wraps shall be completely removed during planting .
Nursery containers shall be completely removed before planting .
The roots of bare root plant materials shall be placed in their natural arrangement with the backfilling carefully performed to prevent damage to the plants root system .
Broken or bruised roots shall be pruned immediately making a clean cut .
Shallow basins or saucers of earth will be required to be placed around each plant .
However when drainage conditions are poor as in heavy clay soil the Resident may require that such saucers be omitted or used only temporarily .
All plants shall be thoroughly watered and liquid fed the day they are planted and as often thereafter as necessary for the plants to become safely established. . Fertilizing a .
Water Soluble Fertilizer The Contractor shall liquid feed all class A plantings as the first watering unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
Liquid fertilizer shall be completely dissolved and mixed in water at the rate of pounds of the fertilizer concentrate to gallons of water .
The resulting solution shall be poured around the plant in the plant saucer .
The solution shall be applied at the following rates for each application Containerized plants shall receive wateringin fertilizer solution of volume equal to container size .
Plant materials including BB shrubs and deciduous trees specified by heightspread shall receive one gallon of water per each foot inches of heightspread .
Plant materials specified by caliper shall receive one gallon of water per each  inch onequarter inch of caliper measurement .
Evergreen plant materials shall receive two gallons of water per each foot inches of height .
b .
Slow Release Fertilizer Tablets All Class A plantings shall be fertilized with slow release fertilizer tablets or equivalent as approved by the Resident at the time of planting unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
Fertilizer tablets shall be placed equidistantly within the planting pit adjacent to the ball or root mass but not in direct contact with roots .
Placement depth shall be to inches below ground level .
The application rates shall be as follows Deciduous and Evergreen Shrubs shall receive one tablet per each foot inches of size .
Deciduous Trees and Evergreen Trees specified by height shall receive one tablet for two foot height plus additional tablet for each additional foot inches of size .
Deciduous Trees specified by caliper shall receive one tablets for each  inch onehalf inch caliper .
Specification Plant size Tablets HeightSpread HeightSpread HeightSpread EvergreenHt .
EvergreenHt .
Caliper Caliper Perennials Vines and Ground Covers shall receive tablet or appropriately proportioned equivalent. . Mulching The disturbed surface area of plant beds and pits shall be evenly and uniformly covered to a depth inches with bark mulch or as directed by the Resident .
All plant pits and beds must be entirely free of weed or grass growth and free of live roots of all weeds and grasses prior to the time mulch is applied .
Mulch shall be removed from or installed with no contact to trunk or bark surfaces .
Mulching will not be required on Class B plantings unless otherwise specified on a project specific basis .
Measurement of the depth of mulch will be made after one heavy rain or after a threeweek period without heavy rain .
All plant pits and beds must be entirely free of weed or grass growth and free of live roots of all weeds and grasses at the time mulch is applied .
When plant beds are installed near guardrails or as stated in Section .a the space between the plants and the guardrail or the nearest pavement when it extends behind the guardrail shall be treated as a part of the plant bed and shall be weeded and mulched .
Plants shall not be damaged when the mulch is applied .
Smothered or otherwise damaged plants must be replaced .
Mulch in place will not be permitted to be directly in contact with the base of plant trunks or stems .
Plants shall be mulched at the time of installation. . Cultivation All plant pits and beds shall be kept free of weeds and grass by the Contractor from the time the plants are planted until final acceptance .
This shall be accomplished by manual weeding cultivation or use of approved herbicides .
Application of herbicides to control weeds or grass shall be performed only by a Maine licensed pesticide applicator with an appropriate category as determined by the Board of Pesticide Control .
There will be no payment for unsatisfactory work. . Pruning Pruning shall be done to each plant individually in such a manner as to preserve the natural character of the plant and shall be done only after delivery and inspection .
All pruning shall be done with sharp tools by experienced persons in accordance with the best horticultural practice .
Plants pruned in such a manner as to seriously impair the appearance or character of the plant will be rejected .
Bench pruning with knives or axes will not be permitted .
Broken or badly bruised branches soft wood and sucker growth shall be removed with clean cuts .
Excessive pruning shall not be accepted as a means of disposing of dead wood or unhealthy plants .
Plants in such poor condition that they can only be revived by pruning of more than or more of the growth will be considered unsatisfactory and will be rejected .
At the time of final acceptance all plants must be at least the size called for in the specification . .
Potted and Container Grown Plants Plants supplied in Containers must have been established in containers at least one full growing season before planting and shall have a well rooted condition evidenced by the firmness of the mass of soil and roots .
The outside of the ball of soil shall be well matted with healthy working roots but shall not be pot bound .
Plants shall be adequately hardened off before planting .
Root growth shall be loosened prior to planting .
Containers shall be of such shape as to permit easy removal of the plant .
No plant will be accepted if the container ball is cracked or broken upon removal from the container. . Protection of Plants It will be the responsibility of the Contractor to take necessary steps to protect all plants from rodents during the Maintenance Period .
Protection from rodents will be included in the cost of the individual plants and the Contractor will receive no extra compensation for this work. . Cleanup and Repair All excess excavated material and debris resulting from the planting operation shall be promptly disposed of outside of and out of sight of the project unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
Any areas disturbed by the Contractor showing bare earth that do not require mulching shall be seeded with approved grass seed fertilized and mulched as directed by the Resident .
The Contractor shall be responsible for any damage caused by their operations and shall restore the disturbed areas to their original condition .
Cost of cleanup and repair shall be incidental to the work . .
Prosecution and Progress It is essential that each portion of the planting work in any area be promptly followed by cleanup of subsoil and debris fertilization watering cultivation pruning mulching spraying as needed repair and restoration of damage caused by the Contractor etc .
The Contractor shall provide sufficient labor and supervisory personnel to carry out this work without undue delay .
Any delay in carrying out this phase of the work which results either in danger to the health or growth of the plants or a poor appearance of the project from the point of view of the public will be considered due cause for withholding all or part of any payment due the Contractor for plants delivered and planted or for any other work done .
Partial payments on the contract do not constitute approval or acceptance of any specific plants or work operations .
The right is reserved to reject any plants or work which are discovered to be unsatisfactory at any time before the end of the Maintenance Period .. .
Maintenance Period The acceptability of the plant material furnished and planted under this contract shall be at the end of the Maintenance Period during which the Contractor as necessary shall employ all possible means to preserve the plants in a healthy and vigorously growing condition and to insure their successful establishment .
During this period the Contractor shall water cultivate and prune the plants and do any other work necessary to maintain the plants in a healthy growing condition .
This shall include seasonal spraying with approved insecticides or fungicides as may be required .
The Contractor shall also be responsible for protecting the plants from rodents .
All dead or rejected plants shall be promptly removed from the project and replaced by live healthy plants meeting the same specifications .
If such plants are declared unacceptable during the planting season they shall be replaced during this planting season otherwise they shall be replaced during the next subsequent planting season .
Such replacement plants are subject to the same requirements as the original plants and must be replaced in turn if they fail to meet the required standards .
Plants designated for spring planting only will be replaced only during the spring planting season unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
The Maintenance Period shall commence after Physical Work Complete but not before the Landscape Warranty Bond has been received by the Resident if required by Special Provision and shall extend for two years after that date unless otherwise directed .
Necessary replacements shall be made so that at the end of the Maintenance Period all plants shall be in a healthy vigorous growing condition and free from sizable dieback .
Replacements will be required for plants lost damaged or rejected whatever the cause .
The Contractor will be considered responsible for the plants until the end of the Maintenance Period .
It shall be the sole responsibility of the Contractor to replace any unsatisfactory plants on the project regardless of whether they are specifically designated by the Resident .
In the case of individual doubtful plants the Contractor may call upon the Resident to make a determination as to their acceptability but it shall not be incumbent on the Resident to furnish the Contractor with exact lists of replacements .
All replacements of plants shall be completed by the end of the planting season before the end of the Maintenance Period .
All replacement planting shall conform in every way to the requirements of the original planting .
The Resident may require that any replacement plants that are not dormant or that are planted late in the season be sprayed as directed with an approved antidesiccant . .
Method of Measurement The quantity of plants to be measured for payment will be the number of individual plants furnished and planted as required and accepted excluding replacements . .
Basis of Payment Each item of Planting will be paid for at the contract unit price for each accepted plant furnished and planted .
Payment shall constitute full compensation for furnishing and placing plants digging delivering rodent protection preparing plant pits beds and drains planting watering fertilizing mulching pruning and the cleanup of planting areas for all fertilizer mulch and other necessary materials all labor equipment tools Maintenance Period work Replacement and Bonding if required by Special Provision and any other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
When a bid item calls for a Group of trees shrubs vines or other plants the Contractor shall furnish each individual species within this Group for the same unit bid price .
The name and estimated number of individual species within each Group will be shown on the estimated quantities sheet of the plans .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .XX Name plant or plant group Each as detailed in Schedule of Items in Proposal Book SECTION TRANSPLANTING SHRUBS HEDGES AND TREES .
Description This work shall consist of digging moving and replanting existing shrubs hedges and trees in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the plans or as directed. . Materials General All nonplant materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of division Materials Fertilizer .
Mulch .
Humus . . Shrubs and Hedges a. Digging The earth of shrubs and hedges to be moved shall be carefully encompassing the roots as is customary in good nursery practice .
Minimum size of the rootball shall be as indicated in the current edition of the American Standards for Nursery Stock ANSI Z. b .
Moving The earth rootball shall be maintained as a solid unit during the moving of the shrubs and hedges and must be protected from breaking or cracking by careful handling .
The rootball shall be tightly wrapped with burlap or similar material .
Earth rootballs greater than inches in diameter shall be tightly bound with cord or rope placed over the burlap unless the shrubs or hedges are to be replanted immediately after digging .
c. Planting The plants shall be planted in the designated new location at the same depth below ground surface as before they were moved .
Backfill consisting of parts excavated soil and one part organic humus shall be placed under and around the rootball to eliminate all air pockets and to support the plant .
Insofar as feasible when hedges are to be transplanted the individual plants shall be replanted in the same relationship to each other that existed before they were moved .
Fertilizer tablets shall be placed into the backfill at the following rates .
Shrubs to foot high or spread tablet Shrubs to foot high or spread tablets Shrubs to foot high or spread tablets d. Time of Transplanting Plants shall be dug and transplanted only when dormant unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
When dug shrubs and hedges shall be moved directly to the final planting site and planted immediately if possible .
The rootball must be kept moist at all times during transplanting operations .
If construction makes it impossible to replant the plants immediately after digging the rootballs of the plants shall be kept completely covered with a thick layer of earth straw bark mulch peat moss or similar material which shall be kept moist at all times while the plants remain unplanted .
Shrubs may be held in approved pots under conditions of delayed replanting .
e. Pruning All pruning shall be done in accordance with the best horticultural practice .
Dead diseased or injured shoots and branches shall be removed .
In order to restore a normal balance between top and roots deciduous shrubs shall be thinned by removing uniformly scattered selected branches which shall be cut back to the main stem as directed .
The Resident may also require tip pruning .
Tip pruning may also be required for evergreens .
In the case of hedges the Resident may require shearing to uniform even surfaces .
f. Watering As soon as the plants are planted they shall be thoroughly watered to the point where the roots and the surrounding earth are well saturated .
The first application of liquid fertilizer shall be made during planting .
g. Mulching After removing all weeds and grass the ground surface over the entire area of the planting pit shall be covered to a depth of inches with bark mulch . .
Trees a. Digging All trees to be moved and replanted shall be dug with a solid ball of earth around the roots as is customary in good nursery practice .
The diameter of the ball shall be not less than times the diameter of the trunk of the tree measured foot above the surface of the ground .
Depth of the ball shall be not less than of its diameter for balls up to inch diameter .
For balls over inch diameter the ball shall have sufficient depth to maintain a solid structure and to encompass all the feeding roots under the ball area .
b .
Moving The ball must be maintained as a solid unit during the moving of the tree .
The ball must be protected from breaking or cracking by careful handling and by being tightly bound with cord or rope over canvas burlap or similar wrapping .
The ball shall be firmly attached to a tree platform of suitable size during moving operation as required .
c. Planting The trees shall be planted in the designated new location at the same depth in relation to the ground surface as before they were moved .
Backfill consisting of parts excavated soil and one part humus shall be placed under the ball and around the periphery of the ball .
Backfill shall be puddled and firmed in place to eliminate all air pockets and give adequate support to the ball .
Fertilizer shall be applied as specified in Section .. d. Protection Every care shall be taken to prevent injury to the tree during the transplanting operation .
All parts of the tree shall be carefully protected .
Branches shall be tied out of the way of possible injury .
No chain cable or heavy rope may be attached to the trunk or branches without protective padding adequate to prevent bruising or other injury .
e. Time of Transplanting Trees shall be dug and transplanted only when dormant unless otherwise directed .
When dug trees shall be moved directly to the final planting site and planted immediately if possible .
The ball must be kept moist at all times during transplanting operations .
If construction problems make it impossible to replant the tree immediately after digging the ball of the tree must be completely covered with a thick layer of earth bark mulch peat moss or similar material which shall be kept moist at all times while the tree remains unplanted .
Pruning watering fertilizing mulching and supporting shall be as specified in the applicable Sections of Section Landscaping . .
Maintenance It shall be the Contractors responsibility to protect and care for transplants .
They shall be watered weekly during dry weather or as otherwise directed .
The Contractor shall take steps required to protect the plants from damage and from diseases and pests .
Should damage occur it shall be repaired by the Contractor according to the best horticultural practice .
The Contractor shall be responsible for transplants through one growing season . .
Replacement If the ball is badly broken or the plants are otherwise badly damaged or if in the opinion of the Resident during the life of the contract the plants show such signs of loss of health or appear to be in danger of dying the Contractor will be required to replace the plants with others of the same size and variety or approved plants of equal value at the proper season . .
Method of Measurement Transplanting shrubs or trees will be measured in place after transplanting by the single shrub or tree unit . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of transplanting shrubs or trees will be paid for at the contract unit price for each plant properly transplanted and accepted which payment shall include digging binding moving replanting pruning mulching care and maintenance and if required replacement of the shrubs and for all fertilizer mulch and other materials and for all incidentals necessary to complete the item .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Transplanting Shrub Each .
Transplanting Tree Each SECTION MONUMENTS Reserved SECTION VACANT SECTION WATER SERVICE SUPPLY LINES .
Description This work shall consist of installing water pipe and pipe sleeve in reasonably close conformity with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established .
The installation shall include the assembly of all components and materials shown on the plans or as directed. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Copper Tubing .
Nonmetallic Pipe Flexible .
Nonmetallic Pipe Rigid .
Metallic Pipe . . General This work shall be done with as little interruption of water service as possible .
Ample notification shall be given to the users of the water before any disruption of water service. . Sleeve Pipe for sleeves shall be metallic or nonmetallic rigid and be laid on a firm foundation at the line and grade designated .
When the pipe installation is in a trench all excavating and backfilling shall be in accordance with Section Structural Excavation .
After installation of the pipe special care shall be taken to protect the pipe from heavy hauling equipment loads rocks or any other damage caused by the Contractors work .
All pipe broken from such causes shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
Pipe sleeves to be placed in concrete shall be supported during placement of concrete .
Special care shall be taken while placing and compacting concrete around the sleeves to prevent voids around the outside of the sleeves .
Ends of the sleeves shall be capped with end plates until the water pipes are installed through the sleeves. . Water Pipe Water pipe shall be copper tubing or nonmetallic flexible pipe as called for .
After the sleeve has been placed the water pipe shall be inserted into the sleeve and connected to the existing pipes at each end .
All connections to existing pipes shall be done in accordance with recognized plumbing practices .
Necessary fittings adapters and reducers shall be furnished as required . .
Method of Measurement Pipe sleeve copper tubing and nonmetallic pipe will be measured by the linear foot . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of pipe sleeve copper tubing and non metallic pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot for the types and sizes specified complete in place which payment will be compensation for furnishing and installing all necessary fittings for connecting to existing systems and for capping the ends of the pipe sleeve .
Excavation will not be paid for separately but will be considered included in the work of the contract items .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
 inch Copper Tubing Linear Foot .
inch Copper Tubing Linear Foot .
 inch Copper Tubing Linear Foot .
 inch Copper Tubing Linear Foot .
 inch Copper Tubing Linear Foot .
inch Copper Tubing Linear Foot .
 inch Nonmetallic PipeFlexible Linear Foot .
inch Nonmetallic PipeFlexible Linear Foot .
 inch Nonmetallic PipeFlexible Linear Foot .
 inch Nonmetallic PipeFlexible Linear Foot .
 inch Nonmetallic PipeFlexible Linear Foot .
inch Pipe Sleeve Linear Foot .
inch Pipe Sleeve Linear Foot .
inch Pipe Sleeve Linear Foot .
inch Pipe Sleeve Linear Foot .
inch Pipe Sleeve Linear Foot SECTION FOUNDATIONS CONDUIT AND JUNCTION BOXES FOR HIGHWAY SIGNING LIGHTING AND SIGNALS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing installing modifying or removing concrete foundations conduits and junction boxes for highway lighting highway signing and traffic signal installations in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the plans. . General The materials furnished by the Contractor shall be new .
Where an existing system is to be modified the existing material shall be removed and abandoned or salvaged as shown on the plans or as directed .
All electrical equipment shall conform to NEMA or UL standards wherever applicable .
In addition to these requirements all materials and workmanship shall conform to the requirements of NEC ASTM Standards the ANSI the local electrical Utility Company and any local ordinances that may apply .
Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Material Details .
Reinforcing Steel .
Precast Concrete Units .
Steel Conduit .
Nonmetallic Conduit .
Prewired Conduit .
Metallic Junction and Fuse Box .
Anchor Bolts . . Miscellaneous Material Gravel backfill shall meet the requirements for Aggregate BaseScreened Section .
a .
Type A. Transformer pads shall conform to the requirements of the local electrical Utility Company .
If grouting is necessary to correct surface irregularities in the top of the concrete foundations a nonshrink material satisfactory to the Resident shall be used .
All concrete foundations shall be constructed of Class LP concrete in accordance with the applicable requirements of Section Structural Concrete. . Equipment List and Drawings Unless otherwise permitted in writing the Contractor shall within days following execution of the contract submit a list of equipment and materials which are to be installed .
The list shall include the name of manufacturer size and identifying number of each item .
The list shall be supplemented by such other data as may be required including detailed scale drawings of proposed minor deviations from the plans .
If requested the Contractor shall submit for review design data and sample articles of the material proposed for use .
All of the above data shall be submitted in duplicate except samples for testing .
Following checking correcting and reviewing two complete sets of drawings shall be submitted .
The Department will not be liable for material purchased labor performed or work delayed before such review .
Upon completion of the work the Contractor shall submit three complete sets of corrected plans showing all construction changes. . General All work shall conform to NEC and NESC standards as set forth in the NIST Handbook H except when otherwise noted on the plans or in the Special Provisions .
The Contractor shall be responsible for and shall repair all damage caused to underground drainage structures utilities or lighting conduit which are encountered during construction. . Conduit If the trench for conduit is located in wet spongy or otherwise unsuitable ground the trench shall be further excavated to a depth sufficient to overcome this condition and shall be backfilled with approved gravel .
The gravel shall be compacted in layers not exceeding inches loose measure .
The grade of the bottom of the trench shall be parallel to the proposed grade of the conduit .
Trenches for conduits shall be excavated to a width that will permit proper installation of the conduit and to the depth shown on the plans or as directed .
All junction or pull boxes shall be vehicle rated lbs and concrete junction boxes shall be Class LP and installed as shown on the plans Where conduits enter exposed junction boxes they shall be sloped to drain towards the conduit entrance holes unless otherwise directed .
Weep holes of  inch diameter shall be placed in all pull boxes junction boxes and fuse boxes .
After the trench has been excavated as specified the bottom of the trench shall be prepared with a sand bedding material .
After placing the conduit sand shall be placed around the sides and over the top of the conduit when shown in the special details .
The entire trench shall then be backfilled with approved material placed in layers not exceeding inches and thoroughly tamped .
All underground conduit shall be placed to at least the depth shown on the plans and shall not interfere with poles guardrail posts sign foundations or other objects .
All conduit ends shall be capped with conduit caps until wiring has begun .
Prewired conduit shall be sealed during construction to prevent entry of moisture dirt or rocks .
All conduit shall be sealed to prevent rodent ingress after cables have been installed .
Any blocking material shall be removable without use of tools .
The size and type of conduit required will be noted on the plans except that the minimum size of conduit risers required for traffic signal installations shall be determined by percentage fill in a single conduit as specified in the latest revision of the NEC .
Where more than one conduit is required to be installed in the same location the conduits may be placed in the same trench .
The weather head on conduit risers on Utility Company poles shall not be less than foot from any utility wires .
Conduit risers on Utility Company poles shall be located as required by the Utility Company .
Within days after completion of each section of conduit the Contractor in the presence of the Resident shall rod and pull through each duct a mandrel and brush of a pattern satisfactory to the Resident but which shall not be more than  inch smaller than the bore of the ducts .
Where obstructions in the ducts prevent passage of the mandrel the Contractor shall at their own expense remove and relay those portions of the ducts necessary to clear the obstruction .
The Contractor shall install a suitable nylon pulling string with a rated lb .
tensile strength in all unused conduits .
The ends of the string shall be secured in such manner as to prevent accidental withdrawal of the string .
Metallic Conduit Installation Conduits shall be of the sizes noted on the plans which are indicated as the nominal inside diameter .
All conduits shall be joined with threaded couplings using approved thread sealant .
Conduit shall be installed so that it is continuous and watertight between boxes or equipment .
Running threads will not be permitted .
When necessary the Contractor shall use an approved electrical uniontype coupling .
Conduits shall be protected at all times from the entrance of water or other foreign matter .
Conduit runs shall be made with as few couplings as standard lengths will permit .
The total angle of all bends in one run and the radius of conduit bends shall conform to the NEC requirements .
All field bends and offsets shall be made with approved hickey or conduit benders .
Pull boxes shall be used wherever necessary to facilitate the installation of the wires .
In making up a run of conduits all cut ends shall be reamed to remove rough edges and cut threads shall be painted with an approved thread sealant in such a manner that there will be no unprotected surfaces and joints will be watertight .
All conduits shall have electrical continuity and shall be adequately grounded .
Conduits to be placed in the concrete superstructure of bridges and similar structures shall be securely supported and fastened in order to maintain the conduits position within the concrete superstructure as shown on the plans .
Pull boxes shall be located as shown on the plans .
Clearance between conduit runs shall preferably be inches but at no time shall be less than the maximum size of the aggregate used in the embedding concrete .
At all joints where relative movement between adjacent parts of a structure can occur a double Oring expansion coupling or other approved expansion device shall be installed .
Exposed conduit shall be rigidly and securely fastened with acceptable fasteners or supports as indicated on the plans or approved .
Fasteners or supports shall not be placed more than feet apart on centers except as otherwise authorized .
Conduits shall generally be supported by an approved spacer at the point of support so that there is an air space between the conduit and the supporting surface .
Ends of conduit runs terminating in a metallic box without a threaded hub shall be provided with a metallic locknut on the outside of the box and a metallic locknut and insulated bushings on the inside .
A lock washer and a galvanized steel flat washer shall be installed between the outside locknut and face of the box. . Polyvinylchloride Conduit Installation Polyvinylchloride conduit and High Density Polyethylene hereafter called PVC conduit shall be installed in accordance with the applicable methods as specified in Section .
for metallic conduits .
PVC conduit shall be made watertight by joining with solvent or in accordance with the manufacturers specifications .
Conduit shall be bent carefully to avoid damage and without the use of an open flame .
Bends sharper than   bend will not be permitted in PVC conduit .
The total angle of all bends in one run and the radius of bends shall conform to the NEC requirements .
Conduits to be placed in the concrete superstructure of bridges and similar structures shall be securely supported and fastened in order to maintain the conduits position within the concrete superstructure as shown on the plans .
Pull boxes shall be located as shown on the plans .
Clearance between conduit runs shall preferably be inches but at no time shall be less than the maximum size of the aggregate used in the embedding concrete .
At all joints where relative movement between adjacent parts of a structure can occur a double Oring expansion coupling or other approved expansion device shall be installed .
To allow for expansion and contraction of PVC conduit during installation of long runs one end shall be left unconnected or a double Oring expansion coupling shall be inserted near one end of the run until final covering of the conduit is in progress .
Where PVC conduit runs are placed parallel to other conduit runs or cross one over another they shall be separated by a minimum of inches of sand or soil cushion .
The bottom of trenches for PVC conduit shall be lined with a inch minimum bedding of tamped sand or soil before laying the conduit .
Backfill to a compacted depth of inches above the top of the conduit shall be sand or soil free from rocks or hard lumps .
No aluminum wire shall be allowed underground .
No prewired conduit shall be allowed .
Conduit and wire sizes shall be as shown on the plans . .
Concrete Foundations If noted on the plans the Department has completed an appropriate test boring program to evaluate subsurface conditions in the general vicinity of proposed foundations for traffic signal dual purpose and mast arm poles and highway sign bridge cantilever and butterfly support structures .
The associated boring logs as well as foundation requirements and any foundation specific information are provided on the plans .
Unless another foundation type is specified on the plans foundations shall consist of castinplace reinforced concrete drilled shafts .
Supplier shall determine the bending moment shear force torsion and axial load at the top of each mast arm or dual purpose pole or sign support structure foundation .
Foundation size diameter and length shall depend on the Bending Moment and Torsion at the top of the foundation and shall be taken off of the specified charts that are provided in Standard Detail as set forth on the plans .
The larger of the foundation sizes shown for Bending Moment or Torsion shall be the required foundation size .
Length shall be added in accordance with the plans to account for embankment fill or sloping ground conditions .
Lengths are depths below lowest adjacent proposed grade .
Reinforcing shall be as specified on the associated chart in Standard Detail .
The Contractor is responsible for final design of the abovegrade components of the mast arm or sign support structure .
Design computations that are part of the Contractors design submittal shall include the actual loads bending moment shear force torsion and axial load at the top of each foundation .
These actual design loads at the top of each foundation that are provided by the Contractor as part of their submittal will be used by the Department to check the Contractors proposed size of the drilled shafts .
The Contractor shall not commence foundation construction prior to receiving approval from the Departments geotechnical group .
In the absence of design requirements being provided on the plans the Contractor shall prepare and submit the foundation designs to the Department for approval .
Likewise the Contractor may propose an alternate shallow spread footing or drilled shaft configuration design than that set forth on the drawings .
In either case any Contractorprepared foundation design shall meet the design criteria of Section of the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Sign Luminaires and Traffic Signals unless otherwise specified by the Department .
Geotechnical design of the foundations shall be in accordance with Section of the aforementioned AASHTO code and AASHTO Standard Specifications for Highway Bridgesth Edition as well as FHWAIF Drilled Shafts Construction Procedures and Design Methods .
In addition to other design requirements foundation design shall account for Torsion for which a minimum Factor of Safety equal to .
shall be achieved .
In evaluating axial capacity and torsional resistance in cohesionless soils load transfer coefficient or side resistance coefficient beta  will be used in accordance with Subsection of FHWANHI with beta determined in accordance with Equations and for silty sands to sandy silts with varying amounts of gravel .
Reference is made to Illinois DOT for additional torsional design methodology .
The design criteria for the resistance of drilled shaft and spread footing foundations against overturning sliding and bearing capacity failure shall meet the requirements of Section of AASHTO Standard Specifications th Edition .
The structural design of foundations shall meet the requirements of AASHTO Standard Specifications th Edition .
The Contractor shall submit to the Department for approval three copies of detailed plans and calculations prepared by a State of Maine licensed Professional Engineer of the proposed foundation .
Construction of foundations shall not commence until the Department has approved the foundation design .
If a test boring program has not been completed by the Department Contractor may use the assumed soil properties provided on the plans to develop foundation designs for the sole purpose of preparing a bid .
Prior to construction the Contractor shall engage a qualified geotechnical firm or person to complete test borings in the vicinity of the foundations including standard penetration tests and soil sampling determine soil properties for use in the foundation design and complete geotechnical analyses and geotechnical foundation design for review and approval by the Department .
All costs associated with the work required to sample classify and analyze the soil design the foundation and prepare submittals shall be incidental to related Contract items .
The Contractor shall submit copies of all foundation design work structural and geotechnical together with computations and plans used for design purposes .
The computations shall be sufficiently detailed to allow the Department to check and approve the computations .
Design calculations that consist of computer generated output shall be supplemented with at least one hand calculation and graphic demonstrating the design methodology used .
Design calculations shall provide thorough documentation of the sources of equations used and material properties .
Design submittals not meeting these criteria will be rejected .
Drilled shafts shall not be permanently cased except for the top .
feet concrete shall be cast directly against the surrounding soil .
Shallow spread footings shall be founded at least .
feet below the lowest surrounding proposed grade for frost protection .
If soil conditions differ materially from those described on the boring logs the contractor shall stop work on that foundation and contact the Resident .
All unsuitable material including but not limited to peat organic material and material that has been disturbed andor dumped within the limits of a foundation shall be removed to the limits directed by the Resident .
Drilled shaft depths shall be increased as directed by the Department to account for the unsuitable material .
Unsuitable material removed from below subgrade for spread footing foundations shall be replaced with compacted material as set forth below for foundation backfill .
Drilled shaft foundation holes except in ledge shall be excavated by auger method to the neat line of the outside dimensions of the footing without disturbing the soil around or below the proposed footing .
Drilled shafts shall not be permanently cased except for the top feet concrete shall be cast directly against the surrounding soil .
In areas where rock or ledge is encountered above the proposed bottom of foundation the Contractor will have the option of removing rock and placing the foundation at the design depth shown on the plans or constructing a grouted rockanchored foundation system .
Rockanchored foundations shall be constructed according to Standard Detail Foundations for Traffic Signals Highway Signing and Lighting or as approved by the Department for drilled shafts greater than inches in diameter .
Concrete for drilled shafts shall be placed as soon after excavation as practicable to prevent debris from collecting in the excavated area .
The Contractor shall provide temporary dewatering of excavations for foundations such that concrete is placed in the dry .
Concrete for drilled shafts shall be placed by tremie methods as temporary casing is withdrawn to prevent debris from contaminating the foundation and to ensure concrete is cast against the surrounding soil .
Concrete for drilled shafts and spread footings shall be Class A in accordance with Section Structural Concrete .
Precast foundations will not be permitted .
Back fill for spread footing foundations shall be Gravel Borrow meeting the requirements of Section .
Gravel Borrow .
Gravel Borrow shall be placed in layers not exceeding inches in depth before compaction .
Each layer of back fill shall be thoroughly compacted by use of power tampers to at least of the materials maximum dry density as measured in the field per AASHTO T or by an approved method using calibrated nuclear device .
All back filling and compacting shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section Structural Excavation .
Before placing concrete the required elbows of entrance conduits reinforcing steel and anchor bolts shall be carefully positioned .
The anchor bolt size and the bolt circle diameter shall be determined from data furnished by the supplier of the poles or as shown on the plans .
Anchor bolts for use with breakaway couplings longitudinally groovedtype shall be inch diameter and shall project between  and inches above the top of the foundation .
All other anchor bolts shall be a minimum of inch diameter and shall project sufficiently to accommodate the thickness of the base plus all nuts and washers .
The bolt length shall also be sufficient to allow clearances of approximately  inch below the leveling nut and  inch above the top nut .
At least two threads on each anchor bolt shall project beyond the outside of the nuts holding the plumbed pole .
All foundations shall be warranteed against leaning and corrosion for two years after the project is completed .
If the lean is greater than degrees from normal or the foundation is spalling within the first two years the Contractor shall replace the foundation at no extra cost .
The finished ground at each foundation shall be graded flush with the top of the foundation except at locations where the foundation is protected by guardrail by curb or is outside the clear zone .
If required approved backfill material shall be added to grade the slopes as specified .
There will be no additional compensation for furnishing placing and compacting material flush around the foundation .
In all cases the surface area around the foundations shall be graded to drain away from the foundation and loamed and seeded in accordance with the requirements of Section and Section .
Concrete foundations designated to be modified or removed shall be modified or removed as shown on the plans .
Debris resulting from the modification or removal shall be removed from the project .
Once removal has been completed the area shall be brought to grade by addition of granular material and loam or by loam only depending on the extent of modification or removal .
The area shall then be seeded in accordance with Section .
The concrete portion of the foundations exposed to view shall have a troweled finish .
A drainage groove shall be formed in the horizontal surface of the foundation .
The top of the concrete foundation shall be horizontal .
When the anchor bolt template is removed the threads of the anchor bolts shall be greased and protected with a metal sleeve held in position with nuts and washers to be furnished with the bolts .
This thread protection shall remain in place until the pole or other equipment is installed .
A copperclad steel ground rod shall be installed when shown on the plans . .
Method of Measurement Precast Concrete Junction Box and Remove or Modify Concrete Foundation will be measured by each unit .
Foundation items . . and .
will be measured by each unit .
The following drilled shaft foundations will be measured by the theoretical cubic yard volume of foundation based upon approved diameters and lengths inchdiameter in excess of feet long and all drilled shafts inches or greater in diameter .
All conduit will be measured by the number of linear feet .
The quantity of structural earth excavation to be measured for payment below grade will be the amount actually excavated from foot below the bottom of the foundation junction box or sand bedding to the required elevation provided the maximum allowable horizontal dimensions do not exceed those bounded by vertical surfaces inches each side of the installation as shown on the plans .
The quantity of structural rock excavation to be measured for payment will be the number of cubic yards actually removed provided the maximum allowable horizontal dimensions do not exceed those bounded by vertical surfaces specified herein . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity andor volume of foundations will be paid for at the contract unit price for each type of foundation .
This payment shall include anchor bolts reinforcing steel conduit within the foundation and extending inches from the foundation loam seeding mulching and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of junction boxes will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Payment for junction boxes shall include furnishing and installing precast concrete or bituminized fiber boxes as designated including that portion of conduit extending inches outside the box .
Payment will be made for the total number of linear feet of each type of underground or exposed conduit actually furnished installed and accepted at the contract price per linear foot .
This price shall include the cost of furnishing and installing the conduit excavating furnishing special backfilling materials pull wire fittings groundings and bonding test cleaning interiors of conduits and all materials labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Excavating and backfilling for junction boxes foundations and excavating backfilling and sand bedding for conduit ducts will be considered included in the respective contract unit prices and no separate payment will be made except as hereafter provided .
Excavating and backfilling as shown on the plans or as required to overcome soft or otherwise unsuitable material or for excavating rock will be paid for as provided in Section .
Required backfill material except sand bedding as shown on the detail plan will be paid for as provided in Section .
Payment will be made for the total number of linear feet of prewired conduit actually furnished installed and accepted at the contract price per linear foot .
This price shall include the cost of hand digging trenching or plowing furnishing and installing the prewired conduit and all labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of ground mounted cabinet foundations will be paid for at the contract unit price each which payment shall include conduit within the foundation and extending inches from the foundation and for loam seeding mulching and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Prewired conduit within the foundations and extending inches from the foundation and prewired conduit within the junction box and extending inches outside the junction box shall be considered incidental to the respective contract unit prices for light standard foundations and junction boxes and no additional payment will be made .
The accepted quantity of Remove or Modify Concrete Foundations will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Such price shall include disposing of concrete removed backfilling with granular material loaming seeding and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment for restoration of roadway pavement sidewalks grass areas and resetting curbing removed in conjunction with this work shall be considered incidental to the respective contract prices for each related item except as otherwise provided .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Precast Concrete Junction Box Each .
Metallic Conduit Linear Foot .
Nonmetallic Conduit Linear Foot .
Prewired Conduit Secondary Wiring Linear Foot .
Prewired Conduit Primary Wiring Linear Foot .
inch Diameter Foundation Each .
inch Diameter Foundation Each .
inch Diameter feet or less Foundation Each .
inch Diameter greater than feet long and all inch and inch Diameter foundations Cubic yard .
inch Diameter inch Diameter inch Diameter Foundations Cubic yard .
Controller Cabinet Foundation Each .
Remove or Modify Concrete Foundation Each .
Special Foundation Each .
Ground Mounted Cabinet Foundation Each SECTION PAVEMENT MARKINGS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and placing reflectorized pavement lines and markings removing pavement lines and markings and furnishing and applying reflectorized paint to curbing in reasonably close conformity with the plans and as designated. . Materials Materials shall conform to the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials .
Pavement Marking Paint .
Reflectorized Plastic Pavement Marking .
Temporary Bidirectional Yellow Delineators shall be Temporary Object Markers T.O.M .
as manufactured by the Davidson Plastic Company East Valley Highway Kent WA or an approved equal. . General All pavement lines and markings shall be applied in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices .
Longitudinal lines placed on tangent roadway segments shall be straight and true .
Longitudinal lines placed on curves shall be continuous smoothly curved lines consistent with the roadway alignment .
All pavement markings placed shall meet the tolerance limits shown on the plans .
Broken lines shall consist of alternate foot painted line segments and foot gaps .
Temporary pavement marking lines defined in Special Provision Section Maintenance of Traffic Temporary Centerline will be applied as many times as necessary to properly delineate traffic lanes for the safe passage of traffic .
Bidirectional delineators may be used in place of temporary lines except where specified otherwise in Special Provision Maintenance of Traffic Temporary Centerline .
Delineators will be applied at foot intervals .
In overnight lane closure areas that are not to be overlaid temporary plastic lines or raised pavement markers shall be used through the length of the taper .
Newly painted lines markings and curb shall be protected from traffic by the use of cones stationary vehicles or other approved methods until the paint is dry . .
Preparation of Surface Immediately before applying the pavement marking paint to the pavement or curb the surface shall be dry and entirely free from dirt grease oil or other foreign matter .
Surface preparation for application of plastic markings shall conform to the manufacturers recommendations . .
Application Prior to applying paint for final pavement lines the Contractor shall perform a test for paint thickness by furnishing and placing a piece of smooth clean metal with an area of at least in in the path of the striping truck .
The striping truck shall be passed over the piece of metal painting the surface as it passes without applying beads .
The result of this test will be used to determine the pressure setting and speed of the truck when applying paint to obtain the specified thickness .
Additional paint thickness testing may be required on the final paint markings .
The wet thickness of paint without beads on final pavement lines shall be a minimum of mils .
On other final pavement markings and on curb where the paint is applied by hand painting or spraying application shall be in two uniform covering coats each at least mils thick .
Before the second coat of paint has dried the glass beads shall be applied by a pressure system that will force the glass beads onto the undried paint as uniformly as possible .
Glass beads shall be applied to the final and temporary pavement lines marking and curb at the rate of lbs.gal of paint and in sufficient quantity to assure complete and uniform coverage of hand painted surfaces .
Temporary painted lines and markings shall be applied as specified for permanent painted lines except that the thickness shall be a minimum of mils .
Temporary pliant polymer marking material shall be used for temporary markings on the final pavement and on pavements not to be resurfaced when such pavement markings do not conform to the final pavement markings pattern .
The plastic final pavement lines and markings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations by the inlay method of application . .
Establishment Period Inlaid plastic pavement lines and marking material furnished and installed under this contract for final pavement markings shall still be subject to a sixmonth period of establishment .
The period of establishment shall commence as soon as the plastic pavement lines and markings are complete and in place and shall continue for six months .
At the end of the establishment period a minimum of of the plastic pavement lines and markings shall still be in place to be acceptable .
If less than of the plastic pavement lines and markings are in place after six months the Contractor shall replace all unsatisfactory plastic pavement lines and markings on the project without additional payment .
Plastic pavement lines and markings designated for replacement shall be installed according to these specifications unless otherwise directed .
Plastic pavement lines and markings replaced at the end of the six month establishment period will not be subject to a further establishment period . .
Removing Lines and Markings When it is necessary to remove pavement lines and markings it shall be done by high pressure water sand blasting solvent or other acceptable means .
The method chosen must be capable of completely eradicating the existing line or marking without damage to the pavement .
Burning and grinding to remove temporary markings from final pavement or from existing pavement not to be resurfaced will not be permitted . .
Method of Measurement The quantity of permanent pavement marking lines measured for payment will be the number of feet shown in the Schedule of Items in the contract .
This quantity will be considered final and no adjustments will be made except when changes resulting in increases or decreases are made by the Resident .
Double yellow centerline broken or solid will be considered one line for measurement purposes .
The measurement of broken lines will include the gaps when painted and will not include the gaps when plastic .
Temporary pavement marking lines will be measured as one lump sum for work accepted .
All other pavement markings will be measured by the square foot for work actually done .
Reflectorized curb will be measured or computed by the square foot of curb surface actually painted and reflectorized .
The accepted quantity of removing existing pavement markings will be measured by the square foot .
Temporary Bidirectional Yellow Delineators will be measured by each unit complete in place maintained and accepted . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of permanent pavement marking lines will be paid for at the contract unit price per foot .
No adjustment will be made to the quantity for payment except as described under Method of Measurement above .
All other permanent pavement markings will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
Payment for final plastic pavement lines and markings will be made in two parts .
The first payment of will be made when plastic pavement lines and markings are placed .
The payment of the remaining will be made at the end of the establishment period for all plastic line and pavement markings accepted .
The accepted quantity of temporary pavement marking lines will be paid for at the contract lump sum price and will include as many applications as required and removal when required .
If allowed by Special Provision the Contractor may utilize Temporary BiDirectional Yellow and White As required Delineators as temporary pavement marking lines and paid for at the contract lump sum price .
Such payment will include as many applications as required and removal .
The accepted quantity of Temporary Bidirectional Yellow Delineators will be paid for at the contract unit price .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
inch Solid White Pavement Marking Line Linear Foot .
White or Yellow Pavement Marking Line Plan Quantity Linear Foot .
White or Yellow Painted Pavement Marking Line Linear Foot .
White or Yellow Painted Pavement Marking Line Linear Foot .
White or Yellow Pavement Curb Marking Square Foot .
Temporary Pavement Marking Line White or Yellow Lump Sum .
Removing Existing Pavement Marking Square Foot .
Temporary Pavement Marking Line White or Yellow Linear Foot .
Reflectorized Plastic White or Yellow Pavement Marking Square Foot .
Reflectorized Plastic White or Yellow Pavement Linear Foot Marking Line Plan Quantity .
Temporary Bidirectional Yellow Delineators Each SECTION VACANT SECTION HAND LABOR .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and supervising laborers when authorized or directed by the Resident in accordance with these specifications. . General Work under this section shall require no special skill but shall be accomplished in a competent manner .
The personnel shall be physically and mentally capable of efficiently performing the assigned duties .
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the Contractor of their responsibility for furnishing personnel under other contract items .
The intent is that this item shall be used to perform necessary work not covered or provided for under existing contract items or other sections of the specifications . .
Method of Measurement Hand labor will be measured by the hours of work actually performed measured to the nearest  hour . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of labor will be paid for at the contract unit price per hour The contract unit price shall be full compensation for hiring transporting supervising payment of workmens compensation social security taxes unemployment insurance overtime benefits and for all hand tools protective clothing and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Hand Labor Straight Time Hour SECTION VACANT SECTION EQUIPMENT RENTAL .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and operating construction equipment as directed by the Resident. . General Equipment used for work under this section shall conform to the following minimum sets of requirements Equipment Description Minimum Size Air Compressor Gasoline or diesel powered unit ft per minute at psi with compressor receiver and adequate air hose Air Tool Single compressed air driven hand drill tamper hammer chipper or pavement breaker All Purpose Excavator Approved truck mounted ton capacity lifting at type class foot radius Heavy Duty Purpose Excavator Approved truck ton capacity lifting at mounted type class foot radius Mini All Purpose Excavator Approved truck hp operating weight mounted type class .
to .
yd rated capacity MiniAll Purpose Excavator Track mounted hp operating weight .
to .
yd rated capacity Bulldozer Crawler or pneumatic tired tractor hp flywheel with pushing blade Weighttractor .
ton Small Bulldozer Crawler with pushing blade hp Skid Steer Pneumatic tired with push blade hp Chain Saw Gasoline or electric powered with inch cutting blade endless chain type blade Culvert Cleaner Water Jet nozzle pump and tank gallons per minute at psi Front End Loader Front end scoop mounted on yd rated capacity pneumatic tires Small Front End Loader Front end scoop mounted ft minimum rated capacity on crawler or pneumatic tires Grader Tandem drive ton Road Broom Engine driven rotary broom foot broom Roller earth or base course Selfpropelled Gross wt .
lbsft of rolling pneumatic tire type width .
inch width Tire ground pressure psi Roller pavement Selfpropelled pneumatic Gross weight ton minimum wheels inch by inch smooth tread tires capable of psi inflation pressure pressure fully ballasted wheel loads pounds or more Brush Chipper Disk Style inch diameter disk Rototiller Rotary cultivator mounted on pneumatic hp tired tractor Stump Chipper Gasoline powered stump chipping hp machine Truck small Pneumatic tired with dump body yd to yd rated capacity manufacturers rating Truck large Pneumatic tired with dump body yd or greater rated capacity manufacturers rated Tractor Mounted Hydraulic Hammer .
Ton minimum weight Hydraulic hammer to be mounted on a Heavy Duty .
ft minimum hammer Dia .
All Purpose Excavator Ftlbs minimum impact energy .
General Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for completing work under other contract items .
These items shall be used to perform only such work as directed by the Resident. . Grading All grading shall be done in a manner to leave the area smooth and suitable for machine mowing and to provide proper drainage or as otherwise directed by the Resident .
Suitable excavated material shall be placed and compacted on embankment slopes or other areas as directed .
Unsuitable material shall be disposed of in approved waste areas. . Rolling All material under this item shall be compacted to the satisfaction of the Resident .
Only those portions of roadway designated for rolling shall be rolled .
The work shall be performed under such conditions that maximum compaction can be obtained . .
Method of Measurement Equipment rental will be measured by the hour to the nearest hour .
Time spent moving to and from the site within the project limits and from beyond the project limits servicing maintaining and changing attachments will not be measured for payment .
Supervision required in the performance of hourly equipment rental work will be measured for payment only when called for on the Plans .
This item does not relieve the Contractor of the responsibility to supervise other contract items .
Foreman will be measured by the hour to the nearest  hour of time actually spent supervising operators of hourly equipment rental pay items .
The name of the supervisor will be supplied to the Resident . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of equipment rental will be paid for at the contract unit price per hour for each type of equipment used .
Payment shall include operators fuel grease oil and other incidentals necessary to operate the equipment .
No separate payment will be made to direct work done under these items except when called for on the Plans .
Payment will then be made under Pay Item .. Payment made will be limited to the grade of foreman and limited to hours spent in actually supervising equipment operators .
Such related costs as use of pickup truck meal and room expenses benefits insurance retirement travel time and overtime will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the unit price bid for this pay item .
Payment for equipment rental will be based on experienced operators familiar with the work being performed .
Operators determined to be below normal acceptable standards of production or workmanship will be paid for at reduced hours as determined by the Resident .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Air Compressor including operator Hour .
Air Tool including operator Hour .
Tractor Mounted Hydraulic Hammer Hour .
All Purpose Excavator including operator Hour .
Heavy Duty All Purpose Excavator including operator Hour .
Mini All Purpose Excavator including operator Hour .
Bulldozer including operator Hour .
Small Bulldozer Grader including operator Hour .
Small Bulldozer including operator Hour .
Skid Steer including operator Hour .
Grader including operator Hour .
Roller earth and base operator Hour .
Roller Pavement including operator Hour .
Trucksmall including operator Hour .
Trucklarge including operator Hour .
Chain Saw Rental including operator Hour .
Stump Chipper Rental including operator Hour .
Road Broom including operators and hauler Hour .
Front End Loader including operator Hour .
Small Front End Loader including operator Hour .
Brush Chipper including operator Hour .
Rototiller including operator Hour .
Culvert Cleaner including operators Hour .
Foreman Hour SECTION and VACANT SECTION HIGHWAY LIGHTING .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing a highway lighting system or modifying or removing an existing highway lighting system in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the plans. . General All material furnished by the Contractor shall be new unless otherwise specified .
Substitutes for specified material may be accepted upon approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Substitutes shall provide equal or better service .
Where an existing system is to be modified the existing material shall be removed upgraded or disposed of as shown on the plans or as directed .
All electrical equipment shall conform to NEMA UL or EIA standards wherever applicable .
In addition all materials and workmanship shall conform to the requirements of the NEC the local electrical Utility Company and all local ordinances which may apply. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Section of Division Materials Steel Conduit .
Nonmetallic Conduit .
Prewired Conduit .
Metallic Junction and Fuse Box .
Secondary Wiring .
Luminaires Lamps and Ballast .
Luminaires Lamp and Ballast for High Mast Lighting .
Photo Electric Control .
Service Equipment .
Lowering System for High Mast Lighting .
Aluminum Supports .
Aluminum Mast Arm and Bracket Arm .
Steel Supports .
Steel Mast Arm and Bracket Arm .
High Mast Light Standard .
Steel Hbeam Poles .
Anchor Bolts .
Wood Ornamental Light Standard .
Wood Utility Pole .
Mast Arm for Wood Utility Pole .
Breakaway Devices .
Transformer enclosures shall conform to NESC requirements .
They shall be approximately inches high inches wide and inches deep .
Dimensions should be verified with the electrical Utility Company before ordering .
Clearances shall be provided as required by the NESC .
The enclosure shall be painted inside and outside with one coat of red ironoxide primer and a finish coat of gray baked enamel .
Doors shall be furnished with padlock lugs .
The electric portable power unit shall be a heavyduty reversing electric motor for the voltage and frequency shown on the plans and shall have a remote control .
The following are the minimum requirements for the high mast lighting lowering system Ball bearing motor Grounded frame Torque limiter Power unit mounting frame Coupling to winch drive shaft Remote control unit with cable Cable with twist lock receptacle and plug for operator of power unit All bolts for mounting lighting fixtures under bridge structures shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A .
These bolts and other fastening hardware shall be hotdipped galvanized in accordance with ASTM A .
Screened sand for bedding and covering direct buried cables shall meet the requirements of Section .
except that there shall be passing the No .
sieve. . Equipment List and Drawings Unless otherwise permitted in writing the Contractor shall submit for review a list of equipment and materials which is proposed to be furnished .
The list shall include the name of manufacturer size and identifying number of each item and other necessary data including detailed scale drawings wiring diagrams of special equipment and any proposed minor deviations from the plans .
If requested the Contractor shall submit sample articles of the material proposed for use .
All of the above data except sample articles shall be submitted in duplicate .
Following checking correction and approval not less than two complete sets of approved drawings shall be submitted .
The Department will not be liable for material purchased labor performed or work delayed before such review .
Where electrical equipment is to be constructed as shown on the plans the submission of detailed drawings and diagrams will not be required .
Upon completion of the work the Contractor shall submit three complete sets of corrected plans showing all construction changes. . Miscellaneous Material Insulating tape shall be of the selfbonding type .
Jacket tape shall be of the water resisting type .
Friction tape shall be rubberimpregnated woven cotton fabric. . Light Standards The terms conventional standard or conventional light standard shall mean the assembled metal base flange transformer base or breakaway device metal columnar shaft metal overhanging bracket arm and incidental hardware .
The term high mast pole shall mean the assembled base plate flange metal columnar shaft luminaire tenon mounting and lowering device and incidental hardware .
For purposes of this specification a structure shall be considered a high mast pole if the pole height from base plate to the center of the luminaire exceeds feet .
The design materials and fabrication of structural supports for luminaires shall meet the requirements of the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and interims thereto except as otherwise indicated within these specifications or on the contract plans .
Light standards with a luminaire mounting height in excess of feet shall be designed using wind speeds based on a year mean recurrence interval .
Minimum design default values for these structures shall be Ir .
Cv .
Kz as specified in Table in the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and interims thereto and G .. Light standards with a luminaire mounting height of feet or less shall be designed using wind speeds based on a year mean recurrence interval .
Minimum design default values for these structures shall be Ir .
Cv .
Kz as specified in Table in the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and interims thereto and G .. High mast poles exceeding feet but less than feet in height shall be classified as Fatigue Category II with Fatigue Importance Factors If of .
for Vortex Shedding and .
for Natural Wind Gusts .
High mast poles of feet or more in height shall be classified as Fatigue Category I with Fatigue Importance Factors If of .
for Vortex Shedding and .
for Natural Wind Gusts .
For structural design purposes the luminaire mounting height for roadside installation is defined as the distance from the center of luminaire to the base plate bottom .
For luminaire supports mounted on structures and approaches to structures the luminaire mounting height shall be defined and measured as the distance of the center of the luminaire to one of the following a .
For bridges over bodies of water Above the prevailing water level or in the case of tidal waters above mean high tide .
b .
For overpass structures Above the lower roadway level .
c. For approach ramps Above the average adjacent ground level if said ground level is more than feet below the base of the light standard .
The design weight of luminaires shall be pounds with an effective projected area of .
ft except that pole topmounted luminaires shall have an effective projected area of .
ft .
Light standards mounted on a bridge structure or light standards fabricated with aluminum shall be equipped with an approved damping or energyabsorbing device .
Deflections of light standards and bracket arms shall be limited as follows a .
Conventional Light standards shall be able to support a pound transverse load applied at inches below the pole top with a maximum deflection of of the nominal pole length .
A computer simulation or detailed computation using full design load as specified in the AASHTO Standard Specification for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals establishing a maximum of deflection of the nominal pole length may be used as an alternate method .
b .
Bracket arms shall be able to support a horizontal load perpendicular to the axial vector of the arm of pounds and a concurrent vertical load of pounds both loads applied at the luminaire tenon without developing a measurable permanent set .
c. High mast light standards shall have a maximum deflection of of the nominal pole length under full design load when equipped with four luminaires .
Conformance to the above deflection criteria for light standards bracket arms and high mast light standards shall be substantiated by detailed computations or computer simulation accompanied by written methodology or actual tests on materials produced for delivery under a Maine Department of Transportation contract .
The base plates of light standards shall have workable leveling nuts beneath and above them with flat washers against both nuts when erected .
The distance between the bottom of the base plate and top of the foundation shall not exceed twice the diameter of the anchor bolts .
Grout or other material shall not be placed between the base plate and foundations .
Approval for deviations from the contract drawings andor specifications shall be requested in writing and shall be approved by the Fabrication Engineer before being incorporated in the manufacturers drawings .
Requests for substitution for all specified material shall be submitted in writing with full documentation specifications mill certifications etc .
enabling the Department to evaluate the proposal .
A Certificate of Compliance shall be provided for all material in accordance with the requirements of the General Statement of Division Materials .
Shop certification in accordance with Section .
is required . .
Conventional Light Standards After execution of the contract for conventional light standards and before any shop work is commenced the Contractor shall submit sets of the manufacturers drawings of all standards and accessories proposed to be furnished and erected under this contract .
The drawings shall be of sufficient detail to indicate material andor dimensional conformance with these specifications and the contract drawings .
Each drawing shall contain a reference to the design criteria and certification that the design criteria have been met for the light standards bracket arms and associated hardware fittings and breakaway devices as submitted .
A Licensed Professional Engineer shall sign the certification under their official seal .
The drawings shall use the same units as found in the project plans .
It is the intent of these specifications that the Contractor shall be fully responsible for the adequacy of the sizes wall thickness materials and connections of the standards bracket arms and associated hardware fittings and breakaway devices .
Approval of the drawings will signify only approval of the materials mounting heightss and bracket arm lengths. . High Mast Light Standard For all high mast light standards as defined in this Section the Contractor shall submit in addition to the manufacturers drawings sets of the design computations including fatigue considerations consistent with AASHTO requirements .
Approval of the drawings and computations will signify approval of all structurally significant details of the light standard and if any the luminaire mounting and lowering device .
All drawings and computations shall be signed by a Registered Professional Engineer .
Approval will be based on the applicable provisions of Section ..
The shaft shall be provided with an equipment access opening approximately ft and centered approximately feet above the base .
The access opening shall be reinforced to maintain the full design strength of the shaft and shall be provided with a hinged removable access door equipped with a vandal proof means of being locked in place .
A positive means of internal grounding shall be provided inside of the access door .
All shaft sections shall be one plate thickness except that a doubler plate may be used around the equipment access opening .
The walls of polygonal shafts shall have an inside corner radius to wall thickness ratio not less than .
The Contractor may propose a galvanized and painted pole in lieu of using weathering type steel .
The steel shall be a base metal listed in the current edition of the AWS Structural Welding Code D ..
Paint color will be designated by the Fabrication Engineer .
Galvanizing and surface preparation shall be in accordance with Section and paint shall be a twocoat system designed for use on galvanized surfaces approved by the Engineer .
The Contractor shall supply sufficient additional coating material and instructions for touchup work. . Breakaway Supports Breakaway supports approved by the Engineer shall be supplied for use at all locations designated as breakaway .
Breakaway Support Certification of both breakaway and structural adequacy shall be provided by the Manufacturer .
Design calculations or test data of production samples to support certification shall be provided .
Breakaway support components shall provide the same or greater structural strength than the support post or pole utilizing the breakaway device .
Breakaway couplings shall not be used in conjunction with transformer bases .
Breakaway devices must include a reaction plate connecting all anchor bolts under the breakaway device .
Poles containing conductors must contain a fusible breakaway device disconnecting all ungrounded conductors simultaneously Breakaway devices are subject to the applicable provisions of Section Breakaway Devices. . General The location of the roadway lighting systems and other incidental work will be shown on the plans .
They are diagrammatic only but shall be followed as closely as actual conditions at the site and the work of other Contractors will permit .
As the work progresses the drawings may be revised or supplemented by the Resident and the Contractor shall perform the work required by such revisions or supplements without additional compensation except as provided in Section .
Work shall be scheduled to assure that each highway lighting system shall be completed and ready for operation upon completion of the corresponding section of the roadway or as specified in Special Provision .
Before proceeding with any work under this Contract the Contractor shall conduct continuity and insulating tests to establish the integrity of cable runs already in place .
The Contractor shall report all cable faults to the Resident .
In cases faults are located while contract work is in progress and the Contractor does not report them the Contractor will be responsible for correcting those faults without extra compensation. . Cable Installation The Contractor shall pull all wires through conduits without overstressing or stretching any wire or scoring cutting twisting or damaging the protective covering or insulation .
When pulling cable into conduits if the strain on the cables is likely to prove excessive the Contractor shall use soapstone powder or listed cable pulling lubricant as a lubricant .
Where two or more cables are to occupy the same conduit they shall be drawn in together and kept parallel to each other by the use of a pulling head .
No aluminum wire shall be installed underground for primary and secondary wiring .
Both ends of each length of cable shall be sealed to prevent the entrance of moisture during shipment or during outdoor storage .
Defective and damaged cable will be rejected and shall be replaced at no cost to the State .
Secondary wiring shall be installed as shown on the plans .
Secondary wiring shall not be spliced underground .
Splicing shall only occur in above ground hand holes and transformer bases .
The wire for secondary circuits which is pulled through ducts shall be fed slack from the feed end .
Secondary wiring being pulled through a junction box shall be provided with enough slack for the center of the cable to be positioned a minimum of one foot outside the top of the junction box Cables in junction boxes shall be provided with enough slack for the center of the cable to be positioned a minimum of one foot outside the top of the junction box and shall be arranged as directed .
After cables have been installed the end of each section of cable in light standards and panel boxes shall be carefully sealed with DAC Heavy Duty KWIK Foam Polyurethane Sealant Minimum Expanding or an approved equal .
Sealant shall penetrate a minimum of four inches into the conduit .
All wiring shall be finished to provide a neat and orderly appearance .
Ends of cable not connected to any device shall be insulated and sealed .
There will be no underground splicing of power conductors .
The trench for directburied cable shall be excavated to the width and depth shown on the plans or as directed .
Placement of the sand bedding shall be coordinated with the installation of the cables .
After the cables and screened sand have been placed the remainder of the trench shall be promptly backfilled with selected excavated material .
Surplus material shall be disposed of as directed and the surface of the trench shall be loamed and seeded in accordance with Sections and .
When connecting sockets outlets and other similar equipment the most accessible bare parts of each piece of equipment shall be connected to the grounded neutral .
In order to ensure this has been done each piece of equipment shall be tested after installation under the supervision of the Resident with a test lamp or other instrument one leg of which has been connected to a definite ground or by other approved means of testing .
All cables in junction boxes and light standards shall be tested for circuit connections which shall be in conformity with those indicated on the plans .
After verification of circuit connections all cables in junction boxes light standards and service panels shall be provided with individual metal tags diestamped with a phase designated A or B as applicable .
The tags shall be securely attached to the cables .
Splices to form continuous circuits shall be made by the Contractor and will only be permitted in accessible above ground locations .
All other splices shall be made with approved crimptype connectors .
Conductors shall not be pulled into conduit until pull boxes are set to grade crushed rock sumps installed grout placed around the conduit concrete bottom of pull boxes placed and the metallic conduit bonded .
Where roadways are to remain open to traffic and existing lighting systems are to be modified the existing lighting system shall remain in operation and the final connection to the modified circuit shall be made so that the modified circuit will be in operation by nightfall of the same day. . Light Standard To provide continuously aligned lamp post installations light standards shall be located in accordance with the details governing the spacings and setbacks shown on the plans unless otherwise directed .
The bracket arms shall be set normal to the edge of the roadway unless otherwise directed .
The bracket shall be assembled and attached to the shaft before the light standard is erected .
If it is anticipated that there will be a period in excess of hours between the erection of the light standards and the installation of the luminaires the Contractor shall install a weight weighing between to pounds at the outboard end of each bracket arm .
This weight shall be designed and fastened in such a way that it will not pose a hazard to persons passing beneath it .
Light standards shall be erected in a vertical position with a maximum deviation from the vertical of  inch in feet using either the leveling nuts provided with the anchor bolts or the breakaway couplings .
Once the light standard is in its final position the top nuts shall be tightened as follows a. Anchor Bolts with Breakaway Couplings The manufacturers recommendation shall be used .
b. Anchor Bolts without Breakaway Couplings the nut shall be tightened to snug tight condition by utilizing the full effort of a worker using a standard spud wrench or comparable tool .
After all nuts have been brought to a snug tight condition each nut shall be tightened an additional turn using an impact wrench torque wrench or large crescent wrench .
A minimum of bolt threads shall project beyond the outside face of the nut .
Nuts for bolts other than anchor bolts shall be tightened as outlined under b. above for anchor bolts .
The bottom of all transformer bases shall be coated with a bitumenmastic epoxy paint .
When foundations and anchor bolts for light standards have been installed by others the Contractor shall verify the anchor bolt dimensions at each location so that bases will be furnished with the proper bolt holes .
Wires in the shaft shall be supported with a Kellumtype braided strainrelief grip attached to a J hook mounted inside the shaft near the top .
Wood Ornamental Light Standards shall be installed as shown on the plans . .
Removing Light Standards Before removing light standards the luminaires shall be removed from the light standards and disposed of as noted on the plans .
Care shall be exercised in removing and transporting the light standards .
The Contractor will be required to replace at their expense all equipment damaged or destroyed by their operations. . Portable Power Unit for Lowering Luminaires The number of portable electric power units with remote control required for operation of the high mast luminaire lowering system will be for every high mast poles or as shown on the plans. . Luminaires Luminaires shall not be installed until the lamp socket position has been inspected and approved for conformance with the manufacturers recommended position for the specified distribution .
All luminaires shall be adjusted to produce the maximum illumination on the roadway surface and shall be full IES cutoff .
The connections between the luminaires and connector kits shall be made with single conductor number wires AWG copper stranded THHN minimum size .
A inch long Teflon sleeve shall be placed over each end of each conductor in the luminaire .
Installation of a connector kit fused or nonfused shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions to provide watertight connections. . UnderBridge Lighting Underbridge lighting shall be installed in accordance with the plans and specifications or as directed .
Circuits shall be fused in fuse boxes with ampere cartridgetype midget fuses  inch diameter and  inches long unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
Wiring connections in the underbridge lighting units shall be made with F wire .
All under bridge lighting luminaires shall be installed and adjusted for maximum illumination of the roadway surface .
The beam angle shall be adjusted as indicated on the plans .
In vehicular undercrossings underpass lights shall be placed in operation as soon as practicable after falsework has been removed from the structure .
Lighting for pedestrian structures shall be placed in operation before opening the structure to pedestrian traffic. . Service The Contractor shall install metal conduit riser with entrance cap entrance switch multiple control relay and other equipment as shown on the plans .
The lighting system will be supplied with electrical power by the local power company .
The type of service will be single phase three wire volt or the voltage indicated on the plans hertz alternating current .
The meter trim will include a bypass handle to allow the power company to change the meter without disconnecting the power .
An external standalone breaker capable of shutting off the lighting control cabinet or signals will be provided to disconnect power to the control cabinet .
No power shall be routed in or out of the control cabinet before this breaker The power company will make all connections of the roadway lighting system cables at the power companys service pole .
The Contractor shall notify the power company at least two weeks in advance of the time they intend to start construction at each of the sites and shall make all necessary arrangements with the power company for the required installation .
Roadway lighting cabinets shall be installed on stub poles with doors accessible from the roadway .
All connections to equipment and terminals shall be neat and orderly conforming to the requirements specified .
Details for the fabrication and installation of service poles with cabinets and other equipment are shown on the plans .
Transformer enclosures used to protect overhead type transformers mounted on concrete pads shall be installed as shown on the plans .
Transformers will be furnished by the power company .
All meter mounting devices shall be installed so that the meters will be upright plumb .
They shall be installed with the top of the meter not less than inches nor more than inches from the floor to the final grade .
Exceptions to this height requirement will be made where special permission has been given to install group or modular metering overall metering enclosures or polemounted meters .
Level grade shall be maintained for a minimum of feet in front of the meter enclosure to provide a safe working space .
In order to meet this requirement on uneven terrain as an option the Contractor may install a pressuretreated wood platform .
For any nonresidential industrial or commercial selfcontained meter socket the bypass requirements are single phase or amp single handle lever operated .
The Contractor shall meet all requirements and regulations of Utility Companies when installing equipment on their poles and for the service connection .
It is the responsibility of the Contractor to contact the appropriate Utility to determine their specific requirements . .
Bonding and Grounding All metal conduit ends light standards luminaires control cabinets and exposed noncurrent carrying metal parts of fixed equipment shall be connected to the grounding conductor .
All grounding and bonding shall conform to the current provisions of the NEC . .
Testing Before acceptance of the work the Contractor shall cause the following tests to be made on all lighting circuits by a licensed electrician .
The tests do not need to be performed in the presence of the Resident but the test results shall be recorded on the Highway Lighting Quality Control Check List and submitted to the Resident by the Contractor for acceptance .
The form shall be signed by the license electrician certifying that the highway lighting meet the requirements of section .. a. Continuity Each circuit shall be tested for continuity .
b .
Ground Each circuit shall be tested for grounds .
c. Resistance The resistance to ground on nonground conductors shall be at least five megaohm at F measured with a volt megger .
The ground resistance shall not be more than ohms .
d. Voltage Voltage readings shall be made at each service pole in the load contractor with load and without load and at each fixture with load .
e. Current Current readings shall be made on the load side of each load contractor phase and neutral .
Readings shall be made at night with lighting systems in normal operation .
f. Test Data Electrical test data obtained from the above tests shall be furnished in writing .
g. Operational Test The Contractor shall conduct an operational test for the completed installation under normal operating conditions .
This operational test shall have a duration of not less than two full days .
The Resident shall be the sole authority to judge the adequacy of the length of the testing period in order to assure the satisfactory operation of the entire system or any of its sections .
The work will not be accepted until the operational test has been successfully completed .
h. Functional Test With all equipment connected to the wiring system a functional test shall be performed by the Contractor in the presence of the Resident to demonstrate that the system and all parts thereof function as specified .
All defective materials or faulty installations shall be corrected by repairs or replacements by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Resident at no additional cost .
Lighting circuits shall be subjected to such other tests as may be required and it shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to ascertain what tests are required and to perform these tests in the presence of the Resident .
All tests shall be performed at the expense of the Contractor .
Cost for power to conduct tests shall be paid by the Contractor . .
Acceptance All systems shall be complete and in operation to the satisfaction of the Resident at the time of acceptance of the work .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the proper performance in service in whole or in part of the various lighting systems and all other electrical installations furnished and installed under this Contract and shall correct at their own expense all deficiencies in the operation which may arise prior to acceptance of the work .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the cost of power until the work is accepted . .
Method of Measurement Highway lighting system will be measured by the lump sum .
Light standards will be measured by the single unit complete in place and accepted .
The quantity of luminaires for high mast lighting will be measured by each single unit . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of light standards will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the number of units of the respective types .
Payment shall be full compensation for the light standard and breakaway transformer base or breakaway device bracket arm and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment for furnishing and installing luminaires for high mast lighting will be made for the accepted quantity at the contract unit price each which shall include luminaire ballast lamp and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted highway lighting system will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the complete lighting system shown on the plans except that luminaires for high mast lighting and light standards will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Lump sum payment for highway lighting system shall be full compensation for furnishing installing and erecting ballast lamps wiring in underground conduit pole wiring and all other wiring except prewired conduit transformer enclosures luminaires except luminaires for high mast lighting breakaway devices when applicable all identification tags and all materials labor equipment tools miscellaneous hardware and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Payment shall also include removing and resetting light standards installing breakaway devices on existing poles disposing of unused light standards as noted on the plans and for furnishing portable electric power units .
No separate payment will be made for bonding grounding and ground rods these costs shall be included in the contract price for conduit light standards service panels or other items requiring bonding and grounding .
Trenching for direct buried cable will be incidental to highway lighting system and shall include excavating furnishing and placing screened sand and backfilling .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Highway Lighting Lump Sum .
Luminaires for High Mast Lighting Each .
Luminaires Each .
Light Standard for Post Top Luminaire Each .
High Mast Light Standard Each .
Wood Ornamental Light Standard Each .
Conventional Light Standard Each SECTION DUST CONTROL .
Description This work shall consist of controlling dust that results from traffic on the project and the Contractors operations by applying water andor calcium chloride as directed by the Resident .
The requirements of Special Provision and other pertinent Sections of the Standard Specifications will apply. . Materials The water shall not be salt or brackish and shall be free from oil acid and injurious alkali or vegetable matter .
The calcium chloride shall conform to Subsection .
except that the requirements for total alkali chloride and impurities shall not apply. . Sprinkling Water shall be applied by approved methods and with equipment including a tank with a pressure pump and a nozzleequipped spray bar. . Calcium Chloride Calcium chloride shall be used when authorized for controlling dust on the roadway under construction and on approved haul roads from the pits to the project or in the area of dwellings and where dust constitutes a hazard to traffic .
Calcium chloride shall be applied by mechanical spreaders or by hand at the rate designated . .
Method of Measurement Water for sprinkling will be measured by the gal in calibrated tanks or distributors or by accurate water meters .
Calcium chloride will be measured for payment by the number of tons satisfactorily applied .
Delivery slips as specified in Section .. f will be required except that weight for calcium chloride shall be determined from the weight stated on each bag and the number of bags used .
Water and calcium chloride acceptably applied for the item Dust Control will be measured for payment as one lump sum . .
Basis of Payment Water for sprinkling will be paid for at the contract unit price per Thousand Gallons .
Calcium chloride will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton .
Water and calcium chloride for the item Dust Control will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
Payment will be full compensation for furnishing and applying water and calcium chloride as required .
Failure by the Contractor to follow Standard Specification or Special Provision Section andor the Contractors own Soil Erosion and Pollution Control Plan concerning Dust Control andor the Contractors own Traffic Control Plan concerning Dust Control andor visible evidence of excessive dust problems as determined by the Resident will result in a reduction in payment computed by reducing the Lump Sum Total by per occurrence per day .
The Departments Resident or any other representative of the Department reserves the right to suspend the work at any time and request a meeting to discuss violations and remedies .
The Department shall not be held responsible for any delay in the work due to any suspension under this item .
Additional penalties may also be assessed in accordance with Special Provision Work Zone Traffic Control and Standard Specification Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control .
When no item for Dust Control item or individual items are included in the schedule of items payment for the work will be considered incidental to the contract .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Sprinkling Gallon .
Calcium Chloride Ton .
Dust Control Lump Sum SECTION BRIDGE LIGHTING Reserved SECTION ENGINEERING FACILITIES .
Description This work shall consist of providing erecting lighting equipping and maintaining buildings to be used by the Resident as field offices Upon completion of the work the buildings and equipment shall remain the property of the Contractor. . Materials Materials for buildings shall be of good quality customarily used in standard frame house or office trailer construction. . General The building of the type called for shall be provided before the start of work and shall remain until work is completed and accepted unless earlier removal is authorized .
The location shall be approved by the Resident .
A fire extinguisher shall be provided in each building or office trailer for electrical and chemical fires and effective on all solvents used in the building .
Walls roof floor windows and doors shall be tightly constructed to the required area .
Furnishings shall be supplied as called for .
Doors shall be equipped with locks and all keys shall be in the possession of the Resident .
Windows shall be equipped with latches so they may be locked on the inside .
Window screens and screen doors shall be supplied when necessary .
Adequate desk and desk space shall be provided .
If a portable table is supplied it should be adjustable to accommodate the various heights of employees .
A proper office chair that is way adjustable is needed. . Field Offices Field Offices are designated Type A Type B or Type C. Buildings including trailers may be provided if they substantially equal or exceed the following requirements .
Air conditioning shall be provided in all field offices .
The walls roof and floor of the building shall be completely insulated with a minimum insulation value of R. Office trailers shall be either new or in very good used condition .
The interior walls shall be covered with suitable wall paneling .
The entire office trailer shall be for the exclusive use of the Resident .
The office trailer shall be winterized and completely enclosed at the bottom if the trailer will be used in cold weather .
Other types of buildings and facilities may be furnished of equal or better quality .
A public work area will be provided in the field office that shall be designed and constructed so that individuals with disabilities can approach enter and exit this area .
At least one accessible route to the field office shall be provided from accessible parking .
The accessible route shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines ADAAG and this specification .
The minimum clear width of an accessible route shall be inches except at doors .
The least possible slope shall be used for an accessible route .
An accessible route with a running slope greater than shall be considered a ramp .
Maximum ramp slope is .
The maximum rise for any run of a ramp shall be inches and the minimum clear width shall be inches .
Nowhere shall the cross slope of an accessible route exceed .
Changes in level up to  inch may be vertical and without edge treatment .
Changes in level between  inch and  inch shall be beveled with a slope no greater than .
Ramp floor surfaces shall be stable firm and slipresistant .
Ground floor surfaces along accessible routes and in accessible rooms and spaces including floors walks ramps stairs and curb ramps shall be stable firm and slipresistant .
The main door to the public work area shall have a minimum clear opening of inches with the door opened degrees measured between the face of door and the opposite stop .
Minimum maneuvering clearances at doors shall be provided .
The floor or ground area within the required clearances shall be level and clear .
The handle and other operating devices on accessible doors shall have a shape that is easy to grasp with one hand and does not require tight grasping .
Leveroperated mechanisms push type mechanisms and Ushaped handles are acceptable designs .
Hardware required for accessible door passage shall be mounted no higher than inches above finished floor .
When parking space is designated then all related requirements will conform to the following One accessible parking space shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible entrance .
Level landings shall be provided at bottom and top of each run .
The landing shall be at least as wide as the ramp run leading to it with a minimum length of inches .
If a ramp run has a rise greater than inches or a horizontal projection greater than inches then it shall have handrails on both sides .
Handrails shall have the following features Handrails shall be provided along both sides of ramp segments .
The inside handrail on switchback ramps shall always be continuous .
If handrails are not continuous they shall extend at least inches beyond the top and bottom of the ramp segment and shall be parallel with the floor or ground surface .
The clear space between the handrail and the wall shall be  inch .
Gripping surfaces shall be continuous .
Top of handrail gripping surfaces shall be mounted between and inches above ramp surfaces .
Ends of handrails shall be either rounded or returned smoothly to floor wall or post .
Handrails shall not rotate within their fittings .
The diameter or width of the gripping surfaces of a handrail shall be  to  inch or the shape shall provide an equivalent gripping surface .
Firm and sturdy steps shall also be provided with inch maximum riser and inch minimum depth and at least one handrail extending from the top of the steps to a minimum inches beyond the bottom of the steps .
The Contractor will make reasonable efforts to provide wheelchair accessible toilet facilities when portable facilities are provided .
The Contractor shall provide wheelchair accessible toilet facilities when flush type facilities that is those with running water are provided and the Contractor shall provide wheelchair accessible portable facilities if used when the contract duration exceeds two continuous construction seasons .
In addition to the facilities previously specified in this subsection each field office shall meet the following minimum requirements Description Quantity Type A Type B Type C Floor Area Outside Dimension ft Inside Wall Height feet Window Area ft Drafting Table Surface Area ft Drafting Stools each Office Desks each Ergonomic Swivel Chairs ea way adjustable Folding Chairs each Lighting Units each Electric Wall Outlets each Electrical Surge Protectors each Wall Closets each Plan Rack for minimum of sets of plans Toilet Facility Wastebaskets each All windows shall be provided with shades or blinds .
The toilet facility shall be for the exclusive use of State personnel .
The Resident will have the option to reject any furniture or supplies provided to the field office based on general condition .
One hundred ten volt cycle continuous electric service shall be supplied for lighting and amp duplex wall outlets .
Lighting shall consist of florescent light units with rapid start bulbs located over the work areas for a minimum of foot candles overall .
Drafting surfaces shall be inches above the floor and have shelves beneath .
Shelves for plans and rolls shall also be furnished overhead .
Drafting stools shall be approximately inches high .
Desks shall be single or double pedestal standard office type and shall be in addition to builtin type desks in the office trailer .
Field offices shall be furnished with one fourdrawer letter size metal filing cabinet .
Wall closets shall be inches wide inches deep and at least feet high .
Each office shall be furnished with a broom dustpan sweeping compound trash bags and with cleaning material for cleaning glass .
If the field office is carpeted then a vacuum cleaner will be provided .
The contractor will be responsible for disposing of trash from the field office .
The Contractor shall provide a fully functional desktop copierscanner capable of copying field books for the Residents use during the project .
All maintenance and supplies except paper shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
The Contractor shall provide a water cooler with hot and cold dispenser and shall be responsible for supplying bottled water compatible with the water cooler to maintain a constant potable water supply for the duration of the project .
All maintenance and supplies shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
Alternate source of water such as individual bottled water may be provided as approved by resident .
The Contractor shall provide a cubicfoot refrigerator in the field office for the duration of the project .
Each office shall be furnished with a person generalpurpose first aid kit .
The first aid kit shall be periodically inspected and refilled as necessary. . Heat Heat shall be supplied by the Contractor to maintain an acceptable room temperature during occupancy. . Telephone The Contractor shall provide two telephone lines and two telephones touchtone models in areas where touchtone service is available in all field offices for the exclusive use of the State personnel .
At least one phone shall be cordless .
These telephones shall be on a private line if available and shall be listed under State of Maine Maine Department of Transportation .
One telephone line shall have Call Waiting installed if available .
Each line shall have jacks installed at each end of the field office .
The Contractor shall be responsible for the installation charges and all reinstallation charges following suspended periods .
Monthly service and maintenance charges shall be billed by the telephone company directly to the Contractor .
During seasonal suspension periods the telephone company shall be notified to discontinue or suspend the services and the Contractor shall assume all charges .
Upon resumption of work the telephone service shall be reinstated .
The Contractor shall also provide a telephoneanswering device in all field offices where a telephone is provided capable of answering calls and recording incoming messages .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all maintenance costs for the answering device. . Broadband Connection In addition the contractor will supply one computer broadband connection modem lease and router .
The router shall have wireless access and be .n or .g capable and wireless .
The type of connection supplied will be contingent upon the availability of services i.e .
DSL or Cable Broadband .
It shall be the contractors option to provide dynamic or static IP addresses through the service .
The selected service will have a minimum downstream connection of .
Mbps and Kbps upstream .
The contractor shall be responsible for the installation charges and all reinstallation charges following suspended periods .
Monthly service and maintenance charges shall be billed by the Internet Service Provider ISP directly to the contractor . .
Method of Measurement Field office will be measured by the unit or lump sum for each building provided equipped and maintained satisfactorily . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of field office will be paid for at the contract unit price each or lump sum which payment shall be full compensation for furnishing erecting equipping maintaining furnishing electricity heating installing and maintaining toilet facilities and if necessary removing the buildings or office trailers .
Payment for these items will be made in parts the first payment of  to be made after the Contractor has supplied the building or office trailer and it has been approved .
The remaining payments shall be made at intervals as follows A second payment of  shall be made when onehalf of the anticipated work has been completed .
The final payment of the remaining  shall be made upon completion of the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Field Office Type A Each .
Field Office Type B Each .
Field Office Type C Each SECTION VACANT SECTION REST AREA FACILITIES Reserved SECTION STEPS .
Description This work shall consist of the construction of wooden steps precast concrete steps or castinplace concrete steps in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with dimensions and designs shown on the plans. . Materials Materials for the steps shall meet the requirements as specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Exterior Ready Mixed Paint .
Timber Preservative .
Precast Concrete Units .
Wood shall be wellseasoned spruce or pine Number dimension lumber .
Nails and hardware shall be galvanized .
Precast concrete steps shall conform to the specifications of precast units except as modified herein and shall be of the dimensions detailed on the plans or as otherwise approved .
Exposed surfaces shall have a rubbed finish as specified in Section .d .
Castinplace concrete steps shall conform to the requirements of Section Structural Concrete Class A. .
Wooden Steps Wooden steps shall be fabricated and fastened in accordance with standard commercial building practices .
After members have been cut to size the ends shall be soaked in an approved timber preservative .
Before assembling the steps all contact surfaces shall be painted coats of paint color to be designated .
The first coat of paint shall be thinned. . Precast Concrete Steps Precast concrete steps shall be placed on a compacted gravel bed with horizontal joints level and vertical joints plumb .
The foundation shall be prepared in advance of setting the steps by grading and compacting the aggregate subbase to the proper elevation .
The steps shall be set with a uniform tread width to match the finish grade of the slope .
All remaining excavated areas surrounding the steps shall be filled to the required grade with approved materials and thoroughly tamped. . Castinplace Concrete Steps Castinplace concrete steps shall conform to the applicable requirements of Section Structural Concrete . .
Method of Measurement Wooden steps and precast Portland cement concrete steps will be measured by each unit complete in place and accepted .
Castinplace concrete steps will be measured for payment by the cubic yard in place . .
Basis of Payment The accepted wooden steps will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete and accepted in place which price shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials labor and other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted quantity of precast concrete steps will be paid for at the contract unit price each complete in place which price shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including reinforcing steel .
Excavation and backfill will be measured and paid for as provided in Section Structural Excavation .
The accepted quantity for castinplace concrete steps will be paid for at the unit contract price per cubic yard complete in place which price shall be full compensation for furnishing and placing all materials including reinforcing steel .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Wooden Steps Each .
Precast Concrete Steps Each .
Castinplace Concrete Steps Cubic Yard SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNALS .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing all equipment necessary for the erection and operation of a traffic signal flashing beacon temporary traffic signal or modification of a traffic signal all in reasonably close conformity with the plans. . General All equipment shall be new unless otherwise specified .
Requests for substitution of any specified material shall be submitted in writing with all documentation specifications mill certifications etc .
in order to enable the Department to evaluate the proposal .
Substitutes for specified material may be accepted upon approval by the Fabrication Engineer .
Functionally any substitute shall give equal or better service than the specified material .
Existing signal equipment to be used shall be cleaned repainted and reconditioned as noted on the plans .
All equipment installation of equipment and other incidental work shall conform to the latest applicable provisions of NEC MUTCD NESC NEMA and the ITE Standards for traffic control equipment .
All work shall be done to the satisfaction of the Resident .
The meaning of specific terms shall be as defined in MUTCD NESC and the ITE Standards for traffic control equipment. . Materials Material shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Steel Conduit .
Nonmetallic Conduit .
Prewired Conduit .
Metallic Junction and Fuse Box .
Secondary Wiring .
Vehicular Signal Indications .
Pedestrian Signal Indications .
Signal Mounting .
Vehicular Loop Detectors .
Microwave Detectors .
Pedestrian Detectors .
Controllers .
Controller Cabinet .
Flasher .
Program Selection .
Contacts and Relays .
Conductors .
Aluminum Supports .
Aluminum Mast Arm and Bracket Arm .
Steel Supports .
Steel Mast Arm and Bracket Arm .
Anchor Bolts .
Wood Utility Pole . .
Paint Aluminum paint shall conform to AASHTO M Type II .
Green or yellow enamel paint as indicated on the plans shall meet or exceed the latest Federal Specification TT E. The color shall match Federal Color Standard Number . . Design and Fabrication The design and fabrication of traffic signal support structures shall meet the requirements of the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and interims thereto except as otherwise indicated within these specifications or on the contract plans .
All poles and mast arms shall be designed to withstand the maximum forces generated on the design configuration by the loads specified in Section of the Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals using the year mean recurrence interval for wind speeds .
Minimum design default values for these structures shall be Ir .
Cv .
Kz .
and G .. Cantilevered signal support structures with mast arms shall be classified as Fatigue Category III with Fatigue Importance Factors If of .
for Natural Wind Gusts and .
for TruckInduced Gusts unless specified otherwise on the contract plans .
If Category II is specified on the contract plans the Fatigue Importance Factors If shall be .
for Natural Wind Gusts and .
for TruckInduced Gusts .
If Category I is specified on the contract plans the Fatigue Importance Factors If shall be .
for Natural Wind Gusts and .
for TruckInduced Gusts .
Designing for fatigue induced by Galloping or Vortex Shedding is not required for traffic signal structures with mast or bracket arms .
All traffic signal structures with mast or bracket arms shall be equipped with an approved damping or energyabsorbing device .
After execution of the contract and before any shop work is commenced the Contractor shall submit sets of the manufacturers drawings of all poles proposed to furnished and erected under this Contract .
The drawings shall be of sufficient detail to indicate material and dimensional conformance with these specifications and the contract drawings .
Each drawing shall contain a reference to the design criteria and a certification that the design criteria have been met by the poles mast arms and associated hardware and fittings as submitted .
The certification shall be signed by a Licensed Professional Engineer under their official seal .
It is the intent of these specifications that the Contractor shall be fully responsible for the adequacy of the sizes wall thicknesses materials and connections of the poles mast arms and associated hardware and fittings .
Approval of the drawings by the Fabrication Engineer will signify only approval of the materials mounting heights and mast arm lengths .
Approval of deviations from the contract drawings andor specifications shall be requested in writing and approved by the Fabrication Engineer before being incorporated in the manufacturers drawings .
The Contractor shall furnish and install all electrical fittings pipe switches fuses and such other material necessary to install the equipment properly and securely .
All equipment shall conform to the applicable code and be of firstclass workmanship .
All electrical fittings shall be complete with weatherproof gaskets. . Miscellaneous Materials Span wire shall be minimum inch diameter minimum strand extrahigh strength galvanized steel wire .
Anchors shall be power installed and sized according to strain and soil conditions .
All hardware such as strand vise feedthru dead ends preforming guy grip dead ends and angle thimbleeye bolts shall be standard pole line hardware .
Guying of poles shall meet the requirements of Grade B Construction as defined in the NESC .
Guys shall be installed in line with the direction of pull .
Anchors shall be power installed so that the centerline of the anchor rod will be within of the line of the guy wire .
The holding capacity of the anchor shall be .
times the calculated load on the guy wire .
Guy wires shall be utility grade and the maximum working stress shall not exceed half of the maximum ultimate tensile strength of utility grade guy strand .
Where bedrock is encountered rock anchors shall be used .
Pipe standoffs for sidewalk anchors shall be galvanized steel pipe sized according to the offset distance from anchor to pole and shall be fitted with standard guying hardware .
Messenger wire shall be  inch diameter strand extrahigh strength galvanized steel wire unless otherwise specified .
LED lamps shall have a regulated power supply designed to electrically protect the diodes .
The lamp shall be watertight and sealed to eliminate contaminants .
The lamps shall be capable of operating at ambient air temperatures of F to F. Lamp life shall be a minimum of hours of continuous operation .
They shall be manufactured using the Allen Gap Technology .
Power consumption for inch indications including power supply shall not exceed w. . General Installation details will be shown on the plans .
The location shown for all equipment and vehicle detectors is approximate final locations will be determined in the field .
During installation all heads installed but not operating shall be covered or otherwise concealed from view .
The requirements of certain Sections of this specification may be waived for temporary traffic signals and traffic signal modifications if so noted on the plans. . Poles Wood poles shall be placed in the ground to a depth of of their overall length with a maximum deviation from the vertical of  inch in feet .
After each wood pole has been set in the ground and plumbed the space around the pole shall be backfilled with selected earth or sand free of rocks and other deleterious material placed in layers approximately inches thick .
Each layer shall be moistened and thoroughly compacted .
Strain poles pedestal poles and mast arm poles shall be erected in a vertical position with a maximum deviation from the vertical of  inch in feet using the leveling nuts provided with the anchor bolts .
Once the poles have been plumbed the top nuts shall be tightened by bringing the nut to a snug tight condition using the full effort of a worker using a spud wrench or compatible tool .
After all nuts have been brought to a snug tight condition each nut shall be tightened an additional onethird turn using an impact wrench torque wrench or large crescent wrench .
A minimum of two full threads shall project beyond the outside face of the nut .
Nuts and bolts other than anchor bolts shall also be tightened by the above procedure .
When foundation and anchor bolts have been installed by others the Contractor shall verify the anchor bolt dimensions at each location so that bases will be furnished with properly located and sized bolt holes .
Wires in poles shall be supported with a Kellumtype braided strainrelief grip attached to a J hook mounted inside the pole near the top . .
Foundations If noted on the plans the Department has completed an appropriate test boring program to evaluate subsurface conditions in the general vicinity of proposed foundations for traffic signal dual purpose and mast arm poles .
The associated boring logs as well as foundation requirements and any foundationspecific information are provided on the plans .
Unless another foundation type is specified on the plans foundations shall consist of castinplace reinforced concrete drilled shafts .
Drilled shafts shall not be permanently cased except for the top .
feet concrete shall be cast directly against the surrounding soil .
Supplier shall determine the Bending Moment Shear Force Torsion and Axial Load at the top of each mast arm or dual purpose pole foundation .
Foundation size diameter and length shall be based on Bending Moment and Torsion at the top of the foundation and determined by Supplier in accordance with Section .
Concrete Foundations .
In the absence of design requirements being provided on the plans the Contractor shall prepare and submit the foundation designs to the Department for approval .
Likewise the Contractor may propose an alternate shallow spread footing or drilled shaft design than that set forth on the drawings .
In either case any Contractorprepared foundation design shall meet the requirements set forth in Section .
Concrete Foundations. . Loop Detector and Loop Detector Wire Installation The detector unit shall be located in the controller .
No more than four loops shall be connected to a single detector amplifier .
Detectors shall be installed according to the manufacturers recommendation subject to approval .
Each detector shall be supplied complete with comprehensive installation instructions .
The pavement slot for wire shall be to inches below the finished surface and not closer than inches from the edge of pavement or the curb .
The rightangle corners of the pavement slot shall be chamfered to eliminate sharp bends in the loop wires .
Loop detector wire shall be number or number AWG copper conductors drawn through vinyl plastic tubing approximately  inch in diameter .
All pulse loop approach wiring shall be insulated red and shall be permanently marked A B C or D according to the approach guidelines in the controller cabinet .
All pulse loop presence wiring shall be insulated black and shall be permanently marked according to the presence guidelines in the controller cabinet .
All loop leadins shall be of the same conductor with no splicing .
The lead in from the amplifier to the beginning of the loop shall be shielded pairs as shown on the plans .
All debris and moisture shall be removed from the loop pavement slot before installation of loop wires .
The pavement slot shall be filled to the road surface with an approved sealing compound to form a waterproof bond with the pavement after installing the wire loop .
Detector conductors shall not be housed in the same jacket as the signal conductors. . Microwave Detector Installation The microwave detector shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
A fourconductor wire shall be installed from the microwave unit to the controller .
All angles and adjustment of patterns shall be the responsibility of the Contractor .
The detectors shall operate in either pulse or presence mode. . Span Wire Messenger Wire and Guy Wire All span wire messenger wire and guy wire installations shall be in conformance with the requirements of the Utility Companies when installed on Utility Facilities .
All span wire hanging traffic signals permanent or temporary will have a bottom tether wire to prevent the signal from excessive swinging All span wires messenger wires guy wires terminal boxes controller cabinets or any other metallic surface that might be contacted by people shall be bonded to ground .
All sidewalk guy wires and slant guy wires installed in a sidewalk area shall be equipped with fullround or halfround guy guards. . Conduit All conductors under roadways from the controller to the mast arm poles shall be inch schedule PVC. . Service Connection The Contractor shall furnish and install the necessary electrical service as directed by the Utility Company .
The Contractor shall make all arrangements for the service connection and be responsible for all charges incurred thereby .
Under no condition shall any equipment except that shown on the plans be installed on any Utility Facilities .
Traffic signal services shall have an automatic transfer switch such as a GENERLINK model MA S installed this will be required on traffic signals only not beacons or dynamic signs .
Whenever a service connection is to be made the Contractor shall contact the Utility Company involved and inform them of the location pole number and time proposed for the service connection .
The traffic cabinet shall be marked with an appropriate arc flash plaque or decal with the following information Flash hazard boundary Calcm hazard at inches PPE level Shock hazard when cover is off Limited approach boundary Restricted approach boundary The prohibited approach boundary This shall be located on the outside of the equipment and shall be visible weatherproof and fade resistant and not easily removed .
The Contractor shall be responsible for all outstanding bills for preliminary work done by the Utility Company during the installation of the traffic signal system to facilitate the service connection .
A service ground rod shall be installed if the service meter trim is not grounded .
The Contractor shall be responsible for grounding the system to OHMS or less .
The grounding shall be performed using a ground meter with reference grounds .
All testing will be done in the presence of the Resident .
All meter mounting devices shall be installed so that the meters will be upright plumb .
They shall be installed with the top of the meter not less than inches nor more than inches from the floor to the final grade .
Exceptions to this height requirement will be made where special permission has been given to install group or modular metering overall metering enclosures or polemounted meters .
Level grade shall be maintained for a minimum of feet in front of the meter enclosure to provide a safe working space .
In order to meet this requirement on uneven terrain as an option the Contractor may install a pressuretreated wood platform .
For any nonresidential industrial or commercial selfcontained meter socket the bypass requirements are single phase or amp single handle lever operated .
The Contractor shall meet all requirements and regulations of Utility Companies when installing equipment on their poles and for the service connection .
It is the responsibility of the Contractor to contact the appropriate Utility to determine their specific requirements. . Wiring The Contractor shall furnish and install sufficient cable and wire to operate the system properly as shown on the plans and as directed .
The following color code shall be used where possible Red Wire Red artery Orange Wire Yellow artery Green Wire Red side street Orange with Tracer Yellow side street Green with Tracer Green side street White and white with tracer Common for all signals and bond Blue All steady burning arrows Blue with Tracer Intermittent arrows Remaining Detectors and pedestrian signals The white wire and white wire with tracer shall be used for all common connections and it shall be continuously connected to ground at the controller .
There shall be no wire splices .
Connections shall be made on a terminal board inside a watertight galvanized steel or aluminum junction box or in an aerial terminal enclosure with protective cover rated for volts .
Spade type copper terminal ends shall be used to attach all conductors to terminals .
All exposed metal parts including service conduit and the controller cabinet shall be bonded and grounded .
Not more than conductors shall be brought to any one terminal .
Terminals shall be mounted to face the cabinet door .
The number and size of conductors required in each cable will be indicated on the plans. . Vertical Clearance Vertical clearances for vehicular and pedestrian heads shall be in conformity with the MUTCD .
All clearances shall be uniform among each type of head or mounting scheme .
Clearance for span wire mounted flashing beacon heads shall be a minimum of feet and a maximum of feet. . Painting Unless otherwise indicated all exterior parts of the following equipment shall be delivered to the project finished with green or yellow enamel Vehicular Signal Heads Pedestrian Signal Heads Pedestrian Push Button Detectors The outside of the steel controller cabinet shall be painted with aluminum paint .
The Contractor shall apply one coat of green enamel to all existing equipment designated on the plans to be painted .
The Contractor shall touch up all scratches on exposed surfaces of new equipment with matching enamel after the equipment has been installed .
All exposed signal parts to be painted shall be cleaned and shall be dry when the paint is applied .
No painting shall be done in damp weather nor when the air temperature is below F unless otherwise permitted .
The Contractor shall identify recently painted equipment with Wet Paint signs and shall be responsible for all claims for damages resulting from contact with wet paint surfaces. . Power Factor In the event that the equipment is of such design that the power factor is reduced below the requirement of the Utility Company the Contractor shall furnish and install without further charge all equipment necessary to restore the power factor to a satisfactory percentage .
Such equipment shall be accessible and shall not be mounted on the Utility Facilities. . Field Tests Before acceptance of the work the Contractor shall conduct the following tests on all traffic signal equipment and circuits by a licensed electrician .
The tests do not need to be performed in the presence of the Resident but the test results shall be recorded on the Traffic Signal Quality Control Check List and submitted to the Resident by the Contractor for acceptance .
The form shall be signed by the licensed electrician certifying that the signal equipment and circuits meet the requirements of section .. a. Continuity Each circuit shall be tested for continuity .
b .
Ground Each circuit shall be tested for grounds .
c. Megger Megger tests at volts DC shall be made on each circuit between the circuit and a ground .
The insulation resistance shall not be less than megaohms on all circuits except for inductive loop detector circuits which shall have an insulation resistance value of not less than megaohms .
d. Loop Inductance A loop test meter shall be used to determine that the inductance of the installed loop and leadin are within the tuning range recommended by the loop detector manufacturer .
e. Functional A functional test shall be made in which it is demonstrated that each part of the system functions as specified .
The functional test for each new or modified traffic signal and flashing beacon shall consist of not less than days of continuous satisfactory operation .
If unsatisfactory performance of the system develops the condition shall be corrected and the test shall be repeated until the days of continuous satisfactory operation is obtained .
The initial operation shall be made between A.M. and P.M. unless specified otherwise .
Before initial operation all equipment shown on the plans shall be installed and operable .
Initial operation of new or modified traffic signal systems shall be made only after all traffic signal circuits have been thoroughly tested as specified above .
During the test period all costs except electrical energy shall be the Contractors responsibility .
Functional tests shall start on any working day except Monday Friday Saturday Sunday or the day preceding a legal holiday .
Shutdown caused by a power interruption shall not constitute discontinuity of the functional test however the test shall continue after power is restored . .
Timing The controller shall be timed as noted on the plans .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident at least week in advance of their intention to initially operate the signals .
At the time of initial operation of the new signals the Contractor shall provide police protection from the local police department at the Contractors expense until the Contractor demonstrates to the Resident that the signal operates in conformance with the specification . .
Final Cleaning Up After all work has been completed the Contractor shall remove all barriers Wet Paint signs equipment and all debris which has accumulated during the work .
Unless otherwise specified in the plans the Contractor shall remove and deliver all unused signal equipment and wiring to the State of Maine Department of Transportation as directed by the Resident .
The Contractor shall notify the State Traffic Engineer as to time and date of such delivery .
Deliveries will be accepted Monday through Friday between the hours of A.M. and P.M. only .
Notification shall precede delivery by a minimum of hours . .
Documents The Contractor shall furnish two operation and maintenance manuals for all controller units auxiliary equipment vehicle detector sensor units control units and amplifiers .
Documents shall be delivered with the controller at the time of testing .
Each manual must include but need not be limited to the following a .
An explanation of the theory of operation including a functional description and a detailed circuit description .
b .
A schematic diagram of each unit .
A cabinet wiring diagram including all field wiring and pin locations and designations for all plug type connectors .
If any circuit changes are made in the field the changes shall be noted on the schematic diagrams .
c. A trouble shooting and preventive maintenance procedure including both field and bench trouble shooting analysis .
d. A parts list including a pictorial diagram showing the location and identification of each component on the chassis or circuit board .
e. A drawing of the controller cabinet interior showing the location of all shelves terminal blocks relays timers loop amplifiers .
In addition manufacturers warranties and guarantees for materials shall be delivered to the Resident before acceptance of the project . .
Method of Measurement Traffic signals traffic signal modifications interconnect wire video detection system traffic signal control system and flashing beacons will each be measured for payment by the lump sum in place .
Temporary traffic signals will be measured for payment by the lump sum satisfactorily installed operated and removed .
Pedestal poles strain poles combination poles and mast arm poles with mast arms will be measured by each unit .
Each loop detector installed connected to appropriate phases in the controller cabinet complete and operational will be measured by the unit .
Excavation in solid ledge rock for replacement of wood poles will be measured by the cubic yard .
The depth of measurement will be to the bottom of the pole and the diameter of measurement will be the pole diameter plus inches . .
Basis of Payment Traffic signal modifications traffic signals interconnect wire and flashing beacons will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing all materials both new and reused including but not limited to wood poles span wire tether wires backplates visors guys controllers vehicular heads pedestrian heads flashing beacons wiring cable pole risers LED lamps and all appurtenances and incidentals required for a complete functioning installation and for furnishing all tools and labor necessary for completing the installation .
Conduits junction boxes and foundations will be paid for under Section .
Pedestal poles strain poles combination poles and mast arm poles with mast arms will be paid for at the contract unit price each which payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing all materials tools and labor necessary to erect the poles .
Payment for temporary traffic signals shall include compensation for the removal of the system upon completion of the work .
All materials used for temporary traffic signals will remain the property of the Contractor .
Operating the controller by hand will be paid for under Section .
Payment will be made for each Loop Detector at contract price which will be full compensation for materials labor and equipment for each loop installed and fully operational .
Traffic signal control system will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing all materials including but not limited to local intersection traffic signal controller controller cabinets onstreet master controller supervisory PC software and all appurtenances and incidentals required for a complete functioning installation .
Video detection system will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing all materials including but not limited to video processing unit video cameras supervisory PC software and all appurtenances and incidentals required for a complete functioning installation .
Payment for excavation of solid ledge rock for the placement of wood poles will be made under Section .. Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Flashing Beacon at Lump Sum .
Traffic Signal Modification Lump Sum .
Temporary Traffic Signal Lump Sum .
Traffic Signals at Lump Sum .
Traffic Signal Control System Lump Sum .
Video Detection System Lump Sum .
Traffic Signal Loop Detector Each .
Interconnect Wire Between Lump Sum .
Mast Arm Pole Each .
Pedestal Pole Each .
Strain Pole Each .
Dual Purpose Pole Each SECTION GLARE BARRIER Reserved SECTION HIGHWAY SIGNING .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing new signs sign supports delineators Polyvinylchloride PVC Pipe and breakaway devices and removing relocating andor modifying existing signs and sign supports in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the plans. . General All equipment shall be new unless otherwise specified .
Requests for substitution of any specified material shall be submitted in writing with all documentation specifications mill certifications etc .
in order to enable the Department to evaluate the proposal .
Substitutes for specified material may be accepted upon approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
Substitutes shall give equal or better service than the specified material .
Where an existing system is to be modified the existing material shall be removed upgraded or disposed of as directed by the contract documents. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements specified in the following Sections of Division Materials Polyvinylchloride PVC Pipe .
Reflective Sheeting .
Demountable High Intensity Reflectorized Letters Numerals Symbols and Borders .
Aluminum Extrusions .
Aluminum Sheets .
Plywood .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineators .
Assembly Hardware .
Aluminum Supports .
Steel Supports .
Steel Hbeam Poles .
Anchor Bolts .
UChannel Posts .
Wood Sign Posts .
Paint for the edge and back of plywood and field coat paint for wood sign posts shall be an exterior grade dark green enamel conforming to Federal Specifications TTPb .
Materials shall meet the gradation requirements only of the following Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course .
Underdrain Backfill Material . . Sign Layout Drawings The Contractor shall submit sets of signface layout detail and scale drawings .
Fabrication of the signs shall not begin until the Contractor has received approval of these drawings .
The drawings shall contain complete detailed information and dimensions .
One set of drawings will be returned to the Contractor who will submit corrected drawings if required .
The drawings shall be detailed using the same units used on the plans. . Support Structures The design materials and fabrication of sign support structures and foundations shall meet the requirements of the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and interims thereto except as otherwise indicated within these specifications or on the plans .
Beam mounted signs and their supports shall be designed using wind speeds as determined from the year mean recurrence interval isotach map .
Minimum design default values for these structures shall be Ir .
Cv .
Kz .
and G .. Bridge cantilever and butterfly sign supports and associated signs and hardware shall be designed using the wind speeds as determined from the year mean recurrence interval isotach map as contained in the above referenced AASHTO Specifications .
Minimum design default values for these structures shall be Ir .
Cv .
Kz .
and G ..
Minimum fatigue design default values for cantilever butterfly sign support structures shall be classified as Fatigue Category I with Fatigue Importance Factors If of .
for Galloping .
for Natural Wind Gusts and .
for TruckInduced Gusts .
Bridge type sign support structures supporting variable message signs VMS shall also use this fatigue criteria in their design .
Foundations for sign support structures shall be as set forth on the plans and in Sections .
Concrete Foundations and .
Bridge Cantilever and Butterfly Support Structure Foundations .
Minimum fatigue design default values for bridge type structures without VMS shall be classified as Fatigue Category II with Importance Factors If of .
for Galloping .
for Natural Wind Gusts and .
for TruckInduced Gusts .
For sign supports mounted on bridge structures and approaches to bridge structures the mounting height shall be measured as the distance of the mounted signs center of gravity to one of the following For bridges over bodies of water above the prevailing water level or in the case of tidal waters above mean high tide .
For overpass structures above the lower roadway level .
For approach ramps above the average adjacent ground level if said ground level is more than feet below the base of the structure .
All cantilever and butterfly type sign support structures shall be equipped with an approved damping or energyabsorbing device .
For aluminum construction welding shall conform to the current edition of AWS Structural Welding Code Aluminum D. for aluminum construction .
After execution of the contract and before any shop work has commenced the Contractor shall submit sets of drawings and computations if prescribed below of all sign supports proposed to be furnished and erected under this contract .
The drawings shall be of sufficient detail to indicate material andor dimensional conformance with these specifications and the contract drawings and in the case of bridge cantilever and butterfly type sign supports shall be sufficiently detailed to show all structural significant details .
Approval for deviations from the contract drawings andor specifications shall be requested in writing and shall be approved by the Fabrication Engineer before being incorporated in the manufacturers drawings .
Requests for substitution of all specified material shall be submitted in writing with full documentation specifications mill certification etc .
enabling the Department to evaluate the proposal .
Sign support structures and anchor bolts shall meet the requirements specified in Section as well as the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
A Certificate of Compliance shall be provided for all material in accordance with the requirements of the General Statement of Division Materials .
a. Beam Mounted Signs The beams for beammounted signs shall be of the size material and shape designated in the contract documents .
The Contractor shall be fully responsible for the adequacy and design of any structural details not shown on the plans and each drawing shall contain a reference to the design criteria and a certification by a Professional Engineer licensed in accordance with the State of Maine regulations over their official stamp that said design criteria have been met by all parts of the structure designed andor detailed by the Contractor .
Approval of the drawings will signify only approval of the size material and length of the beam .
b. Bridge Cantilever and Butterfly Type Sign Supports The Contractor shall be responsible for the design of the support structure including its foundation .
Foundation design shall follow requirements of Sections .
Concrete Foundations and .
Bridge Cantilever and Butterfly Support Structure Foundations as well as this Section .
Signs shall be placed on the support structure such that the bottom edges are aligned unless written consent from the Fabrication Engineer is obtained while accommodating the minimum height requirement see Section ..
The Contractor shall use the Contract Drawings in order to determine the approximate horizontal placement of signs .
Installation shall be in accordance with Section .
Installation of Type I Signs .
The structure and foundation shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of .
times the sign area on each structure as shown on the contract documents .
This additional theoretical sign load shall be computed by For single signs increasing the sign widths an additional without changing the horizontal midpoint of the sign for multiple signs the sign widths shall be increased toward the outside sign edges .
The height shall be increased without changing the bottom edge elevation of the signs .
Bridge type structures shall be designed using either a trichord or fourchord truss structure as the overhead member .
Each of the two upright members supporting the bridge type overhead truss member shall consist of a minimum of two vertical legs .
A four chord truss configuration shall be required if the contract documents specify placing signs on both sides of the overhead structure two way traffic beneath structure .
Cantilever and butterfly type structures shall be designed using either a trichord or fourchord overhead truss member .
The upright member of a cantilever or butterflytype support structure shall have a maximum horizontal deflection of L where L is the length of upright member as determined from design loads calculated in accordance with the AASHTO Standard Specification for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals .
The base plates of uprights for all types of support structures shall have heavy hex leveling nut with hardened flat washers .
The distance between the bottom of the base plates to the top of the foundations shall not exceed twice the diameter of the anchor bolts .
Grout or other materials shall not be placed between base plates and the top of foundations .
In addition to the required detail drawings the Contractor shall submit copies of the design computations including fatigue considerations in accordance with Section Fatigue Design in the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and interims thereto for the entire structure .
Erection lifting points shall be clearly depicted on the shop drawing .
The computations shall be sufficiently detailed to allow the Engineer to check and approve the computations .
Computer printouts will not be accepted unless they meet the above criteria .
All plans and design calculations sign support structure and foundation shall be signed by a Professional Engineer licensed in accordance with the State of Maine regulations .
Approval will be based on the applicable provisions of Section .
Working Drawings .
Overhead sign panel mounting devices shall be designed accommodating the requirements of appropriate sign panel tilting included in this specification .
The design of this assembly shall include fastening sign panels directly to steel or aluminum members as further described in Section .
as well as other applicable Sections plans and specifications .
c. Bridge Overpass Mounted Sign Supports Overpass mounted sign supports shall be constructed to the configuration and sizes and of the material shown on the contract documents .
Approval will be based on the applicable provisions of Section .
Working Drawings .
Fastening sign panels directly to steel or aluminum members shall be as described in Section .
as well as other applicable Sections plans and specifications .
d. Breakaway Supports for Sign Supports Breakaway supports for sign supports will be required only for those locations indicated on the contract plans .
Breakaway supports approved by the Resident using loadconcentrating couplings shall be supplied for use at all locations designated as breakaway .
Breakaway Support Certification of both breakaway and structural adequacy shall be provided by the Manufacturer .
Design calculations or test data of production samples to support certification shall be provided .
Breakaway support components shall provide the same or greater structural strength as the support post or pole utilizing the breakaway device .
On multipole sign supports designated as breakaway each pole shall be equipped with breakaway hinges immediately below the lower edge of the sign .
Hinges relying on the friction between the hinge and the pole face for transmitting the design moment will not be accepted for use .
Breakaway devices are subject to the applicable provisions of Section . . Bridge Cantilever and Butterfly Support Structure Foundations If noted on the plans the Department has completed an appropriate test boring program to evaluate subsurface conditions in the general vicinity of proposed foundations for traffic signal dual purpose and mast arm poles .
The associated boring logs as well as foundation requirements and any foundationspecific information are provided on the plans .
Unless another foundation type is specified on the plans foundations shall consist of castinplace reinforced concrete drilled shafts .
Drilled shafts shall not be permanently cased except for the top .
feet concrete shall be cast directly against the surrounding soil .
Supplier shall determine the Bending Moment Shear Force Torsion and Axial Load at the top of each mast arm or dual purpose pole foundation .
Foundation size diameter and length shall be based on Bending Moment and Torsion at the top of the foundation and determined by Supplier in accordance with Section .
Concrete Foundations .
In the absence of design requirements being provided on the plans the Contractor shall prepare and submit the foundation designs to the Department for approval .
Likewise the Contractor may propose an alternate shallow spread footing or drilled shaft design than that set forth on the drawings .
In either case any Contractorprepared foundation design shall meet the requirements set forth in Section .
Concrete Foundations . .
Classification of Signs Sign sizes color and legend designs shall conform to these specifications the plans and MUTCD requirements .
The signs are classed according to the intended use as follows a .
Sign Type I guide signs shall consist of high intensity prismatic reflectorized sheeting or reflectorized demountable letters numerals symbols and border mounted on a high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting background adhered to a sign panel constructed of extruded aluminum planks .
b .
Sign Type I regulatory warning and route marker assembly signs shall consist of high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting letters numerals symbols and border on a high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting background adhered to a sign panel constructed of sheet aluminum .
c. Sign Type II guide signs shall consist of high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting letters numerals symbols and border on an high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting background attached to a sign panel constructed of plywood .
d. Sign Type II regulatory warning and route marker assembly signs shall consist of high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting letters numerals symbols and border on an high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting background adhered to a sign panel constructed of sheet aluminum or plywood . .
Fabrication of Type I Guide Signs a .
Panels The panels for this type sign shall be shopfabricated from aluminum planks to the sizes designated on the approved shop drawings .
Cut edges shall be true smooth and free from burrs or ragged breaks .
Flame cutting will not be permitted .
Bolt holes may be drilled to finished size or punched to finished size provided the diameter of the punched hole is at least twice the thickness of the metal being punched .
Fabrication of extruded aluminum sign planks including punching or drilling holes and cutting to length shall be completed before the metal degreasing and the application of the reflective sheeting .
The bolts required for fastening the extruded aluminum planks together shall conform to the designs used in standard commercial processes for the type of extruded aluminum panels to be used as approved .
All route shields shall be on an overlay aluminum sheet of .
inch minimum thickness and shall be in full color with reflective background they shall not have demountable numerals and borders .
b. Reflective Sheeting The high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting shall be applied to the extruded aluminum plank in accordance with the current recommendations of the sheeting Manufacturer .
The reflective sheeting shall cover the complete panel and shall not be trimmed to conform to the border .
The reflective sheeting shall overlap into the side recess of the individual planks .
There shall be no paint applied to the sign panels .
The surface of all completed sign panels shall be flat and free of defects .
Extruded aluminum molding shall be placed on the edges of the extruded panels as shown on the plans .
c. Text The design of upper and lower case letters numerals and symbols and the arrangement and spacing of texts shall be as provided on the plans and in conformance with the MUTCD and Standard Highway Signs .
Text for Guide Signs shall be composed of demountable letters numerals symbols and borders and shall be highintensity prismatic reflective sheeting .
The demountable text shall be applied to the panels by use of aluminum pop rivets in accordance with standard commercial processes as approved .
All demountable letters numerals symbols and borders shall be the same manufacturers make for the entire project .
Cutout highintensity reflective sheeting text shall be applied to the sign panel with a precoated adhesive backing . .
Fabrication of Type I Regulatory Warning and Route Marker Assembly Signs and Type II Sheet Aluminum Regulatory Warning and Route Marker Assembly Signs a .
Panels Sheet aluminum sign panels shall be shopfabricated to the size shown on the plans .
The corners shall be rounded to the indicated radius where shown .
Bolt holes may be drilled or punched to finished size provided the diameter of the punched hole is at least twice the thickness of the metal being punched .
Cut edges shall be true smooth and free from burrs or ragged breaks .
Flame cutting will not be permitted .
Punching or drilling of holes and cutting to size shall be completed before metal degreasing and the application of reflective sheeting .
b. Reflective Sheeting The high intensity prismatic reflective sheeting shall be applied to the sheet aluminum sign panels in accordance with the current recommendations of the sheeting Manufacturer .
The reflective sheeting colors shall conform to the MUTCD standard highway sign colors for each type of sign .
Surface of all panels shall be flat and free from defects .
c. Text The text for regulatory warning confirmation and route marker assembly signs shall be composed of High intensity prismatic reflective sheeting letters numerals symbols and borders or the silver letters may be formed by applying transparent ink to the reflective sheeting background where the silk screen process is used or other methods to form the text may be used when approved in advance . .
Fabrication of Type II Guide Signs and Type II Plywood Regulatory Warning and Route Marker Assembly Signs a .
Panels Fabrication of all sign panels from highdensity overlaid plywood shall be performed in a uniform manner .
All fabrication including cutting drilling and edge routing shall be completed prior to painting and application of reflective sheeting to the highdensity overlaid plywood .
Panels shall be cut to size and shall be plywood .
Panels shall be cut to size and shall be free of warping open checks open splits open joints open cracks loose knots and other defects resulting from fabrication .
Corners shall be left square .
The surface of all sign panels shall be flat .
The edge and back of the plywood shall be painted with an exterior grade dark green paint .
b. Blanks Sign blanks shall be cut to shape using a saw blade that does not tear plywood grain .
Holes shall be cleancut and uniform .
All cracks open checks open splits and other defects occurring on the edge surfaces shall be filled with a synthetic wood filler and sanded smooth prior to sealing and painting .
The sign blank edges shall be sealed using an approved sealerprimer .
The edges shall then be painted with an exterior grade dark green paint .
The surface shall not be painted before application of reflective sheeting .
Before applying reflective sheeting dirt or wax shall be removed by one of the following methods .
The surface shall be buffed lightly with solventsoaked steel wool fine or medium using organic solvents such as lacquer thinner xylol heptane benzene or naphtha and wiped dry with clean cloths . .
The panel shall be sanded lightly with finegrade paper cleaned with solvent and wiped dry using clean cloths .
c. Reflective Sheeting The High intensity prismatic reflective sheeting shall be applied directly to the cleaned highdensity surface in accordance with the recommendations of the reflective sheeting manufacturer .
d. Text The text for regulatory warning confirmation and route marker assembly signs shall be composed of cutout High intensity prismatic reflective sheeting letters numerals symbols and borders or the silver letters may be formed by applying transparent ink to the reflective sheeting background where the silk screen process is used .
Other methods to form the text may be used when approved in advance .
The design of the letters numerals and symbols the spacing of the text and the size and spacing of the border shall conform to the MUTCD and Standard Highway Signs . .
Installation of Type I Signs The sign locations shown on the plans are approximate exact locations will be determined in the field by the Resident .
Signs stockpiled before erection shall be stored in a vertical position and completely covered to avoid staining weathering and dirt accumulation .
a .
Sign Supports Poles for single and multiple support roadside signs shall be erected plumb using the leveling nuts supplied with the anchor bolts .
When signs are supported by more than one pole all poles shall be carefully aligned to avoid warping of the sign panel .
Bridge butterfly and cantilever type sign supports and their foundations shall be constructed assembled and erected in accordance with the manufacturers details as approved .
All horizontal supports spanning the roadway shall be level and shall have permanent camber as described in Section of the current edition of AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and interims thereto .
If at any time after their erection bridge butterfly or cantilever type sign supports are to remain for a period in excess of hours without the signs for which they were designed being in place suitable vibration damping devices approved by the Resident shall be installed until such time as the signs can be erected .
Bridgemounted sign supports shall be fabricated and assembled in accordance with the details as shown on the contract drawings and with Section .
Additionally if required to be painted bridgemounted sign supports shall be painted in accordance with Section .
Where aluminum surfaces are in contact with concrete or dissimilar metals the contacting surface shall be thoroughly coated with an approved aluminum impregnated caulking compound or the surfaces shall be separated by another approved material .
Before signs are attached aluminum sign supports shall be cleaned of all dirt and discoloration using methods recommended by the manufacturer .
b .
Sign Panels Extruded aluminum planks for sign panels shall be bolted together as indicated on the plans .
Extruded aluminum molding shall be placed on the edges of the extruded panels .
Sign panels shall be attached to the posts to provide the vertical and horizontal clearances from the roadway as indicated on the plans .
Sign panels on overhead structures shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of feet to the highest point of the roadway surface under the signs .
Sign panels on bridgemounted sign supports shall be installed with the bottom edge of the sign approximately inches above the bottom of the bridge beam .
Sign panels mounted over the roadway shall tilt in the direction of the approaching traffic in such a manner that the angle between the sign face and the roadway grade at the sign location shall be  . Groundmounted signs located to feet from the edge of shoulder shall form an angle of  between the approach roadway and the sign .
Signs located more than feet from the edge of the shoulder shall form an angle between the approach roadway and the sign face equal to   for each additional feet beyond feet .
Unless otherwise shown on the plans or designated by the Resident a minimum lateral clearance of feet shall be provided between the edge of the shoulder and the edge of any sign panel .
The elevation of the bottom edge of guide sign panels shall be feet above the elevation of the edge of the traveled way at the sign location or in case of a curb section feet above the elevation of the outer edge of the roadway unless authorized otherwise .
Signs located feet or more from the edge of traveled way shall be feet above the elevation of the edge of shoulder .
In the event that a second sign is to be placed under the main sign the elevation of the bottom edge of the principal sign shall be a minimum of feet above the outer edge of the traveled way or a minimum of feet above the edge of the traveled way in curbed sections the bottom edge of the second sign must be at least feet above the edge of the traveled way .
The elevation of the bottom edge of the regulatory warning and route marker sign panels shall be feet above the elevation of the edge of the pavement or edge of roadway in curbed sections at the sign location .
The elevation of the bottom edge of these sign panels above the elevation of the edge of the pavement on all crossing or connecting roadways shall be feet in rural areas or feet in urban areas .
Field conditions may require some variation in elevations as directed .
Each sign shall have at least two fasteners connecting it to the sign poles except signs of foot or less in height may have one fastener . .
Installation of Type II Signs The exact sign locations will be determined in the field .
Signs stockpiled before erection shall be stored in a vertical position and completely covered to avoid staining weathering and dirt accumulation .
When a steel pole is to be used before any shop work is commenced the Contractor shall submit sets of the manufacturers drawings of all standards and accessories proposed to be furnished and erected under this contract .
The drawings shall be of sufficient detail to indicate material andor dimensional conformance with these specifications and the contract drawings .
Each drawing shall contain a reference to the design criteria and certification that the design criteria have been met for current AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals bracket arms and associated hardware fittings and breakaway devices as submitted .
A Licensed Professional Engineer shall sign the certification under their official seal .
The drawings shall use the same units as found in the project plans .
It is the intent of these specifications that the Contractor shall be fully responsible for the adequacy of the sizes wall thickness materials and connections of the standards bracket arms and associated hardware fittings and breakaway devices .
Approval of the drawings will signify only approval of the materials mounting heightss and bracket arm lengths .
a .
Sign Supports Support posts for Type II signs shall be Uchannel posts weighing  pounds per foot for signs of less than .
ft in area inch by inch wood posts or two Uchannel posts weighing  lbft for signs of area .
ft to ft inch by inch wood posts for signs of area ft to ft and inch by inch wood posts for signs of area over ft .
All signs inches wide or wider shall be mounted on two wood posts .
Wood posts shall be set to a depth of feet .
Uchannel posts shall be set to a minimum depth of inches .
Leading signs less than ft on the apex of islands will be installed on Uchannel posts .
Solar powered sign mounted beacon arrays shall be mounted on galvanized steel poles .
Any signs installed onin an island shall be installed in a PVC sleeve of the appropriate size for the type of post being installed as shown in the standard details .
When it is necessary to set sign posts in bedrock holes shall be excavated to the required depth and size at the locations indicated on the plans .
The excavated material will be satisfactorily disposed of as directed and the posts set to the required depth .
When installing pressuretreated sign posts the cut end of the posts shall not be buried in the ground .
Backfilling around the posts shall be with excavated material unless the excavated material is considered unsatisfactory in which case the backfill shall be granular material conforming to the requirements of Section .
Granular Borrow .
Backfill shall be thoroughly tamped in layers not exceeding inches in depth .
When directed the area around the posts shall be loamed and seeded in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section and Section .
The Contractor shall be responsible for and shall repair all damage to underground drainage structures utilities or lighting conduits encountered during placing the posts .
b .
Mounting Type II signs shall be mounted using assembly hardware specified in Section .. PVC pipe shall be installed in all locations where sign posts are to be placed in paved islands and shall have an inside diameter of inches .
For sleeves that are to be utilized for Uchannel posts the PVC pipe shall have a minimum length of feet .
For sleeves that are to be utilized for wood posts the PVC pipe shall have a minimum length of feet .
Installation of the PVC pipe shall occur prior to paving of the island .
The pipe shall be placed at a depth so that the top of the pipe shall have no more than a inch reveal from finished surface pavement .
Once placed the pipe shall be backfilled around the outside diameter in layers that are thoroughly compacted and that do not exceed a depth of inches .
Once installed and backfilled the pipe shall be completely filled to the top of the pipe with material that meets the gradation requirements of Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course or Underdrain Backfill Material . .
Installation of Delineators Posts for delineators shall be erected so that posts and assemblies will be plumb .
All posts which are bent or otherwise damaged shall be removed and properly replaced .
Posts shall be driven feet from the outside edge of shoulder feet from the face of curb and feet from the normal edge of shoulder in guardrail sections .
A suitable driving cap shall be used and after driving the top of the post shall have substantially the same cross sectional dimensions as the body of the post .
When bedrock is encountered in erecting posts the depth to be drilled into the rock shall be determined by the Resident .
After the posts are driven delineators shall be mounted feet above the elevation of the edge of the traveled way .
In the event that a delineator is required to be installed on a bridge structure it shall be installed by use of a bracket as shown on the plans .
Sign support posts to be installed in the sleeve shall be plumbed and set in the material which shall be compacted or tamped around the post .
The posts shall be placed so that there is a foot maximum distance from the bottom of the retroreflective strip on the sign post to the paved travelway or shoulder surface .
For wooden posts only feet of the post shall be placed in the sleeve .
Other sign support post installation requirements shall be followed as per Section of the Standard Specifications . .
Installation of Breakaway Devices Breakaway devices shall be installed at locations indicated on the plans by an approved method .
Each sign and pole shall be carefully demounted for reinstallation at the same or at a new location .
Manufacturers installation information shall be provided on the project .
If required poles shall be cut in such a manner that no rough edges will remain .
No flame cutting will be permitted .
Cut edges on steel poles shall be painted in accordance with Section ..
Existing foundations shall be modified for attachment of the breakaway device as shown on the plans or approved .
Breakaway devices shall be attached to new foundations in accordance with the recommendations of the breakaway device manufacturer and as approved . .
Installation of Sign Mounted Beacon Array Beacons installation shall conform to current MUTCD standards .
Battery and solar assembly shall be of sufficient size to power sign for days without solar charging .
Batteries shall be gel cell or absorbed glass mat AGM batteries .
Solar panel shall be installed facing true south and degrees from vertical .
Connections to service shall be in accordance with section ..
The cabinet should be positioned on the side of the pole farthest from traffic .
Only aluminum and steel cabinets will be accepted .
All exposed wiring shall be in accordance with section .. All wiring shall be in accordance with section .c .
Beacon Array shall meet testing requirements outlined in sections .
a b and e. . Demounting and Reinstalling Existing Signs and Poles Signs and poles designated to be demounted and not designated to be reinstalled except those designated to be demounted by others shall be delivered to the Resident .
Existing sign panels poles foundations and sign hardware damaged because of the Contractors operations shall be replaced or repaired by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Resident .
New or relocated regulatory warning confirmation or route marker assembly signs shall be installed the same working day as the corresponding existing signs are demounted .
All new or relocated guide signs shall be installed within two working days of the time the corresponding existing sign is demounted .
Before the Contractor demounts any regulatory or warning sign they shall erect a similar easel mounted sign at a designated location .
The Contractor shall maintain this temporary sign in place until the permanent sign is installed .
Existing signs and poles shall be reinstalled in accordance with the applicable requirements for installing new signs and poles .
Relocated steel posts and clamps shall be field painted two coats after the posts have been erected .
The first coat shall be a zincdust primer paint meeting Federal Specification TTP B Type II .
The second coat shall be bright aluminum paint aluminumdust Type II Class brightness meeting Federal Specification TTA with a minimum of lbgal with vehicle meeting or exceeding Federal Specification TTV .
Scratches shall be touched up after the erection of the sign panels .
The touchup shall be with both primer and finish coat .
Sign pole surfaces to be painted shall be cleaned and dry when the paint is applied .
No painting shall be done in damp weather nor when the air temperature is below F. .
Method of Measurement Demount Signs Demount Poles Reinstall Signs and Reinstall Poles will be measured by each unit .
Bridge cantilever and butterfly type sign supports including the foundations support structures and sign panels complete in place as called for on the plans will be measured by each unit .
Bridge OverpassMounted Guide Signs including supports will be measured by each unit in place .
Breakaway devices per pole shall be measured by the unit complete in place and accepted .
The area of roadside guide signs regulatory warning confirmation and route marker assembly signs of the respective types will be measured by the area in square feet computed to nearest hundredth of a square foot as determined by the overall height multiplied by the overall width .
Aluminum poles for roadside guide signs Type I will be measured by the number of units of each diameter complete in place .
Steel Hbeam poles will be measured for payment by the pound determined from the nominal weight per foot for each size and the lengths as indicated on the plans .
Demountable reflectorized delineators will be measured by the number of units of each type in place .
All beacons installed on an individual postpole shall constitute a single installation .
Each installation will be measured for payment by the lump sum in place .
Basis of Payment The accepted demounted signs and demounted poles will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the respective item specified .
Such price will be full compensation for delivering signs and poles not to be reinstalled to a site designated by the Resident and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted reinstalled signs or reinstalled poles will be paid for at the contract unit price each .
Such price will be full compensation for furnishing new hardware when required and all incidentals necessary to complete the installations .
All signs or poles designated to be reinstalled that are damaged by the Contractor shall be replaced by the Contractor with new signs or poles conforming to the applicable Specifications at no additional cost to the State .
The accepted bridge cantilever and butterfly type sign supports will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the respective items .
Such price will be full compensation for the signs support structures foundations and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted guide signsoverpass mounted will be paid for at the contract lump sum price for the respective items which price will be full compensation for the signs supports and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted roadside guide signs and regulatory warning confirmation and route marker assembly signs will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
Such payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing signs assembly hardware and all incidentals necessary to complete the work .
The accepted aluminum poles will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the specified diameter complete in place .
The accepted demountable reflectorized delineators will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the type specified which payment will be full compensation for delineator and post or bridge rail mounting complete in place .
Payment for breakaway devices shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing the device all required pole cutting for adapting the pole to the breakaway device for adapting the concrete base to the breakaway device and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
Separate payment will be made at the respective contract unit prices for demounting and reinstalling the signs and the poles at multipole installations .
At singlepole installations separate payment will be made at the respective contract unit prices for demounting and reinstalling the poles only .
The accepted quantity of steel Hbeam poles will be paid for at the contract unit price per pound complete in place as shown on the plans or as designated .
Furnishing and installing posts for Type II signs including earth excavation and backfilling furnishing and placing assembly hardware backfilling material loam seed and other incidentals will not be paid for directly but will be considered incidental to the cost of the signs they support .
Sign Mounted Beacon Arrays will be paid for at the contract lump sum price which payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials including but not limited to the LED arrays flasher timer controller cabinets wiring pedestrian push buttons solar panels batteries radio devices radar units and all appurtenances and incidentals required for a complete and functioning installation and for furnishing all tools and labor necessary for completing the installation .
Array must meet all testing and connection requirements of this section All work PVC Pipe Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course Underdrain Backfill Material and other materials furnished to install backfill around and fill the sleeve in the island and place the sign post in the sleeve shall be incidental to the Section Items .
Excavating rock will be paid for as provided in Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Demount Guide Sign Each .
Demount Regulatory Warning Confirmation and Each Route Marker Assembly Sign .
Demount Pole Each .
Reinstall Guide Sign Each .
Reinstall Regulatory Warning Confirmation and Each Route Marker Assembly Sign .
Reinstall Pole Each .
Overhead Guide Sign STA X XXX Lump Sum .
Bridge OverpassMounted Guide Sign Lump Sum STA X XXX LeftRight XX .
Special Work No .
Lump Sum .
Cantilever Guide Sign STA X XXX Lump Sum .
Breakaway Device Single Pole Each .
Breakaway Device Multi Pole Each .
Roadside Guide Signs Type I Square Foot .
Bridge Guide Sign Type I Square Foot .
Regulatory Warning Confirmation and Square Foot Route Assembly Sign Type I .
Inch Aluminum Pole Each .
Inch Aluminum Pole Each .
Inch Aluminum Pole Each .
Inch Aluminum Pole Each .
Inch Aluminum Pole Each .
Inch Aluminum Pole Each .
Steel HBeam Poles Pounds .
Roadside Guide Signs Type II Square Foot .
Regulatory Warning Confirmation and Square Foot Route Marker Assembly Signs Type II .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineator Single Each .
Demountable Reflectorized Delineator Double Each .
Sign Mounted Beacon Array Lump Sum SECTION through VACANT SECTION MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing installing maintaining and removing traffic control devices necessary to provide reasonable protection for motorists pedestrians and construction workers in accordance with these Specifications the applicable provisions of Section .. Special Detours and the plans .
Traffic control devices include signs signals lighting devices markings barricades channelizing and hand signaling devices traffic officers and flaggers. . Materials All traffic control devices shall conform to the requirements of Part VI of the latest edition of the MUTCD and NCHRP guidelines .
All signs shall be fabricated with high intensity fluorescent retroreflective sheeting conforming to ASTM D Type VII Type VIII or Type IX prismatic .
All barricades drums and vertical panel markers shall be fabricated with high intensity orange and white fluorescent retroreflective sheeting conforming ASTM D Type VII Type VIII or Type IX prismatic .
Construction signs shall be fabricated from materials that are flat free from defects retroreflectorized and of sufficient strength to withstand deflections using a wind speed of mileshr .
All barricades cones drums and construction signs may be constructed from new or recycled plastic .
.. Signs Only signs with symbol messages conforming to the design of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be used unless the Resident approves the substitution of word messages .
..
Flashing Arrow Board Flashing Arrow Panels FAP must be of a type that has been submitted to AASHTOs National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP for evaluation and placed on the Maine Department of Transportations Approved Products List of Portable Changeable Message Signs Flashing Arrow Panels .
FAP units shall meet requirements of the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD for Type C panels as described in Section F. Temporary Traffic Control Devices .
An FAP shall have matrix of a minimum of lowglare sealed beam Par elements capable of either flashing or sequential displays as well as the various operating modes as described in the MUTCD Chapter F. If an FAP consisting of a bulb matrix is used each element should be recessmounted or equipped with an upper hood of not less than degrees .
The color presented by the elements shall be yellow .
FAP elements shall be capable of at least a percent dimming from full brilliance .
Full brilliance should be used for daytime operation and the dimmed mode shall be used for nighttime operation .
FAP shall be at least inches x inches and finished in nonreflective black .
The FAP shall be interpretable for a distance not less than mile .
Operating modes shall include flashing arrow sequential arrow sequential chevron flashing double arrow and flashing caution .
In the three arrow signals the second light from the arrow point shall not operate .
Flashing Arrow Panels FAP must be of a type that has been submitted to AASHTOs National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP for evaluation and placed on the Maine Department of Transportations Approved Products List of Portable Changeable Message Signs Flashing Arrow Panels .
FAP units shall meet requirements of the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD for Type C panels as described in Section F. Temporary Traffic Control Devices .
An FAP shall have matrix of a minimum of lowglare sealed beam Par elements capable of either flashing or sequential displays as well as the various operating modes as described in the MUTCD Chapter F. If an FAP consisting of a bulb matrix is used each element should be recessmounted or equipped with an upper hood of not less than degrees .
The color presented by the elements shall be yellow .
FAP elements shall be capable of at least a percent dimming from full brilliance .
Full brilliance should be used for daytime operation and the dimmed mode shall be used for nighttime operation .
FAP shall be at least x and finished in nonreflective black .
The FAP shall be interpretable for a distance not less than mile .
Operating modes shall include flashing arrow sequential arrow sequential chevron flashing double arrow and flashing caution .
In the three arrow signals the second light from the arrow point shall not operate .
The minimum element ontime shall be percent for the flashing mode with equal intervals of percent for each sequential phase .
The flashing rate shall be not less than nor more than flashes per minute .
All onboard circuitry shall be solid state .
Primary power source shall be volt solar with a battery backup to provide continuous operation when failure of the primary power source occurs up to days with fully charged batteries .
Batteries must be capable of being charged from an onboard volt AC power source and the unit shall be equipped with a cable for this purpose .
Controller and battery compartments shall be enclosed in lockable weathertight boxes .
The FAP shall be mounted on a pneumatictired trailer or other suitable support for hauling to various locations as directed .
The minimum mounting height of an arrow panel should be feet from the roadway to the bottom of the panel .
The face of the trailer shall be delineated on a permanent basis by affixing retroreflective material known as conspicuity material in a continuous line as seen by oncoming drivers .
A portable changeable message sign may be used to simulate an arrow panel display .
.. Other Devices Vertical panel markers shall be orange and white striped inches wide by inches high .
On the Interstate System vertical panel markers shall be orange and white striped inches wide by inches high .
Cones shall be orange in color at least inches high and retroreflectorized .
Retro reflection shall be provided by a white band of retroreflective sheeting conforming to Section .
inches wide no more than to inches from the top of the cone and a inch wide white band at least inches below the inch band .
Drums shall be of plastic or other yielding material and shall be approximately inches high and a minimum of inches in diameter .
There shall be at least two retroreflectorized orange and at least two retroreflectorized white stripes at least inches wide on each drum .
Metal drums shall not be used .
Warning lights and battery operated flashing and steady burn lights shall conform to the requirements Section .
Flashing Lights .
STOPSLOW paddles shall be the primary and preferred handsignaling device .
Flags shall be limited to emergencies .
The paddle shall have an octagonal shape and be at least inches wide with letters at least inches high and should be fabricated from light semirigid material .
Type I barricades shall be feet minimum feet maximum in length with an inch wide rail mounted feet minimum above the ground .
Type II barricades shall be feet in length with two inch wide rails and the top rail shall be mounted feet minimum above the roadway .
Type III barricades shall be feet in length with three inch wide rails and the top rail shall be mounted feet minimum above the roadway .
The cross members of all barricades shall be of  or  inch thick plywood or other lightweight rigid material such as plastic fiberglass or fiber wood as approved by the Resident .
The predominant color for supports and other barricade components shall be white except that unpainted galvanized metal or aluminum components may be used .
.. Portable Changeable Message Sign Trailer mounted Portable Changeable Message Signs PCMS must be of a type that has been submitted to AASHTOs National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP for evaluation and placed on the Maine Department of Transportations Approved Products List of Portable Changeable Message Signs Flashing Arrow Panels .
The PCMS unit shall meet or exceed the current specifications of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD F ..
The front face of the sign should be covered with a lowglare protective material .
The color of the LED elements shall be amber on a black background .
The PCMS should be visible from a distance of .
mile day and night and have a minimum  viewing angle .
Characters must be legible from a distance of at least feet .
The message panel should have adjustable display rates minimum of seconds per phase so that the entire message can be read at least twice at the posted speed the offpeak th percentile speed prior to work starting or the anticipated operating speed .
Each message shall consist of either one or two phases .
A phase shall consist of up to eight characters per line .
The unit must be capable of displaying at least three lines of text with eight characters per line .
Each character shall be inches high .
Each character module shall use at least a five wide and seven high pixel matrix .
The text of the messages shall not scroll or travel horizontally or vertically across the face of the sign .
Units shall automatically adjust their brightness under varying light conditions to maintain legibility .
The control system shall include a display screen upon which messages can be reviewed before being displayed on the message sign .
The control system shall be capable of maintaining memory when power is unavailable .
Message must be changeable with either a notebook computer or an onboard keypad .
The controller shall have the capability to store a minimum of userdefined and preprogrammed messages .
Controller and battery compartments shall be enclosed in lockable weathertight boxes .
PCMS units shall have the capability of being made programmable by means of wireless communications .
PCMS units shall also be fully capable of having an onboard radar system installed if required for a particular application .
PCMS primary power source shall be solar with a battery backup to provide continuous operation when failure of the primary power source occurs .
Batteries must be capable of being charged from a volt AC power source .
The unit must also be capable of being operated solely from a volt AC power source and be equipped with a cable for this purpose .
The PCMS shall be mounted on a trailer in such a way that the bottom of the message sign panel shall be a minimum of feet above the roadway in urban areas and feet above the roadway in rural areas when it is in the operating mode .
PCMS trailers should be of a heavy duty type with a inch ball hitch and a minimum of four leveling jacks at each corner .
The sign shall be capable of being rotated relative to the trailer .
The face of the trailer shall be delineated on a permanent basis by affixing retroreflective material known as conspicuity material in a continuous line as seen by oncoming drivers .
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS .. Responsibility of the Department The Department will provide Project traffic requirements such as allowable lane or road closures minimum temporary lane widths work zone speed limits timing limitations and allowable special detours and temporary structures .
No revisions to these requirements will be permitted unless the Contractor can thoroughly demonstrate an overall benefit to the public and a Contract Modification is approved .
.. Responsibility of the Contractor The Contractor shall provide continuous and effective traffic control and management for the Project that is appropriate to the construction means methods and sequencing allowed by the Contract and selected by the Contractor .
.. Submittal of Traffic Control Plan The Contractor shall submit at or before the Preconstruction Meeting a Traffic Control Plan TCP that provides the following information to the Department a .
The name telephone number and other contact numbers cellular phone pager if any of the Contractors Traffic Control Supervisor TCS .
The TCS is the person with overall responsibility for insuring the contractor follows the TCP .
and who has received Work Zone Traffic Control Training commensurate with the level of responsibility shown in the requirements of the Contract and who is empowered to immediately resolve any work zone traffic control deficiencies or issues .
Provide documentation that the Traffic Control Supervisor has completed a Work Zone Traffic Control Training Course AGC ATSSA or other industry recognized training and a Supervisory refresher training every years thereafter .
Submit training certificates or attendance roster that includes the course name training entity and date of training .
Traffic Control Training Course curriculum must be based on the standards and guidelines of the MUTCD and must include at a minimum the following .
Parts of Temporary Traffic Control Zone .
Appropriate use and spacing of signs .
Use and spacing of channelizing devices .
Flagging basics .
Typical examples and applications The Traffic Control Supervisor or designee directly overseeing physical installation adjustment and dismantling of work zone traffic control will ensure all personnel performing those activities are trained to execute the work in a safe and proper manner in accordance with their level of decisionmaking and responsibility .
b .
Proposed construction phasing or sequencing that reasonably minimizes traffic impacts .
The Contractor shall conduct the Work such that traffic delays do not exceed minutes unless longer periods are authorized by the Department .
The Contractor shall provide advance signing to warn motorists of expected traffic backups or queues .
c. A written narrative andor plan explaining how traffic and pedestrians will be moved through the Project Limits including transitions during the change from one phase of construction to the next as applicable .
d. Temporary traffic control treatments at all intersections with roads rail crossings businesses parking lots pedestrian ways bike paths trails residences garages farms and other access points as applicable .
e. A list of all Contractor or Subcontractor certified flaggers to be used on the Project together with the number of flaggers which will be used for each type of operation that flagging is needed .
If the Contractor is using a flagging Subcontractor then the name and address of the Subcontractor may be provided instead of a list of flaggers .
f. A procedure for notifying the Resident local emergency officials and local government officials including the name and phone numbers of such officials whenever significant traffic impacts are anticipated or occur and the plan for removing all lane restrictions in case of emergency or significant traffic impact .
For a related provision see Section .. Project Specific Emergency Planning .
g. A description of any special detours including provisions for constructing maintaining signing and removing the detour or detours including all temporary bridges and accessory features and complete restoration of the impacted land .
h. The maximum length of requested contiguous lane closure .
The Contractor shall not close excessive lengths of traffic lane to avoid moving traffic control devices .
i .
The proposed temporary roadway surface conditions and treatments .
The Contractor shall provide an adequate roadway surface at all times taking into account traffic speed volume and duration .
j .
The coordination of appropriate temporary items drainage concrete barriers barrier end treatments impact attenuators and traffic signals with the TCP .
k. The plan for unexpected nighttime work the contractor shall provide a list of emergency nighttime lighting equipment and safety personnel available onsite or have the ability to have them on site within an hour of the time of need .
l. The plan for meeting any project specific requirements contained in special provision andor m. The lighting plan if night work is anticipated .
The Department will review the TCP for completeness and conformity with Federal requirements Contract provisions the current edition of the MUTCD and Department policy and procedures .
The Department will review and provide comments to the Contractor within days of receipt of the TCP .
No review or comment by the Department or any failure to review or comment shall operate to absolve the contractor of its responsibility to design and implement the plan in accordance with the Contract or to shift any responsibility to the Department .
If the TCP is determined by the Department to be operationally ineffective the Contractor shall submit modifications of the TCP to the Department for review and shall implement these changes at no additional cost to the Contract .
Nothing in this Section shall negate the Contractors obligations set forth in Section Indemnification Bonding and Insurance .
The creation and modification of the TCP will be considered incidental to the related items .
.. General Prior to starting any work on any part of the project adjacent to or being used by the traveling public the Contractor shall install the appropriate traffic control devices in accordance with the plans specifications and the latest edition of Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices Part VI .
The Contractor shall continuously maintain the traffic control devices in their proper position and they shall be kept clean legible and in good repair throughout the duration of the work .
If notified that the traffic control devices are not in place or not properly maintained the Contractor may be ordered to immediately suspend work until all deficiencies are corrected .
No equipment or vehicles of the Contractor their subcontractors or employees engaged in work on this contract shall be parked or stopped on lanes carrying traffic or on lanes or shoulders adjacent to lanes carrying traffic at any time except as required by ongoing work operations .
Contractor equipment or vehicles shall never be used to stop block or channelize traffic .
The Contractor shall not store material or park equipment within feet of the edge of the established travel lanes .
Equipment parked overnight between and feet of the edge of the travel lane shall be placed behind positive barriers if feasible or clearly marked by channelizing devices or other reflective devices .
Channelization devices shall include Vertical Panel Markers Barricades Cones and Drums .
These devices shall be installed and maintained at the spacing determined by the MUTCD through the work area .
Channelization devices consisting of barricades or drums at a maximum spacing of feet shall be used in guardrail areas when neither the existing guardrail nor the new guardrail is in place .
The Contractor shall maintain existing guardrails andor barriers until removal is necessary for construction .
The Contractor shall use a temporary barrier or appropriate channelizing devices while the guardrails andor barriers are absent .
Permanent guardrails and barriers shall be installed as soon as possible to minimize risk to the public .
All excavation areas adjacent to the roadway shall be channelized continuously in both directions for the length of the project in all areas where the centerline strip is not effective in accordance with the latest edition of the MUTCD .
Where the roadway is adjacent to an area being excavated a minimum foot shoulder should be maintained and the effective slope of the earth excavation beyond the foot shoulder shall not be steeper than a  horizontal to vertical .
The effective slope of rock excavation shall not be steeper than horizontal to vertical beyond the foot shoulder .
In the case of cuts over feet deep an earth berm or other approved barrier shall be placed between the travel lane and the excavated area .
In this instance travel speeds shall be limited by specific advisory signing to miles per hour in all cases .
When excavation does not leave sufficient usable widths to maintain twoway traffic as provided in Section .
Maintenance of Work onelane traffic controlled by a traffic signal or continuous flagging may be considered .
Closely spaced vertical panels drums or other channelizing devices shall be used on any of these types of areas that are left exposed for short durations .
When paving operations or shoulder grading leave a inch or less exposed vertical face at the edge of the traveled way channelization devices shall be placed feet outside the edge of the pavement at intervals not exceeding feet and a inch by inch W Low Shoulder sign shall be placed at a maximum spacing of  mile .
When paving operations or shoulder grading leave greater than a inch exposed vertical face at the edge of the traveled way the Contractor shall place shoulder material for a width of at least feet to meet the pavement grade and place channelizing devices as above before the lane is opened to traffic .
Special Detours and temporary structures if used shall meet applicable AASHTO standards including curve radii and grade .
..
Installation of Traffic Control Devices All traffic control devices shall be in conformance with NCHRP requirements and installed as per manufactures recommendations .
Portable signs shall be erected on temporary sign supports approved crashworthy devices so that the bottom of the sign is either inches or greater than feet above the traveled way .
Postmounted signs shall be erected so the bottom of the sign is no less than feet above the traveled way and feet above the traveled way in business commercial and residential areas .
Postmounted signs must be erected so that the sign face is in a true vertical position .
All signs shall be placed so that they are not obstructed in any manner and immediately modified to ensure proper visibility if obstructed .
Signs may be mounted lower or higher to fit the situation when authorized by the Resident .
Cones shall be either weighted or nailed .
Tires will not be allowed as weights .
Vertical panel markers shall be mounted with the top at least feet above the traveled way .
Drums shall not be weighted on the top .
Drain holes shall be provided to prevent water from accumulating in the drums .
Drums may be weighted with up to inches of loose dry sand .
The Contractor shall operate and maintain the flashing arrow board unit and trailer and shall continuously supply fuel and lubrication for dependable service during the life of the contract .
The units shall remain in continuous night and day service at locations designated until the Resident designates a new location or discontinuance of service .
The Contractor shall maintain the devices in proper position and clean them as necessary .
Maintenance shall include the covering and uncovering of all signs when no longer applicable even if for a very short duration .
The sign shall be considered adequately covered when no part of the sign face is visible either around or through the covering .
The Contractor shall replace damaged traffic control devices with devices of acceptable quality as directed by the Resident .
.. Traffic Control The Contractor shall provide a minimum roadway width of feet for twoway traffic and feet for oneway traffic .
The existing travel way width shall be maintained to the maximum extent practical .
Vertical panel markers drums cones or striping shall be used to clearly delineate the roadway through the construction area .
Twoway traffic operation shall be provided at all times that the Contractor is not working on the project .
One way traffic shall be controlled through work areas by flaggers utilizing radios field telephones or other means of direct communication .
The traffic control devices shall be moved or removed as the work progresses to assure compatibility between the uses of the traffic control devices and the traffic flow .
Traffic control devices that become unnecessary shall be immediately removed from use .
Pavement markings shall be altered as required to conform to the existing traffic flow pattern .
Repainting of pavement marking line if required to maintain the effectiveness of the line shall be considered maintenance of traffic control devices .
No separate payment will be made .
Inappropriate existing pavement markings shall be removed whenever traffic is rerouted and temporary construction pavement markings shall be placed .
Obliteration and removal of nonapplicable markings and placement of temporary construction pavement markings shall be considered maintenance of traffic control devices and will be paid for under the appropriate Contract item .
Traffic changes shall not be made unless there is sufficient time equipment materials and personnel available to complete the change properly before the end of the workday .
This provision will not be required when traffic is rerouted for brief periods during daylight hours and the route can be clearly defined by channelizing devices or flaggers or both. . Flaggers The Contractor shall furnish flaggers as required by the TCP or as otherwise specified by the Resident .
All flaggers must have successfully completed a flagger test approved by the Department and administered by a Departmentapproved FlaggerCertifier who is employing that flagger .
All flaggers must carry an official certification card with them while flagging that has been issued by their employer .
Flaggers shall wear safety apparel meeting ANSI Class risk exposure that clearly identifies the wearer as a person and is visible at a minimum distance of ft and shall wear a hardhat with retroreflectivity .
For nighttime conditions Class apparel meeting ANSI shall be worn along with a hardhat with retroreflectivity .
Retroreflective or flashing SLOWSTOP paddles shall be used and the flagger station shall be illuminated to assure visibility in accordance with Flagger stations shall be located far enough in advance of the workspace so that approaching road users will have sufficient distance to stop at the intended stopping point .
While flagging the flagger should stand either on the shoulder adjacent to the traffic being controlled or in the closed lane .
At a spot obstruction with adequate sight distance the flagger may stand on the shoulder opposite the closed sections to operate effectively .
Under no circumstances shall the flagger stand in the lane being used by moving traffic or have their back to oncoming traffic .
The flagger should be clearly visible to approaching traffic at all times and should have a clear escape route .
When conditions do not allow for proper approach sight distance of a flagger or storage space for waiting vehicles additional flaggers shall be used at the rear of the backlogged traffic or at a point where approaching vehicles have adequate stopping sight distance to the rear of the backlogged traffic .
All flagger stations shall be signed even when in close proximity .
The signs shall be removed or covered when flagger operations are not in place even if it is for a very short duration .
Flaggers shall be provided as a minimum a minute break every hours and a minute or longer lunch period away from the work station .
Flaggers may only receive unpaid break per day all other breaks must be paid .
Sufficient certified flaggers shall be available onsite to provide for continuous flagging operations during break periods .
If the flaggers are receiving the appropriate breaks breaker flaggers shall be paid starting hours after the work begins and ending hours before the work ends .
A maximum of breaker per flaggers will be paid .
breaker flagger for to flaggers breaker flaggers for to flaggers etc .
If a flagger station is manned for hours or more then  hour for lunch will be deducted from billable breaker flagger hours. . Traffic Officers Traffic officers will be uniformed police officers . .
Warning Lights Warning lights shall be installed at locations designated by the Resident before any work is done on the portions of roadway being used by traffic .
Upon installation all warning lights shall remain in continuous operation during the life of the project unless otherwise authorized by the Resident .
When a suitable volt AC power service source is available within feet of the designated warning light location power operated flashing lights shall be installed .
Two alternately flashing lamps shall be mounted approximately inches above the sign spaced approximately inches apart .
When a suitable volt AC power service source is not available battery operated flashing lights may be erected .
Four flashing lamps shall be mounted approximately inches above the sign spaced approximately inches apart .
The power service connections shall be installed to the satisfaction of both the power company and the Resident .
The Contractor shall make all necessary arrangements for the power service connections and be responsible for all charges incurred thereby including power charges .
The Contractor shall also be responsible for all outstanding bills from the electric power company for preliminary work done by the electric company for the power service connection .
When batteries are required for battery operated flashing lights they shall be provided and replaced by the Contractor as necessary .
.. Rumble Strip Crossing When lane shifts or lane closures require traffic to cross a permanent longitudinal rumble strip for calendar days or less the Contractor shall install warning signs that read RUMBLE STRIP CROSSING with a supplemental Motorcycle Plaque WP .
When lane shifts or lane closures require traffic to cross a permanent longitudinal rumble strip for more than calendar days the Contractor shall pave in the rumble strips in the area that traffic will cross unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
Rumble strips shall be replaced prior to the end of the project when it is no longer necessary to cross them .
.. Daylight Work Times Unless otherwise described in the Contract the Contractor is allowed to commence work and end work daily according to the SunriseSunset Table at httpwww.sunrisesunset.comusaMaine.asp .
If the Project town is not listed the closest town on the list will be used as agreed at the Preconstruction Meeting .
Any work conducted before sunrise or after sunset will be considered Night Work .
.. Night Work When Night Work occurs either scheduled or unscheduled the Contractor shall provide and maintain lighting on all equipment at all work stations and all flagger stations .
The lighting facilities shall be capable of providing light of sufficient intensity to permit good workmanship safety and proper inspection at all times .
The lighting shall be cut off and arranged on stanchions at a height that will provide perimeter lighting for each piece of equipment and will not interfere with traffic including commercial vehicles approaching the work site from either direction .
The Contractor shall have available portable floodlights for special areas .
The Contractor shall utilize padding shielding or other insulation of mechanical and electrical equipment if necessary to minimize noise and shall provide sufficient fuel spare lamps generators etc .
to maintain lighting of the work site .
The Contractor shall submit as a subset of the Traffic Control Plan a lighting plan at the Preconstruction Conference showing the type and location of lights to be used for night work .
The Resident may require modifications be made to the lighting set up in actual field conditions .
Prior to beginning any Night Work the Contractor shall furnish a light meter for the Residents use that is capable of measuring the range of light levels from to footcandles .
Horizontal illumination for activities on the ground shall be measured with the photometer parallel to the road surface .
For purposes of roadway lighting the photometer is placed on the pavement .
Vertical illumination for overhead activities shall be measured with the photometer perpendicular to the road surface .
Measurements shall be taken at the height and location of the overhead activity .
Night Work lighting requirements Mobile Operations For mobiletype operations each piece of equipment paver roller milling machine etc will carry indirect i.e .
balloon type lights capable of producing at least foot candles of lighting around the work area of the equipment .
Fixed Operations For fixedtype operations flaggers curb bridge pipes etc .
direct i.e .
tower lighting will be utilized capable of illuminating the work area with at least foot candles of light .
Hybrid Operations For hybridtype operations guardrail sweeping Inslope excavation etc .
either direct or indirect lighting may be utilized .
The chosen lights must be capable of producing at least footcandles of light around the work area of the equipment Inspection Operations Areas required to be inspected by the Department will require a minimum of footcandles of lighting .
This may be accomplished through direct or indirect means .
All workers shall wear safety apparel labeled as meeting the ANSI standard performance for Class risk exposure .
The Contractor shall apply inch wide retroreflective tape with alternating red and white segments to outline the front back and sides of construction vehicles and equipment to define their shape and size to the extent practicable .
Pickup trucks and personal vehicles are exempt from this requirement .
The Contractor shall furnish approved signs reading Construction Vehicle Keep Back to be used on trucks hauling to the project when such signs are deemed necessary by the Resident .
The signs shall be a minimum of inches by inches Black and Orange ASTM D Type VII Type VIII or Type IX prismatic .
All vehicles used on the project including pickup trucks and personal vehicles shall be equipped with amber flashing lights visible from both front and rear or by means of single approved type revolving flashing or strobe lights mounted so as to be visible  .
The vehicle flashing system shall be in continuous operation while the vehicle is on any part of the project .
The Resident or any other representative of the Department reserves the right to suspend the work at any time and request a meeting to discuss violations and remedies .
The Department shall not be held responsible for any delay in the work due to any suspension under this item .
Failure to follow the approved Lighting Plan will result in a Traffic Control violation .
Payment for lighting vehicle mounted signs and other costs accrued because of night work will not be made directly but will be considered incidental to the related contract items . .
Method of Measurement Signs and panel markers will be measured by the square foot for all signs authorized and installed .
Flashing arrow boards portablechangeable message signs and flashing and steady burn lights will be measured by each unit authorized and installed on the project .
Barricades drums and cones will be measured by each unit authorized .
No additional payment will be made for devices that require replacement due to poor condition or inadequate retroreflectivity .
The accepted quantity of traffic officer and flagger time will be the number of hours the designated station is occupied .
The number of hours authorized for payment will be measured to the nearest  hour .
Maintenance of traffic control devices will be measured by the calendar day or as one lump sum for all authorized and installed traffic control devices .
Warning lights will be measured by the group of lights furnished . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of signs and panel markers will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
Such payment will be full compensation for furnishing and installing all signs sign supports and all incidentals necessary to complete the installation of the signs .
The accepted quantity of flashing arrow boards portablechangeable message signs barricades battery operated flashing and steady burn lights drums and cones will be paid for at the contract unit price each for the actual number of devices authorized furnished and installed .
Such payment shall be full compensation for all incidentals necessary to install and maintain the respective devices .
Failure by the contractor to follow the Contracts Special Provisions and Standard Specification andor the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices MUTCD andor the Contractors own Traffic Control Plan will result in a violation letter and result in a reduction in payment as shown in the schedule below .
The Resident or any other representative of the Department reserves the right to suspend the work at any time and request a meeting to discuss violations and remedies .
The Department shall not be held responsible for any delay in the work due to any suspension under this item .
Any reduction in payment under this Special Provision will be in addition to forfeiting payment of maintenance of traffic control devices for that day .
ORIGINAL CONTRACT AMOUNT From Up to and Amount of Penalty Damages per Violation More Than Including st nd rd Subsequent and more ..
Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices Payment by Calendar Day Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices will be paid for at the contract unit price per calendar day for each calendar day that the Contractor maintains traffic as specified herein .
Such payment will be full compensation for moving devices as many times as necessary for replacing devices damaged lost or stolen and for cleaning maintaining and removing all devices used for traffic control including replacing temporary pavement marking lines .
The contract unit price per calendar day for Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices shall be full payment each day for such maintenance encompassing all areas of the contract regardless of whether or not the work areas or projects are geographically separated .
Payment by Lump Sum Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices will be paid at the contract lump sum price .
Such payment will be full compensation all days that the Contractor maintains traffic as specified herein and for moving devices as many times as necessary for replacing devices damaged lost or stolen and for cleaning maintaining and removing all devices used for traffic control including replacing temporary pavement marking lines .
The contract lump sum price for Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices shall be full compensation for all days for such maintenance encompassing all areas of the contract regardless of whether or not the work areas or projects are geographically separated .
.. Other Items The accepted quantities of flagger hours will be paid for at the contract unit price per hour for each flagging station occupied excluding lunch breaks and for each approved breaker flagger .
Overtime hours as reported on the certified payrolls will be paid an additional of the bid price for ..
The computation and additional payment for overtime hours will occur during the project closeout process and will be paid as additional hours of .
to the nearest  hour .
The contract unit price shall be full compensation for hiring transporting equipping supervising and the payment of flaggers and all overhead and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
There will be no payment made under any pay items after the expiration of the adjusted total contract time .
The accepted quantities of traffic officer hours will be paid for at the contract unit price per hour for each station occupied with no additional payment for overtime .
This price shall be full compensation for supplying uniformed officers with police cruisers and all incidentals necessary to complete the work including transportation equipment and supervision .
The accepted quantities of warning lights will be paid for at the contract unit price per group complete in place including the necessary power and remaining in operation during active work of the project or as otherwise directed .
Upon completion of the work the lamps fixtures and the framework required to properly mount the lamps shall remain the property of the Contractor .
Payment for temporary pavement marking lines and pavement marking removal will be made under the respective pay item in Section Pavement Markings .
Payment for temporary traffic signals will be made under Section Traffic Signals .
There will be no payment made under any pay items after the expiration of the adjusted total contract time .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Flashing Arrow Each .
Type I Barricade Each .
Type II Barricade Each .
Type III Barricades Each .
Battery Operated Light Each .
Drum Each .
Cone Each .
Construction Signs Square Foot .
Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices Calendar Day .
Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices Lump Sum .
Warning Lights Group .
Flaggers Hour .
Traffic Officers Hour .
PortableChangeable Message Sign Each SECTION POLYSTYRENE PLASTIC INSULATION .
Description This work shall consist of furnishing and installing a polystyrene plastic insulating layer at locations designated on the plans in accordance with these specifications. . General Insulating material shall be extruded polystyrene insulating board conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M. Pegs shall be hard wood approximately inches by  inch round pointed on one end . .
Preparation of Foundation The insulating boards shall be placed on a compacted layer of granular material graded to a tolerance of  inch above or below the required grade and cross section .
The surface shall be free of rocks that would cause damage to the insulating boards .
The type and thickness of the granular material will be as shown on the plans . .
Placing Insulating Boards The insulating boards shall be secured to the ground with pegs placed at each corner or where directed by the Resident and driven flush with the surface of the insulating board .
Joints between the insulating boards shall be staggered .
The openings in all joint shall be kept to a minimum . .
Placing Backfill After the insulating boards have been placed granular material shall be placed using care to avoid pushing or puncturing the boards .
The depth of the first layer of aggregate subbase sand shall not be less than inches loose measure .
The aggregate subbase sand shall be spread with a crawler type bulldozer of not more than lbft ground contact pressure or with other approved equipment but not supported directly on the insulating boards .
Trucks and other heavy construction equipment shall not be operated directly on the insulating boards .
The type and thickness of granular material will be shown on the plans. . Compaction Compaction of the first layer of aggregate subbase sand shall be by vibratory methods to the satisfaction of the Resident .
After the first layer has been compacted normal construction practices may be followed providing no loads are placed on the area that produce more than lbft ground contact pressure. . Protection of Polystyrene Since gasoline oil heat and sunlight will damage polystyrene all precautions shall be taken to prevent them from damaging the insulating board .
The insulating boards shall not be stored in sunlight for more than one day . .
Method of Measurement Polystyrene plastic insulation will be measured by the square yard in place . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantities of polystyrene plastic insulation will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete in place .
Payment shall be full compensation for and for furnishing and placing the insulating boards of pegs .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
inch Polystyrene Plastic Insulation Square Yard .
 inch Polystyrene Plastic Insulation Square Yard .
inch Polystyrene Plastic Insulation Square Yard .
inch Polystyrene Plastic Insulation Square Yard SECTION VACANT SECTION ELECTRICAL WORK Reserved SECTION TEMPORARY SOIL EROSION AND WATER POLLUTION CONTROL .
Responsibility of the ContractorPrepare and Follow Plan The Contractor shall provide continuous and effective temporary soil erosion and water pollution control for the Project that is appropriate to the construction means methods and sequencing allowed by the Contract and selected by the Contractor .
To do so the Contractor shall prepare and submit a Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Plan SEWPCP and properly implement its approved SEWPCP .
The Contractor shall have its SEWPCP approved perform a preconstruction field review and install and certify initial controls before commencing any Work which could disturb soils or impact water quality .
If the Contractor properly implements its approved SEWPCP then any Work required in excess of that required by the SEWPCP will be Extra Work any Delay resulting from any such excess Work will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay and the Contractor will not be responsible for damages relating to insufficient soil erosion and water pollution control including the cost of all environmental enforcement actions penalties or monetary settlements assessed any environmental regulatory entity and all costs incurred by or through the Department .
If the Contractor fails to prepare submit or seek approval of a SEWPCP or fails to properly implement its approved SEWPCP then the Department may suspend all Work the Department may withhold all Progress Payments or any portion thereof until the Contractor remedies all deficiencies the Department may remedy deficiencies with Departmental or contracted forces and deduct the cost thereof from payments otherwise due the Contractor any delay resulting from such failure or noncompliance will be a Nonexcusable Delay and the Contractor will be responsible for all damages arising from or related to such failure or non compliance including the cost of all environmental enforcement actions penalties or monetary settlements assessed by any environmental regulatory entity and all costs incurred by or through the Department including legal and consulting fees. . Submittal and Approval of the SEWPCP Within calendar days of Contract Execution the Contractor must submit two copies of its SEWPCP to the Resident .
Within days of receipt the Department will determine if the SEWPCP is in accordance with the Contract requirements and notify the Contractor that the SEWPCP is approved or return it for any needed revisions .
If returned for revision the Contractor must resubmit two copies of its revised SEWPCP as provided above within days and the Department will have days from receipt of the revised plan to notify the Contractor whether its SEWPCP is approved or again requires revision .
Additional iterations will occur in a like manner until the Department approves the Contractors SEWPCP .
The Contractor must have its SEWPCP approved and implemented before commencing any Work which could disturb soils or impact water quality .
SEWPCP REQUIREMENTS ..
Qualifications of Preparer The preparer of the SEWPCP must be knowledgeable and experienced in erosion and pollution control and must be a DEP Certified Contractor as designated by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection MDEP or be licensed in Maine as a Professional Engineer Landscape Architect or Soil Scientist .
.. Standards The SEWPCP must be in accordance with all applicable laws rules regulations permit requirements and conditions this specification all other contractual provisions and the latest version of Departments Best Management Practices for Erosion Sedimentation Control the BMP Manual .
In the event of conflicting provisions the SEWPCP must utilize the more restrictive requirements .
.. General SEWPCP Elements In addition to other requirements provided for or referenced in this specification the SEWPCP must include the following elements .
a .
The name and qualifications of the person preparing the SEWPCP .
b .
The name of the onsite person the Environmental Coordinator responsible for implementation of the SEWPCP who must be the Prime Contractors Superintendent or other supervisory employee with the authority to immediately remedy any deficient controls with their phone number and emergency number personal cellular phone or pager .
c. The schedule and sequence of all activities that involve soil disturbance including work on sites outside the rightofway such as borrow pit operations haul roads staging areas equipment storage sites mixing plants and Waste Areas including expansion of existing sites .
d. Incorporation of permanent erosion and sedimentation control features into the project at the earliest practicable time .
e. Identification of steep slopes and highly erodible soils with the method and frequency of soil stabilization .
Temporary slope stabilization is required on a daily basis .
Permanent slope stabilization measures shall be applied within one week of the last soil disturbance .
f. Emergency procedures for storms including availability of Materials and procedures and time frames for corrective action if controls fail .
g. If water is flowing within the drainage system the water shall be diverted to a stable area or conduit and work shall be conducted in the dry .
The Contractors plan shall address when and where the diversions will be necessary h. Type and location of all temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures .
Temporary winter stabilization must be used between November st and April st or outside of said time period if the ground is frozen or snow covered .
Temporary winter stabilization involves at a minimum covering all disturbed soils and seeded ground that is not Acceptable Work with an approved method other than using unanchored hay or straw mulch .
Such other methods may include the use of Erosion Control Mix or other covers that are not susceptible to erosion or wind movement as described within the Winter Stabilization section of the most recent MaineDOT BMP Manual .
If temporary winter stabilization practices are used spring procedures for permanent stabilization shall also be described in the SEWPCP .
Use of these methods for over winter temporary erosion control will be incidental to the contract and be paid for as part of Pay Item .
i. Mulching type and frequency of application for disturbed soil areas .
Newly disturbed earth shall be mulched by the end of each workday .
Mulch shall be maintained on a daily basis .
All disturbed ditchesslopes shall be stabilized by the end of each workday .
Stabilization shall be maintained on a daily basis .
Erosion control blanket shall be installed in the bottoms of all ditches except where a stone lining is planned or otherwise stated in the contract document .
Seed shall be applied prior to the placement of the blanket .
j .
Location and frequency of application of temporary seeding .
Permanent seeding shall be performed in accordance with the most current specification unless otherwise stated in the contract document .
k. Description of all dust control procedures for roadways haul roads work areas and all other contractor activities .
l. Location and method of temporary erosion and sediment control for existing and proposed catch basins and all other drainage inlet and outlet areas .
Culvert inlet and outlet protection shall be installed within hours of culvert installation or prior to a storm event whichever is sooner .
m. Describe all instream work with timing and plans for temporary stream diversions and cofferdams .
Water flow must be maintained at all times unless otherwise stated in the contract document .
n. Describe the design location and plans for sedimentation basins used for dewatering cofferdams .
If a cofferdam sedimentation basin is used it shall be located in an upland area where the water can settle and sink into the ground or be released slowly to the resource in a manner that will not cause erosion .
The location of such a cofferdam sedimentation basin shall be addressed in the SEWPCP .
o .
Inspection and maintenance schedules for all erosion and water pollution control measures temporary and permanent including the method frequency and disposal location for sediment removal .
p. Demolition debris including debris from wearing surface removal saw cut slurry dust concrete debris etc .
shall be contained and shall not be allowed to discharge to any resource .
All demolition debris shall be disposed of in accordance with Standard Specifications Section .
Removing Existing Superstructure Structural Concrete Railings Curbs Sidewalks and Bridges .
Containment and disposal of demolition debris shall be addressed in the Contractors SEWPCP q .
Procedures for removal of temporary erosion and pollution controls .
.. Water Pollution Control Requirements In addition to other requirements provided for or referenced in this specification the SEWPCP must include all of the following requirements applicable to water pollution control .
a .
The Contractor must comply with the applicable federal state and local laws and regulations relating to prevention and abatement of water pollution .
b .
Except as allowed by an approved permit or otherwise authorized by the Department in writing pollutants and construction debris including excavated material aggregate residue from cleaning sandblasting or painting cement mixtures chemicals fuels lubricants bitumens raw sewage wood chips and other debris shall not be discharged into waterbodies wetlands or natural or manmade channels leading thereto and such materials shall not be located alongside waterbodies wetlands or such channels such that it will be washed away by high water or runoff .
c. Construction operations in waterbodies or wetlands shall be restricted to the construction limits shown on the plans and to those areas that must be entered for the construction of temporary or permanent structures except as allowed by approved permit or otherwise authorized by the Department in writing .
d. Mechanized equipment shall not be operated in waterbodies or wetlands except as allowed by approved permit or otherwise authorized by the Department in writing .
e. Upon completion of the work waterbodies or wetlands shall be promptly cleared of all falsework piling debris or other obstructions caused by the construction operations except as otherwise authorized by the Department in writing .
f. Spill Prevention If the Work includes the handling use or storage of petroleum products or hazardous MatterSubstances including the onsite fueling of Equipment the SEWPCP must include a Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure Plan SPCCP .
At a minimum the SPCCP must include .
The name and emergency response numbers telephone number cellular phone and pager numbers if applicable of the Contractors representative responsible for spill prevention and response .
General description and location of handling transfer storage and containment facilities of such products or hazardous MatterSubstances activities and facilities and potential receptors of such products or hazardous MatterSubstances including oceans lakes ponds rivers streams wetlands and sand and gravel aquifers sensitive resources including the distances between said activities and facilities and said sensitive resources .
Description of preventative measures to be used to minimize the possibility of a spill including Equipment andor Materials to be used to prevent discharges including containment and diversionary structures inspections and personnel training .
A contingency response plan to be implemented if spill should occur including a list of emergency phonepager numbers including the Contractors representative MDEP Spill Response the National Response Center if spill enters the water the Resident and local police and fire authorities a list of emergency response equipment and locations and a description of the capabilities of the equipment a description of the general response and clean up protocols by product or MatterSubstances and an overview of the verbal and written notification procedures for federal state and local officials .
For a related provision see .. Project Specific Emergency Planning .
For a related provision see Section .. Wetland and Waterbody Impacts .
.. Material Requirements Unless otherwise approved by the Department the Contractor must use temporary erosion control Materials contained on the Departments Preapproved List of Erosion Control Materials if such a list is established the Departments latest BMP Manual or Section Roadside Improvement Materials .
.. Construction Requirements In addition to other requirements provided for or referenced in this specification the SEWPCP must include all of the following requirements applicable during construction .
a .
The Contractor shall install and maintain all temporary erosion control Materials in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations or the Departments latest BMPs or Standard Specifications where applicable .
b .
The Contractor shall perform instream work during low flow conditions except as allowed by a specific Permit requirement .
During instream work the Contractor shall maintain water flow at all times except in ponded water or where specifically authorized .
The Contractor to the maximum extent practicable shall place pipes in dry conditions .
c. The Contractor to the maximum extent practicable shall install temporary and permanent erosion control measures prior to conducting clearing and grubbing operations .
Clearing shall be minimized as shown on the design plans if provided .
The Contractor shall not conduct clearing operations within any protected vegetative buffer area indicated in the plans notes or special provisions .
The Contractor shall limit excavation borrow and embankment operations commensurate with its capability and progress in keeping the finish grading mulching seeding and other such temporary and permanent erosion control measures current in accordance with its schedule .
Should seasonal limitations make such coordination impractical temporary erosion control measures shall be provided immediately .
d. The Contractor shall not work in a wetland except as allowed by a specific permit provision .
All equipment which must work in a wetland shall travel and work on platforms or mats that protect vegetation which the Department has designated to remain .
The Contractor shall not store or stockpile materials in a wetland .
The Contractor shall contain and immediately remove from the wetland or waterbody any debris generated by the Work .
e. The Contractor shall not place uncured concrete directly into a waterbody .
The Contractor shall not wash tools forms or other items in or adjacent to a waterbody or wetland .
Prior to release to a natural resource any impounded water that has been in contact with concrete placed during construction must have a pH between .
and .
must be within one pH unit of the background pH level of the resource and shall have a turbidity no greater than the receiving resource .
This requirement is applicable to concrete that is placed or spilled including leakage from forms as well as indirect contact via tools or equipment .
Water not meeting release criteria shall be addressed in the SEWPCP .
Discharging impounded water to the stream must take place in a manner that does not disturb the stream bottom or cause erosion .
The Contractor shall be responsible for monitoring pH with a calibrated meter accurate to .
units .
A record of pH measurements shall be kept in the Environmental Coordinators log .
f. The Contractor shall contain all demolition debris including debris from wearing surface removal saw cut slurry dust etc .
and shall not allow it to discharge to any resource .
All demolition debris shall be disposed of in accordance with Section .
Removing Existing Superstructure Structural Concrete Railings Curbs Sidewalks and Bridges .
The Contractor shall dispose of debris in accordance with the Maine Solid Waste Law Title M.R.S.A .
Section et .
seq .
Containment and disposal of demolition debris shall be addressed in the Contractors SEWPCP .
g. The Contractor shall air dry all treated lumber for at least days before use .
All treated timber surfaces shall be exposed during airdrying .
h. The Contractor shall place all permanent seeding in accordance with Section Seeding unless the Contract states otherwise .
The Contractor shall state what additional measures they will employ for soil stabilization between November st and April st. i .
The Contractor shall not remove rocks from below the normal high water line of any wetland great pond river stream or brook except to the extent necessary for completion of the Work and as allowed by environmental permits .
The Contractor shall not work below the high water line of a great pond river stream or brook during periods of elevated water except as necessary to protect work in progress or for emergency flood control and as allowed by environmental permits .
j .
During periods of approved suspension the Contractor shall inspect and maintain temporary and permanent erosion controls in accordance with its approved SEWPCP .
k. All sites of disturbed soil outside the rightofway such as haul roads staging areas Equipment storage sites mixing plants and waste disposal sites including expansion of existing sites shall be graded smooth loamed seeded and mulched upon completion of the work .
For a related provision see Section ..
Pit Requirements .
IMPLEMENTATION OF SEWPCP ..
Follow Plan Until Acceptance of the Work the Contractor must continuously provide soil erosion and water pollution controls in compliance with its approved SEWPCP as amended if necessary and in compliance with Section .. Additional MeasuresAmendment of SEWPCP .
..
Inspection and Record Keeping The Environmental Coordinator must inspect and monitor all controls for the duration of the project and keep a written log .
This log must include daily onsite precipitation and air temperature as well as the performance failure and any corrective action for all controls in place .
The log must be updated at least weekly and after all significant storm runoff and flood events .
The Environmental Coordinator must make this log available to the Department upon request .
The Contractor will retain the log for three years after the completion of the project .
.. Additional MeasuresAmendment of SEWPCP If there exists observable evidence of erosion or sedimentation despite the installation of all controls in compliance with the Contractors approved SEWPCP then the Contractor must undertake such additional measures as are necessary to stop such erosion and prevent further erosion or sedimentation .
Observable evidence of erosion or sedimentation includes visible sheet rill or gully erosion discoloration of water by suspended particles areas of sediment accumulation slumping of banks deposition of soil and visible dust .
Such additional measures must be undertaken within hours and completed within hours from the time such evidence is observed unless otherwise authorized by the Department .
Within days of that time the Contractor must submit an amendment to its SEWPCP setting forth the apparent cause of the erosion or sedimentation and the additional measures undertaken and that will continue to be undertaken .
If the Contractor complies with the requirements of this Section all additional measures and the amendment of the SEWPCP will be Extra Work and any Delay resulting from the additional measures will be analyzed in accordance with Section .
Adjustments for Delay .
..
Duration of Contractors Responsibility The Contractor shall provide temporary soil erosion and water pollution controls in compliance with its SEWPCP and maintain all permanent control features until Acceptance of the Work .
Once final surface treatments are established the Contractor is responsible for removal of all temporary sedimentation control practices such as silt fence .
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence all work needed to remedy damage to properly installed and maintained permanent control features caused by a weather related Uncontrollable Event shall be Extra Work .
PAYMENT ..
If Pay Item .
Provided If the Schedule of Items contains Pay Item .
for Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control payment will be made on a Lump Sum basis payment of which will constitute full and complete compensation for all labor equipment materials inspection professional services and incidentals necessary to prepare submit obtain approval of and properly implement the Contractors SEWPCP .
The Lump Sum will be payable in installments as follows of the Lump Sum once the final SEWPCP is approved and the initial soil erosion and water pollution controls are in place and certified by the Contractor with the balance to be paid as the Work progresses at a rate proportional to the percentage completion of the Contract .
Failure by the Contractor to follow Standard Specification or Special Provision Section andor the Contractors own Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Plan SEWPCP will result in a violation letter and a reduction in payment as shown in the schedule below .
The Departments Resident or any other representative of The Department reserves the right to suspend the work at any time and request a meeting to discuss violations and remedies .
The Department shall not be held responsible for any delay in the work due to any suspension under this item .
ORIGINAL CONTRACT AMOUNT From Up to and Amount of Penalty Damages per Violation More Than Including st nd rd Subsequent and more Cofferdams and related temporary soil erosion and water pollution controls are incidental to the Pay Item .
unless a specific pay item for cofferdams is included in the Schedule of Items .
If a specific pay item for cofferdams is included then related temporary soil erosion and water pollution controls including inspection and maintenance are incidental to the pay item for cofferdams .
..
If No Pay Item If Pay Item .
is not provided in the Schedule of Items then the cost related thereto shall be Incidental to the Contract .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Temporary Soil Erosion and Water Pollution Control Lump Sum SECTION REHABILITATION OF PITS Reserved SECTION ACRYLIC LATEX COLOR FINISH .
Description This work shall consist of applying a color finish to asphaltic or Portland cement concrete surfaces designated on the plans for median strips islands and certain crosswalks colorcoated with an acrylic latex finish system. . Materials The color finish shall be a green acrylic latex emulsion type containing only inert mineral pigment colorants faderesistant for exterior use .
The color coating shall contain insoluble mineral fillers suitable for uniform application tack free and shall show no deterioration due to temperature salts moisture and ultraviolet rays of sun for a period of at least one year .
Only materials on the Qualified Products List for acrylic latex color finish shall be used . .
Surface Preparation The bituminous or Portland cement concrete shall be carefully laid free of depressions and ridges and at the pitch or grade shown on the plans to provide flow of water from the surface .
The pavement shall be free of all loose dirt dust particles grease oil or any other contaminant .
Grease and oils shall be removed by a detergent wash flushed with water and followed by highpressure water air broom or hand sweep .
The surface course of bituminous concrete pavement shall be a tight mix of thoroughly compacted material .
The pavement shall be placed a minimum of days before the application of the coating .
The surface of Portland cement concrete pavement shall be a medium broom finish .
New concrete must cure a minimum of days before application of coating .
The concrete surface shall be first washed with phosphoric acid solution parts water to part acid then coated with a tiecoat before the green finish coat can be applied .
The surface shall be accepted by the Resident and the coating subcontractor before the application of the color coating .
The Contractor shall add sand to the acrylic latex in the crosswalk area as directed by the Resident . .
Application of Color Coating The coating shall be applied according to the Manufacturers recommendations which can be found in the technical bulletin of the product .
The paint shall be stored in an area where freezing or overheating will not occur .
The acrylic coatings are waterborne and can not cure in cold temperatures or when subject to moisture .
Care shall be taken not to apply coatings when rain is forecast or sudden drop in temperature is expected .
Two coats shall be applied over the area in a thickness sufficient to give uniform texture appearance and color per Manufacturers recommendation .
The second coat shall not be applied until the first coat is completely dried to touch and the Manufacturers minimum time is requirement for top coating has elapsed .
No color coating shall be allowed to run drop or otherwise color adjacent areas .
If the Contractor elects to apply the coating after the above date the Contractor is responsible for the performance of the coating .
In this case the payment will be withheld until the following spring . .
Method of Measurement Acrylic Latex Color Finish will be measured by the square yard of surface sealed measured parallel to the surface .
Furnishing and adding sand at designated locations will be incidental . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Acrylic Latex Color Finish will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard complete in place including furnishing and adding sand where required .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Acrylic Latex Color Finish Square Yard SECTION MOBILIZATION .
Description When this item is listed as a Pay Item in the Bid it shall consist of preparatory work and operations including but not limited to those necessary to the movement of personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site and for all other work and operations which must be performed or costs incurred prior to beginning work on the various items on the project site . .
Basis of Payment Partial payments will be made in accordance with Section .. Mobilization The total sum of payments under this item shall not exceed the original Contract amount bid regardless of the fact that the Contractor may shut down their work on the Project or move equipment away from the Project and then back again .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Mobilization Lump Sum SECTION ONTHEJOB TRAINING .
Description OnTheJob Training programs OJT are required as part of the Contractors equal employment opportunity affirmative action program .
The primary objective of on the job training shall be to train and upgrade women minorities and disadvantaged workers toward journey worker status in the type of trade or job classification involved . .
Requirements Contractors shall begin training in accordance with OJT Special Provision as follows for all projects with assigned trainee slots .
Total number of trainee slots required will be the amount listed in the Schedule of Items .
All OnTheJob Training will be performed in accordance with CFR Subpart A Appendix B and MaineDOT OnTheJob Training Program Manual .
Training classifications shall be distributed among work classifications needed by the Contractor in the skilled and semi skilled craft levels identified on the Letter of Intent .
These classifications must be needed on that specific project and have sufficient work hours available to meet the training plan activities and duration .
The Contractor shall receive credit for training hours only after the Department or its representative has approved the program .
For this reason contractors are reminded to register candidates at the onset of project work in order to guarantee the maximum training time for the enrollee to complete the OJT program .
Contractors will be reimbursed for such approved trainee slots upon successful completion of the training .
The Contractor shall make every effort to enroll minority and women trainees e.g .
by conducting systematic and direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield women minorities and disadvantaged trainees to the extent that such persons are available within a reasonable area of recruitment .
The contractor shall be responsible for demonstrating to the Department the steps taken in pursuance thereof before determination as to whether the Contractor is in compliance with this program .
These semiskilled and skilled craft employment goals set by this office of Federal Contractor Compliance Programs are as follows .
percent women and .
percent minorities and percent for women and .
percent for minorities in unskilled classes respectively statewide .
For this reason whether a Contractor meets these goals or not the Department will require all contractors to participate in the program until such time that the goals are met as a whole .
If any Contractor falls below these standards it shall immediately implement an Affirmative Action Program to increase the employment and retention of women minorities and the disadvantaged .
Trainees shall not be enrolled in a classification in which they have successfully completed a training course leading to journeylevel status or for which they have held employment as a journey level worker .
No Contractor shall enroll trainees who possess postsecondary degrees certification or diploma without first securing written approval from the Civil Rights Office .
Only individuals with nonconstruction oriented credentials except those who are upgraded will be considered .
Upgrades from semiskilled to skilled crafts is acceptable but must be approved by the Department or its representative .
The minimum length and type of training for each classification will be as established in the training program selected by the Contractor and approved by the Department .
Nothing in this section limits a Contractor to only the curriculum found in the OJT Manual .
The Department will consider a training curriculum if it meets the equal employment opportunity obligations that bring women minorities and the disadvantaged in to the industry and to retain them in the industry at the journey level of the classification of the training .
Contractors are encouraged to examine training opportunities which fit their needs for the project and for the company .
The Contractor shall complete and forward to the Departments OJT or its representative the Letter of Intent the OJT Registration Form and the Workforce Breakdown Form for approval by the Department .
The Contractor shall maintain records of trainee activities and performance and furnish the department or its representative with documentation of each trainees progress using the Weekly Evaluation Form .
Requests for changes in the number of trainees shall be handled as other bid items .
The Contractor must submit a change order with justification to the resident .
The Resident will then forward that request to the Civil Rights Office for consideration .
Once an OJT is approved by the Department The Contractor shall begin training at the onset of employment for the trade classification .
Trainees are expected to remain in status as long as training opportunities exist in the work classification or until the training program is completed .
Section shall be included directly in all contracts to subcontractors .
Subcontractors are expected to comply with craft goals .
As with other Sections applied to a Subcontractor the Contractor retains obligations accordingly. . Payment to the Trainee .
Trainees will be paid at least percent of the appropriate minimum journeymans rate specified in the contract for the first half of the training period percent for the third quarter of the training period and percent for the last quarter of the training period unless apprentices or trainees in an approved existing program are enrolled as trainees on this project .
In that case the appropriate rates approved by the Departments of Labor or Transportation in connection with the existing program shall apply to all trainees being trained for the same classification who are covered by this Training Special Provision .
The contractor shall furnish the trainee a copy of the program manual he will follow in providing the training .
Once the Department has determined that the trainee has completed the required hours of training a certificate showing the type and length of training satisfactorily completed will be issued. . Submittals The Contractor shall complete and forward to the Departments OJT and Contract Compliance Consultant the Letter of Intent the OJT Registration Form and the Workforce Breakdown Form .
The Contractor shall maintain records of trainee activities and performance and furnish the department or its representative with documentation of each trainees progress using the Weekly Evaluation Form .
Requests for changes in the number of trainees shall be handled as other bid items .
The Contractor must submit a change order with justification to the resident .
The Resident will then forward that request to the Civil Rights Office for consideration. . OffSite Training Some offsite training is permissible as long as the training is an integral part of an approved training program and does not comprise a significant part of the overall training .
The Contractor must forward a completed OffSite OJT RequestApproval Form with a cover letter explaining the intent of the transfer to the Civil Rights Office .
Provided the Contractor has Department approval training may be conducted off site .
Verification of training hours shall be determined for credit on offsite work by reviewing the Weekly OJT Evaluation Form . .
Method of Measurement The OJT item will be measured by the number of OJT trainees who successfully complete an approved training program .
A trainee will be considered successfully complete for purposes of payment when the trainee receives a certificate of completion from the Department . .
Basis of Payment to the Contractor .
The OJT shall be paid for once successfully completed at the contract unit price per each .
Payment will be made even though the Contractor may have received additional training program funds from other sources provided such other source does not prohibit the Contractor from receiving other payment .
No payment will be made for training not completed in accordance with this specification the OJT Manual and the Code of Federal Regulations .
No payment will be made to the Contractor if the Department determines the Contractor failed to provide the required training .
The Department shall work with any Contractor whose efforts have been deemed not consistent with the spirit or intent of the Program. . Sanctions .
When the Department determines the Contractor has not complied with this Section the Department shall move within days of the ruling to advise the Contractor in writing that documentation of good faith effort will be required .
If the Department determines that good faith effort was not met sanctions will be imposed as follows the number of training hours remaining to be completed for each training hour required will be multiplied by the prevailing wage rate plus fringes for that particular trainees classification .
The resulting figure may be deducted from any monies due the contractor as determined by the Department .
A corrective action plan may be developed in order to avoid similar future findings .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
OnTheJob Training Each SECTION GABION WALL Reserved SECTION DRY CAST SEGMENTAL BLOCK WALL Reserved SECTION PRECAST CONCRETE BLOCK GRAVITY WALL .
Description The work under this item shall consist of design fabrication furnishing and construction of a Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall in accordance with these specifications and in close conformance with the lines and grades shown on the Plans or established by the Resident .
The Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall consist of facing blocks made of wet cast concrete made from Portland cement water chemical admixtures and aggregates supported on concrete leveling pads and if required geosyntheticreinforced backfill .
Included in the scope of the precast gravity wall construction are geotechnical design of any wall with a exposed height greater than .
feet or as specified on the Plans all grading necessary for wall construction compaction of the wall foundation soil backfill piped drainage construction of leveling pads and block wall installation .
The top of the upper row of blocks shall be at or above the top of the face elevation shown on the Plans. . Quality Assurance The wall system shall be one of the approved combinations of facing block and soil reinforcement systems noted in the Plans or on the Departments Qualified Products List QPL .
Alternate wall systems will not be considered for this Item .
All design calculations and Shop Drawings shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
The Contractor shall require the wall designsupplier to provide an onsite qualified experienced technical representative to advise the Contractor concerning proper installation procedures .
The technical representative shall be onsite during initial stages of installation and thereafter shall remain available for consultation as necessary for the Contractor or as required by the Resident. . Materials Materials for walls shall meet the requirements of the following sections of Division Gravel Borrow .
Crushed Stone  Inch .
Underdrain Pipe .
or .
Reinforcing Steel .
Reinforcement Geotextile .
Drainage Geotextile .
The Contractor is cautioned that all of the materials listed are not required for every Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall .
The Contractor shall furnish the Resident a Materials Certification Letter certifying that the applicable materials comply with this section of the specifications .
Materials shall meet the following additional requirements .
Concrete Units The Materials Certification Letter described above shall contain the date of concrete casting a lot identification number compressive strength results and entrained air results .
All prefabricated concrete units shall conform to the requirements of .
with the following exceptions A .
Materials Materials are modified as follows the maximum water cement ratio shall be .
use of calcium nitrite is not required and the minimum day compressive strength shall be psi .
B .
Quality Control and Quality Assurance .
Quality Control and Quality Assurance is modified as follows delete the paragraph that begins with The contractor shall provide a private office C. Construction .
Construction requirements are modified as follows Replace the first sentence in the paragraph which begins Forms shall remain with the following The forms shall remain in place until the concrete has gained sufficient strength such that removal of the forms and subsequent handling will not damage the units .
Add the following paragraph at the end of the Construction section Face texture of the units shall be a formed finish on all exposed surfaces .
Pigment shall be added during the casting process of the concrete unit to achieve a consistent shade of gray or other color as determined by the Resident .
D. Concrete Testing .
Concrete testing requirements are modified as follows Replace the paragraph which begins The Contractor shall cast a minimum of .
With the following The Contractor shall make and test at least one set of cylinders for every CY of production concrete used to cast the concrete units .
Replace the paragraph which begins At least once with the following The Contractor shall make four cylinders for use by the Department to represent every CY or fraction thereof .
E. Tolerances .
Maximum dimensional deviation of formed unit dimensions shall be  inch or percent or the manufacturers published tolerances whichever is less .
Units not meeting the specified tolerances will be rejected. . Geosynthetic Reinforcement Geosynthetic reinforcement shall be as required by the proprietary wall system manufacturer or wall designer .
Geosynthetic reinforcement shall consist of a geotextile or geogrid approved by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Substitution of a geosynthetic other than that required by the proprietary wall system manufacturer shall not be allowed unless approved by the Geotechnical Engineer after submittal of shop drawings and pullout and interface friction test data .
A. Geotextiles and Thread for Sewing .
Woven or nonwoven geotextiles shall consist of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns formed into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their position relative to each other during handling placement and design life .
At least percent by weight of the long chain polymer shall be polyolefin or polyester .
The material shall be free of defects and tears .
Geotextiles used for reinforcement shall conform as a minimum to the properties indicated for .
StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile and shall meet the requirements of part D and E below .
Geotextiles shall have a minimum permeability greater or equal to that shown on the Shop Drawings and the reinforced soil permeability .
B. Geogrids .
The geogrid shall be a regular network of integrally connected polymer tensile elements with aperture geometry sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the surrounding soil or rock .
The geogrid structure shall be dimensionally stable and able to retain its geometry under manufacture transport and installation .
Geogrids shall conform as a minimum to the criteria specified in part D and E below .
C. Required Properties .
The specific geosynthetic materials shall be preapproved and shall the have the ultimate tensile strength Tult shown on the approved Shop Drawings for the geosynthetic specified and for the fill type shown .
Tult shall be determined from wide width tests specified in ASTM D for geotextiles and ASTM D or GRIGG for geogrids .
The ultimate tensile strength value is based on the minimum average roll values MARV for the product .
D. The geosynthetic shall conform to the following criteria .
PP and HDPE Min .
retained strength of percent after hours per ASTM D. . HDPE Grade E E E E E E J J or J per ASTM D . . PET Molecular weight Mn per GRIGG and ASTM D. . PET Carboxyl end group CEG mmolkg GRIGG. . All polymers Minimum Weight per Unit Area of ozyd per ASTM D. . All Polymers Maximum percent post consumer recycled material by weight. . A default total reduction factor for creep durability and installation damage of RF may be used in design provided the criteria of through are satisfied and is adjusted to percent after hours is satisfied .
E. Manufacturer Quality Control .
The geosynthetic reinforcements shall be manufactured with a high degree of quality control .
The Manufacturer is responsible for establishing and maintaining a quality control program to ensure compliance with the requirements of the specification .
The purpose of the QC testing program is to verify that the reinforcement geosynthetic being supplied to the project is representative of the material used for performance testing and approval .
Conformance testing shall be performed as part of the manufacturing process and may vary for each type of product .
As a minimum the following index tests shall be considered as applicable for an acceptable QAQC program Property Test Procedure .
Specific Gravity HDPE only ASTM D . Ultimate Tensile Strength ASTM D GRIGG .
Melt Flow HDPE and PP only ASTM D . Intrinsic Viscosity PET only ASTM D . Carboxyl End Group PET only ASTM D F. Sampling Testing and Acceptance .
Sampling and conformance testing shall be in accordance with ASTM D. Conformance testing procedures are established above .
Geosynthetic product acceptance shall be based on ASTM D. The quality control certificate shall include .
Roll numbers and identification .
Sampling procedures .
Results of quality control tests including a description of test methods used .
G. Certification .
The Contractor shall submit a manufacturers certification that the geosynthetics supplied meet the respective index criteria set when the geosynthetic was approved measured in full accordance with all test methods and standards specified or referenced in this specification .
The manufacturers certificate shall state that the furnished geosynthetic meets the requirements of these specifications as evaluated by the manufacturers quality control program .
The values submitted shall be certified by a person having legal authority to bond the manufacturer .
In case of dispute over validity of values the Resident can require the Contractor to supply test data from an agency approved laboratory to support the values submitted at the Contractors cost. . Geosynthetic Connection Reinforcing bar used in the geosynthetic connection shall be a minimum inch diameter corrosion resistant reinforcing bar coated on the ends and meeting the requirements of Section Reinforcing Steel .
Installation shall be in accordance with manufacturers recommendations . .
Concrete Leveling Pad Concrete for leveling pads shall be Fill Concrete conforming to the requirements of Section Structural Concrete .
Unless otherwise specified concrete for leveling pads shall be accepted under Method C requirements. . Backfill Material Backfill material placed behind the concrete units shall meet the requirements of Section .
Gravel Borrow except that the backfill material shall only contain particles that will pass the inch square mesh sieve .
The contractor is required to submit a grain size distribution curve ASTM D and a moisturedensity relationship curve AASHTO T for acceptance of the proposed backfill material and determination of the appropriate installation damage reduction factor RFID .
Walls with reinforced backfill require that the backfill material be subjected to pH testing to determine the appropriate durability reduction factor RFD .
Material between blocks must be Gravel Borrow or Crushed Stone  Inch. . Materials Certification Letter The Contractor or the supplier as his agent shall furnish the Resident a Materials Certification Letter for the above materials including the backfill material in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications .
A copy of all test results performed by the Contractor or his supplier necessary to assure contract compliance shall also be furnished to the Resident .
The Resident will base acceptance upon the materials Certificate Letter accompanying test reports and visual inspection. . Design Requirements The wall shall be designed with a service life of not less than years .
The Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall be designed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
The wall shall be designed in accordance with the following .
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications current edition herein referred to as LRFD .
FHWANHI and FHWANHI Design and Construction of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes Volumes I and II .
FHWANHI CorrosionDegradation of Soil Reinforcements for Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes .
The Contract Plans .
The requirements specified herein .
The manufacturers requirements Where conflicting requirements occur the more stringent requirements shall govern .
Fortyfive days prior to beginning construction of the wall the design computations shall be submitted to the Resident for review by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Any additional design or costs arising as a result of rejection of a wall design by the Geotechnical Engineer shall be borne by the Contractor .
Design calculations that consist of computer program generated output shall be supplemented with at least one hand calculation and graphic demonstrating the design methodology used .
Design calculations shall provide thorough documentation of the sources of equations used and material properties .
The design by the wall system supplier shall consider the stability of the wall as outlined below and in the Contract Documents A .
Failure Plane The theoretical failure plane within the reinforced soil mass shall be determined in accordance with LRFD Article and be analyzed so that the soil stabilizing components extend sufficiently beyond the failure plane within the reinforced soil mass to stabilize the material .
B .
External Loads External loads which affect the internal and external stability such as those applied through traffic loadings impact on traffic barrier posts slope surcharge hydrostatic and seismic loads shall be accounted for in the design .
Traffic surcharge and traffic impact loads shall be calculated and applied in compliance with LRFD Section .
C. External Stability Loads and load combinations selected for design shall be consistent with LRFD .
Application of load factors shall be taken as specified in LRFD Section .
Sliding resistance factors and bearing resistance factors shall be consistent with LRFD .
Overturning and sliding provisions of LRFD shall apply .
D. Internal Stability Evaluation of reinforcement pullout reinforcement rupture and reinforcementblock connection pullout or rupture shall be consistent with LRFD Section and checked at each level .
Loads load combinations and load factors shall be as specified in LRFD Section .
Resistance factors for internal design are specified in LRFD Section .
Maximum reinforcement loads shall be calculated using the Simplified Method approach .
Calculations for factored stresses and resistances shall be based upon assumed conditions at the end of the design life .
a. Geosynthetic Reinforcement Design Tensile Resistance The nominal long term reinforcement design strength Tal shall be determined by reducing Tult by reduction factors RF in accordance with the documents referenced above .
The designer shall procure and use the manufacturers tested and certified geosynthetic reinforcement reduction factors for creep RFCR durability RFD and installation damage RFID to determine Tal .
In absence of manufacturers tested and certified reduction factors a combined default reduction factor RF shall be used in accordance with the referenced documents .
For RFID the installation damage reduction factor shall be checked in accordance with LRFD and FHWANHI .
b. ReinforcementFacing Connection Design Strength The nominal long term connection strength between the geosynthetic reinforcement and the concrete blocks shall be checked in accordance with LRFD and FHWA NHI and FHWANHI .
c. Reinforcement Pullout The pullout resistance factor F and scale effect correction factor  used in pullout design shall be determined from project specific pullout tests using the proposed geosynthetic in the specified project backfill material or equivalent soil .
The pullout resistance factors shall be determined in accordance with LRFD and FHWANHI and FHWANHI .
In the absence of test data empirical relationships may be used to determine the pullout resistance factors any empirical relationships used in design shall be referenced in the design calculations .
E. Backfill and Foundation Soils Parameters The friction angle of the backfill used in the reinforced fill zone for internal stability design shall be assumed have a friction angle of degrees unless specific project select backfill is tested for frictional strength .
The friction angle of the foundation soils and random backfill shall be assumed to be degrees unless otherwise shown on the plans .
F. Reinforcement Length The soil reinforcement shall be the same length from the bottom to the top of each wall section .
The minimum length of the soil reinforcement shall be ft but shall not be less than percent of the wall height H for walls with level surcharges or percent of H for walls with a sloped surcharge or walls supporting an abutment .
The mechanical wall height H or H shall be the vertical difference between the top of the leveling footing and the elevation at which the failure surface as described above intercepts the ground surface supported by the wall .
G. Bearing Resistance The factored bearing pressures under the Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall be clearly indicated on the Shop Drawings .
Walls shall be dimensioned so that the factored bearing resistance of the foundation soils as noted on the Plans is not exceeded .
H. Facing Stability Stability calculations for the concrete facing blocks shall be in accordance with LRFD and shall include an evaluation of the maximum vertical spacing between reinforcement layers .
I .
Stability During Construction Walls shall be designed to resist failure by instability of temporary construction slope .
Passive pressure in front of the wall mass shall be assumed to be zero for design purposes .
J .
Design Life The wall design life shall be a minimum of years .
K. Depth of Embedment The depth of embedment for frost protection and stability shall be at or below the elevation shown on the Plans and the approved Shop Drawings .
L. Drainage System Piped drainage shall be designed to collect and dispose of water from the base of the reinforced soil zone and backfill soil .
This shall outlet into surrounding drainage systems or ditches. . Submittals The Contractor shall supply wall design computations wall details dimensions quantities and cross sections necessary to construct the wall .
A sample hand calculation including all equations parameter values used units theory freebody diagram comparison to design requirements etc .
shall be provided .
Spread sheet calculations alone are not acceptable .
Fortyfive days prior to beginning construction of the wall four sets of the wall design computations and Shop Drawings shall be submitted to the Resident for review by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Mix design information shall be submitted at the same time including aggregate source current gradation aggregate quality information and concrete unit weight .
The contractor shall also submit backfill material test results as part of the wall submittal package .
Backfill material test results shall include grain size distribution curve moisture density relationship curve and pH test results required for reinforced backfill only .
If geotechnical design is required the fully detailed plans shall be prepared in conformance with Section and shall include but not be limited to the following items A .
A plan and elevation sheet or sheets for each wall containing the following elevations at the top of leveling pads the distance along the face of the wall to all steps in the leveling pads the location of the original and final ground line .
B .
All details for foundations and leveling pads including details for steps in the leveling pads as well as allowable and actual maximum bearing pressures shall be provided .
C. Details for the barriers posts curbs and facing as required by the project conditions .
D. Design computations prepared and sealed by a licensed Professional Engineer .
E. Prior to the beginning of construction the contractor shall supply the Resident with two copies of the designsuppliers Installation Manual .
In addition the Contractor shall have two copies of the Installation Manual on the project site. . Construction Requirements The Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall have the following construction requirements A. Excavation .
The excavation and use as fill or disposal of all excavated material shall meet the requirements of Section Excavation and Embankment except as modified herein .
B .
Foundation .
The area upon which the prefabricated block gravity wall structure is to rest and within the limits shown on the submitted plans shall be graded for a width equal to or exceeding the length of the blocks .
Prior to wall and leveling pad construction this foundation material shall be compacted to at least percent of maximum laboratory dry density AASHTO T Method C or D. Frozen and unsuitable soil shall be removed and replaced with gravel borrow compacted to percent of AASHTO T. A concrete leveling pad shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
Dimensions may be modified per the wall suppliers recommendations with written approval of the Geotechnical Engineer .
The leveling pad shall be cast to the design elevations as shown on the plans or as required by the wall supplier upon written approval of the Geotechnical Engineer .
The allowable elevation tolerances from the design elevations are .
feet and .
feet .
Leveling pads which do not meet this requirement shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the Resident at no additional cost to the Department .
Placement of wall units may begin after the strength of the concrete leveling pad reaches psi or is adequate to support the proposed loads .
Contractor may begin placement of concrete block units after hours at his own risk .
C. Method and Equipment .
Prior to erection of the prefabricated concrete block wall the Contractor shall furnish the Resident with detailed information concerning the proposed construction method and equipment to be used .
The erection procedure shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Any units that are damaged due to handling will be replaced at the Contractors expense .
D. Installation of Wall Units .
A field representative from the wall system being used shall be available as needed during the erection of the wall .
The services of the representative shall be at no additional cost to the project .
Horizontal joint fillers shall be installed as needed .
The maximum offset in any unit horizontal joint shall be inch .
The prefabricated wall blocks shall be installed to a tolerance of plus or minus inch in feet in vertical alignment and horizontal alignment .
E. Backfill Placement .
Backfill placement shall closely follow the erection of each row of prefabricated wall units .
The Contractor shall decrease the lift thickness if necessary to obtain the specified density .
The maximum lift thickness shall be inches loose .
Gravel borrow backfill shall be compacted in accordance with Section .
except that the minimum required compaction shall be at least percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D. Backfill compaction shall be accomplished without disturbance or displacement of the wall blocks .
Sheepsfoot rollers will not be allowed .
Whenever a compaction test fails no additional backfill shall be placed over the area until the lift is recompacted and a passing test achieved .
The moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be uniform throughout each layer .
Backfill material shall have a placement moisture content less than or equal to the optimum moisture content .
Backfill material with a placement moisture content in excess of the optimum moisture content shall be removed and reworked until the moisture content is uniform and acceptable throughout the entire lift .
The optimum moisture content shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D. At the end of the days operations the Contractor shall shape the last level of backfill so as to direct runoff of rain water away from the wall face .
Material between blocks must be Gravel Borrow or Crushed Stone  Inch meeting the requirements of Section ..
If Gravel Borrow is used between blocks .
drainage geotextile shall be placed behind vertical joints to prevent loss of granular material between blocks .
Compliance with the gradation requirements shall be the responsibility of the Contractor who shall furnish a copy of the backfill test results prior to construction .
If crushed stone inch is used between blocks no geotextile is required behind vertical joints . .
Method of Measurement Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall will be measured by the square foot of front surface not to exceed the dimensions shown on the Contract Plans unless authorized by the Resident .
Vertical and horizontal dimensions will be from the edges of the blocks .
No field measurements for computations will be made unless the Resident specifies in writing a change in the limits indicated on the Plans . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot complete in place .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing geotechnical design as required all labor equipment and materials including all precast concrete units hardware joint fillers geosynthetics reinforcing steel drainage pipe backfill materials and technical field representative .
Excavation foundation material and backfill material will all be incidental to the Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall .
Cost of castinplace concrete for leveling pad will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall .
There will be no allowance for excavating and backfilling for the Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall beyond the limits shown on the approved submitted plans except for excavation required to remove unsuitable subsoil in preparation for the foundation .
Payment for excavating unsuitable subsoil shall be full compensation for all costs of pumping drainage sheeting bracing and incidentals for proper execution of the work and will be paid as Common Excavation in accordance with Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Precast Concrete Block Gravity Wall Square Foot SECTION WET CAST SMALL LANDSCAPE BLOCK WALL .
Description The work under this item shall consist of the design fabrication furnishing and construction of a Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall in accordance with these specifications and in conformance with the lines and grades shown on the Plans or established by the Resident .
The Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall shall consist of blocks made of Structural Precast concrete made from Portland cement water chemical admixtures and aggregates supported on concrete leveling pads and if required geosynthetic reinforced backfill .
The concrete blocks used in this system should have dimensions inches or less wide and .
inches high at the face with a pattern to simulate small stones or cobbles .
Included in the scope of the wall construction are geotechnical design of any wall with an exposed height greater than .
ft or as specified on the Plans all grading necessary for wall construction compaction of the wall foundation soil backfill piped drainage construction of leveling pads and concrete wall unit installation .
The top of the upper row of concrete wall units shall be at or above the top of the face elevation shown on the Plans. . Quality Assurance The wall system shall be one of the approved combinations of facing block and soil reinforcement systems noted in the Plans or on the Departments Qualified Products List QPL .
Alternate wall systems will not be considered for this item .
All design calculations and Shop Drawings shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
The Contractor shall require the wall designsupplier to provide an onsite qualified experienced technical representative to advise the Contractor concerning proper installation procedures .
The technical representative shall be onsite during initial stages of installation and thereafter shall remain available for consultation as necessary for the Contractor or as required by the Resident. . Materials Materials for walls shall meet the requirements of the following sections of Division Gravel Borrow .
Crushed Stone  Inch .
Underdrain Pipe .
or .
Reinforcing Steel .
Structural Precast Concrete Units .
Reinforcement Geotextile .
Drainage Geosynthetic .
The Contractor is cautioned that all of the materials listed are not required for every Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall .
The Contractor shall furnish the Resident a Materials Certification Letter certifying that the applicable materials comply with this section of the specifications .
Materials shall meet the following additional requirements .
Concrete Units The Materials Certification Letter described above shall contain the date of concrete casting a lot identification number compressive strength results and entrained air results .
All prefabricated concrete units shall conform to the requirements of .
with the following exceptions A .
Materials Materials are modified as follows the maximum water cement ratio shall be .
use of calcium nitrite is not required and the minimum day compressive strength shall be psi .
B .
Quality Control and Quality Assurance Quality Control and Quality Assurance is modified as follows delete the paragraph which begins with The contractor shall provide a private office C. Construction Construction requirements are modified as follows Replace the first sentence in the paragraph which begins Forms shall remain with the following The forms shall remain in place until the concrete has gained sufficient strength such that removal of the forms and subsequent handling will not damage the units .
D. Concrete Testing Concrete testing requirements are modified as follows Replace the paragraph which begins A minimum of .
With the following The Contractor shall make and test at least one set of cylinders for every yd of production concrete used to cast the concrete units .
Replace the paragraph which begins At least once with the following The Contractor shall make four cylinders for use by the Department for every yd .
Add the following paragraph at the end of the Construction section Face texture of the units shall be a formed finish on all exposed surfaces .
Pigment shall be added during the casting process of the concrete unit to achieve a consistent shade of gray or other color as determined by the Resident .
E. Tolerances Maximum dimensional deviation of formed unit dimensions shall not vary more than inch or percent or the manufacturers published tolerances whichever is less .
Units not meeting the specified tolerances will be rejected. . Geosynthetic Reinforcement Geosynthetic Reinforcement shall be as required by the proprietary wall system manufacturer or wall designer .
Geosynthetic reinforcement shall consist of a geotextile or geogrid approved by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Substitution of a geosynthetic other than that required by the proprietary wall system manufacturer shall not be allowed unless approved by the Geotechnical Engineer after submittal of shop drawings and pullout and interface friction test data .
A. Geotextiles and Thread for Sewing .
Woven or nonwoven geotextiles shall consist of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns formed into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their position relative to each other during handling placement and design life .
At least percent by weight of the long chain polymer shall be polyolefin or polyester .
The material shall be free of defects and tears .
Geotextiles used for reinforcement shall conform as a minimum to the properties indicated for .
StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile and shall meet the requirements of part D and E below .
Geotextiles shall have a minimum permeability greater or equal to that shown on the Shop Drawings and the reinforced soil permeability .
B. Geogrids .
The geogrid shall be a regular network of integrally formed polymeric tensile elements with aperture geometry sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the surrounding soil or rock .
The geogrid structure shall be dimensionally stable and able to retain its geometry under manufacture transport and installation .
Geogrids shall conform as a minimum to the criteria specified in part D and E below .
C. Required Properties .
The specific geosynthetic materials shall be preapproved and shall the have the ultimate tensile strength Tult shown on the approved Shop Drawings for the geosynthetic specified and for the fill type shown .
Tult shall be determined from wide width tests specified in ASTM D for geotextiles and ASTM D or GRIGG for geogrids .
The ultimate tensile strength value is based on the minimum average roll values MARV for the product .
D. The geosynthetic shall conform to the following criteria .
PP and HDPE Min .
retained strength of percent after hours per ASTM D. . HDPE Grade E E E E E E J J or J per ASTM D . . PET Molecular weight Mn per GRIGG and ASTM D. . PET Carboxyl end group CEG mmolkg GRIGG. . All polymers Minimum Weight per Unit Area of ozyd per ASTM D. . All Polymers Maximum percent post consumer recycled material by weight. . A default total reduction factor for creep durability and installation damage of RF may be used in design provided the criteria of through are satisfied and is adjusted to percent after hours is satisfied .
E. Manufacturer Quality Control .
The geosynthetic reinforcements shall be manufactured with a high degree of quality control .
The Manufacturer is responsible for establishing and maintaining a quality control program to ensure compliance with the requirements of the specification .
The purpose of the QC testing program is to verify that the reinforcement geosynthetic being supplied to the project is representative of the material used for performance testing and approval .
Conformance testing shall be performed as part of the manufacturing process and may vary for each type of product .
As a minimum the following index tests shall be considered as applicable for an acceptable QAQC program Property Test Procedure .
Specific Gravity HDPE only ASTM D . Ultimate Tensile Strength ASTM D GRIGG .
Melt Flow HDPE and PP only ASTM D . Intrinsic Viscosity PET only ASTM D . Carboxyl End Group PET only ASTM D F.Sampling Testing and Acceptance .
Sampling and conformance testing shall be in accordance with ASTM D. Conformance testing procedures are established above .
Geosynthetic product acceptance shall be based on ASTM D. The quality control certificate shall include .
Roll numbers and identification .
Sampling procedures .
Results of quality control tests including a description of test methods used .
G. Certification .
The Contractor shall submit a manufacturers certification that the geosynthetics supplied meet the respective index criteria set when the geosynthetic was approved measured in full accordance with all test methods and standards specified or referenced in this specification .
The manufacturers certificate shall state that the furnished geosynthetic meets the requirements of these specifications as evaluated by the manufacturers quality control program .
The values submitted shall be certified by a person having legal authority to bond the manufacturer .
In case of dispute over validity of values the Resident can require the Contractor to supply test data from an agency approved laboratory to support the values submitted at the Contractors cost . .
Concrete Leveling Pad Concrete for leveling pads shall be Fill Concrete conforming to the requirements of Section Structural Concrete .
Unless otherwise specified concrete for leveling pads shall be accepted under Method C requirements. . Drainage Stone Fill Concrete wall unit voids shall be filled with material that conforms to the requirements of Standard Specification Crushed Stone  Inch meeting the requirements of Section .. Compaction of the stone fill will be required before the block surfaces are cleaned to ensure good interface connection strength between geogrids and blocks. . Backfill Material Backfill material placed behind the concrete wall units shall meet the requirements of Section .
Gravel Borrow except that the backfill material shall only contain particles that will pass the inch square mesh sieve .
The contractor is required to submit a grain size distribution curve ASTM D and a moisturedensity relationship curve AASHTO T for acceptance of the proposed backfill material and determination of the appropriate installation damage reduction factor RFID .
Walls with reinforced backfill also require that the backfill material be subjected to pH testing to determine the appropriate durability reduction factor RFD. . Materials Certificate Letter The Contractor or the supplier as their agent shall furnish the Resident a Materials Certificate Letter for the above materials including the backfill material in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications .
A copy of all test results performed by the Contractor or their supplier necessary to assure contract compliance shall also be furnished to the Resident .
The Resident will base acceptance upon the materials Certificate Letter accompanying test reports and visual inspection. . Design Requirements The wall shall be designed with a service life of not less than years .
The Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall shall be designed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
The wall shall be designed in accordance with the following .
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications current edition herein referred to as LRFD .
FHWANHI and FHWANHI Design and Construction of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes Volumes and .
FHWANHI CorrosionDegradation of Soil Reinforcements for Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes .
The Contract Plans .
The requirements specified herein .
The manufacturers requirements Where conflicting requirements occur the more stringent requirements shall govern .
Fortyfive days prior to beginning construction of the wall the design computations shall be submitted to the Resident for review by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Any additional design or costs arising as a result of rejection of a wall design by the Geotechnical Engineer shall be borne by the Contractor .
Design calculations that consist of computer program generated output shall be supplemented with at least one hand calculation and graphic demonstrating the design methodology used .
Design calculations shall provide thorough documentation of the sources of equations used and material properties .
The design by the wall system supplier shall consider the stability of the wall as outlined below and in the Contract Documents A .
Failure Plane The theoretical failure plane within the reinforced soil mass shall be determined in accordance with LRFD Article and be analyzed so that the soil stabilizing components extend sufficiently beyond the failure plane within the reinforced soil mass to stabilize the material .
B .
External Loads External loads which affect the internal and external stability such as those applied through traffic loadings impact on traffic barrier posts slope surcharge hydrostatic and seismic loads shall be accounted for in the design .
Traffic surcharge and traffic impact loads shall be calculated and applied in compliance with LRFD Section .
C. External Stability Loads and load combinations selected for design shall be consistent with LRFD .
Application of load factors shall be taken as specified in LRFD Section .
Sliding resistance factors and bearing resistance factors shall be consistent with LRFD .
Overturning and sliding provisions of LRFD shall apply .
D. Internal Stability Evaluation of reinforcement pullout reinforcement rupture and reinforcementblock connection pullout or rupture shall be consistent with LRFD Section and checked at each level .
Loads load combinations and load factors shall be as specified in LRFD Section .
Resistance factors for internal design are specified in LRFD Section .
Maximum reinforcement loads shall be calculated using the Simplified Method approach .
Calculations for factored stresses and resistances shall be based upon assumed conditions at the end of the design life .
a. Geosynthetic Reinforcement Design Tensile Resistance The nominal long term reinforcement design strength Tal shall be determined by reducing Tult by reduction factors RF in accordance with the documents referenced above .
The designer shall procure and use the manufacturers tested and certified geosynthetic reinforcement reduction factors for creep RFCR durability RFD and installation damage RFID to determine Tal .
In absence of manufacturers tested and certified reduction factors a combined default reduction factor RF shall be used in accordance with the referenced documents .
For RFID the installation damage reduction factor shall be checked in accordance with LRFD and FHWANHI .
b. ReinforcementFacing Connection Design Strength The nominal long term connection strength between the geosynthetic reinforcement and the concrete blocks shall be checked in accordance with LRFD and FHWA NHI and FHWANHI Volumes and .
c. Reinforcement Pullout The pullout resistance factor F and scale effect correction factor  used in pullout design shall be determined from project specific pullout tests using the proposed geosynthetic in the specified project backfill material or equivalent soil .
The pullout resistance factors shall be determined in accordance with LRFD and FHWANHI and FHWANHI Volumes and .
In the absence of test data empirical relationships may be used to determine the pullout resistance factors any empirical relationships used in design shall be referenced in the design calculations .
E. Backfill and Foundation Soils Parameters The friction angle of the backfill used in the reinforced fill zone for internal stability design shall be assumed have a friction angle of degrees unless specific project select backfill is tested for frictional strength .
The friction angle of the foundation soils and random backfill shall be assumed to be degrees unless otherwise shown on the plans .
F. Reinforcement Length The soil reinforcement shall be the same length from the bottom to the top of each wall section .
The reinforcement length defining the width of the entire reinforced soil mass may vary with wall height .
The minimum length of the soil reinforcement shall be ft but shall not be less than percent of the wall height H for walls with level surcharges or percent of H for walls with a sloped surcharge .
Reinforcement length will be determined by the geotechnical wall designer .
The mechanical wall height H or H shall be the vertical difference between the top of the leveling footing and the elevation at which the failure surface as described above intercepts the ground surface supported by the wall .
G. Bearing Resistance The factored bearing pressures under the Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall shall be clearly indicated on the Shop Drawings .
Walls shall be dimensioned so that the factored bearing resistance of the foundation soils as noted on the Plans is not exceeded .
H. Facing Stability Stability calculations for the concrete facing blocks shall be in accordance with LRFD and shall include an evaluation of the maximum vertical spacing between reinforcement layers .
I .
Stability During Construction Walls shall be designed to resist failure by instability of temporary construction slope .
Passive pressure in front of the wall mass shall be assumed to be zero for design purposes .
J .
Design Life The wall design life shall be a minimum of years .
K. Depth of Embedment The depth of embedment for frost protection and stability shall be at or below the elevation shown on the Plans and the approved Shop Drawings .
L. Drainage System Piped drainage shall be designed to collect and dispose of water from the base of the reinforced soil zone and backfill soil .
This shall outlet into surrounding drainage systems or ditches. . Submittals .
The Contractor shall supply wall design computations wall details dimensions quantities and cross sections necessary to construct the wall .
A sample hand calculation including all equations parameter values used units theory freebody diagram comparison to design requirements etc .
shall be provided .
Spreadsheet calculations alone are not acceptable .
Fortyfive days prior to beginning construction of the wall four sets of the wall design computations and Shop Drawings shall be submitted to the Resident for review by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Mix design information shall be submitted at the same time including aggregate source current gradation aggregate quality information and concrete unit weight .
The contractor shall also submit backfill material test results as part of the wall submittal package .
Backfill material test results shall include grain size distribution curve moisture density relationship curve and pH test results required for reinforced backfill only .
If geotechnical design is required the fully detailed plans shall be prepared in conformance with Section and shall include but not be limited to the following items A .
A plan and elevation sheet or sheets for each wall containing the following elevations at the top of leveling pads the distance along the face of the wall to all steps in the leveling pads the location of the original and final ground line .
B .
All details for foundations and leveling pads including details for steps in the leveling pads as well as allowable and actual maximum bearing pressures shall be provided .
C. Details for the barriers posts curbs steps and facing as required by the project conditions .
D. Design computations prepared and sealed by a licensed Professional Engineer .
E. Prior to the beginning of construction the contractor shall supply the Resident with two copies of the designsuppliers Installation Manual .
In addition the Contractor shall have two copies of the Installation Manual on the project site. . Construction Requirements The Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall shall have the following construction requirements A. Excavation The excavation and use as fill of all excavated material shall meet the requirements of Section Excavation and Embankment except as modified herein .
B .
Foundation The area upon which the Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall structure is to rest and within the limits shown on the submitted plans shall be graded for a width equal to or exceeding the length of the blocks .
Prior to wall and leveling pad construction this foundation material shall be compacted to at least percent of maximum laboratory dry density AASHTO T Method C or D. Frozen and unsuitable soil shall be removed and replaced with gravel borrow compacted to percent of AASHTO T or as shown on the plans .
A concrete leveling pad shall be constructed a minimum width of inches beyond the front and back of the concrete wall units or as indicated on the plans .
Dimensions may be modified per the wall suppliers recommendations with written approval of the Geotechnical Engineer .
The leveling pad shall be cast to the design elevations as shown on the plans or as required by the wall supplier upon written approval of the Geotechnical Engineer .
The allowable elevation tolerances from the design elevations are .
ft and .
ft .
Leveling pads which do not meet this requirement shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the Resident at no additional cost to the Department .
Placement of wall units may begin after the strength of the concrete leveling pad reaches psi or is adequate to support the proposed loads .
Contractor may begin placement of concrete block units after hours at their own risk .
C. Method and Equipment Prior to erection of the wall the Contractor shall furnish the Resident with detailed information concerning the proposed construction method and equipment to be used .
The erection procedure shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Any units that are damaged due to handling will be replaced at the Contractors expense .
D. Installation of Concrete Wall Units A field representative from the wall system being used shall be available as needed during the erection of the wall .
The services of the representative shall be at no additional cost to the project .
The contractor shall place the first course of wall units directly on the leveling pad and check for level and alignment .
Adjacent units should be in contact .
The prefabricated concrete wall units shall be installed to a tolerance of plus or minus inch in ft in vertical and horizontal alignment .
Fill all voids between and within the wall units with drainage stone as described in this specification .
Stone infill shall be compacted by hand tamping with a rod .
The drainage stone fill shall extend a minimum of in behind the tails of the wall units unless a geotextile filter is placed over the inside joint at the back of adjacent wall units .
If used the drainage geotextile shall conform to the requirements of Section ..
The top course of blocks and all coping units shall be installed using adhesive or other method of permanent attachment as recommended by the manufacturer .
E. Backfill Placement Backfill placement shall closely follow the erection of each row of prefabricated wall units .
The maximum lift thickness shall be inches loose .
The Contractor shall decrease the lift thickness if necessary to obtain the specified density .
The backfill shall be compacted in accordance with Section .
except that the minimum required compaction shall be at least percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D. Backfill compaction shall be accomplished without disturbance or displacement of the concrete wall units .
Sheepsfoot rollers will not be allowed .
Whenever a compaction test fails no additional backfill shall be placed over the area until the lift is recompacted and a passing test achieved .
The moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be uniform throughout each layer .
Backfill material shall have a placement moisture content less than or equal to the optimum moisture content .
Backfill material with placement moisture content in excess of the optimum moisture content shall be removed and reworked until the moisture content is uniform and acceptable throughout the entire lift .
The optimum moisture content shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D. At the end of the days operations the Contractor shall shape the last level of backfill so as to direct runoff of rainwater away from the wall face .
F. Construction Certification Letter The Contractor shall furnish the Resident a Construction Certification Letter describing how adequate compaction of the block infill material was accomplished and what QAQC procedures were followed to ensure that this effort was continued throughout construction of the wall . .
Method of Measurement Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall will be measured by the square foot of front surface not to exceed the dimensions shown on the Contract Plans unless authorized by the Resident .
Vertical and horizontal dimensions will be from the edges of the blocks .
No field measurements for computations will be made unless the Resident specifies in writing a change in the limits indicated on the Plans . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot complete in place .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing geotechnical design as required all labor equipment and materials including all precast concrete units aggregate fill hardware joint fillers geosynthetic drainage pipe and technical field representative .
Excavation foundation material and backfill material will all be incidental to the Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall .
Cost of castinplace concrete for leveling pad will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall .
There will be no allowance for excavating and backfilling for the Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall beyond the limits shown on the approved submitted plans except for excavation required to remove unsuitable subsoil in preparation for the foundation .
Payment for excavating unsuitable subsoil shall be full compensation for all costs of pumping drainage sheeting bracing and incidentals for proper execution of the work and will be paid as common excavation in accordance with Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Wet Cast Small Landscape Block Wall Square Foot SECTION PREFABRICATED CONCRETE MODULAR GRAVITY WALL .
Description This work shall consist of the construction of a prefabricated modular reinforced concrete gravity wall in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformance with the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the Resident .
Included in the scope of the Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall construction are all grading necessary for wall construction excavation compaction of the wall foundation backfill construction of leveling pads placement of geotextile segmental unit erection and all incidentals necessity to complete the work .
The Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall design shall follow the general dimensions of the wall envelope shown in the contract plans .
The top of the leveling pad shall be located at or below the theoretical leveling pad elevation .
The minimum wall embedment shall be at or below the elevation shown on the plans .
The top of the face panels shall be at or above the top of the panel elevation shown on the plans .
The Contractor shall require the designsupplier to supply an onsite qualified experienced technical representative to advise the Contractor concerning proper installation procedures .
The technical representative shall be onsite during initial stages of installation and thereafter shall remain available for consultation as necessary for the Contractor or as required by the Resident .
The work done by this representative is incidental. . Materials Materials shall meet the requirements of the following subsections of Division Materials Gravel Borrow .
Preformed Expansion Joint Material .
Reinforcing Steel .
Structural Precast Concrete Units .
Drainage Geotextile .
The Contractor is cautioned that all of the materials listed are not required for every Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall .
The Contractor shall furnish the Resident a Certificate of Compliance certifying that the applicable materials comply with this section of the specifications .
Materials shall meet the following additional requirements Concrete Units Tolerances In addition to meeting the requirements of .
all prefabricated units shall be manufactured with the following tolerances .
All units not meeting the listed tolerances will be rejected. . All dimensions shall be within edge to edge of concrete in. . Squareness The length differences between the two diagonals shall not exceed in . .
Surface Tolerances For steel formed surfaces and other formed surface any surface defects in excess of .
in .
in ft will be rejected .
For textured surfaces any surface defects in excess of in .
in ft shall be rejected .
Joint Filler where applicable Joints shall be filled with material approved by the Resident and supplied by the approved Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall supplier .
in .
wide by .
in .
preformed expansion joint filler shall be placed in all horizontal joints between facing units .
In all vertical joints a space of .
in .
shall be provided .
All Preformed Expansion Joint Material shall meet the requirements of subsection .. Woven Drainage Geotextile Woven drainage geotextile in .
wide shall be bonded with an approved adhesive compound to the back face covering all joints between units including joints abutting concrete structures .
Geotextile seam laps shall be in .
minimum .
The fabric shall be secured to the concrete with an adhesive satisfactory to the Resident .
Dimensions may be modified per the wall suppliers recommendations with written approval of the Resident .
Concrete Shear Keys where applicable Shear keys shall have a thickness at least equal to the precast concrete stem .
Concrete Leveling Pad Castinplace concrete shall be Fill Concrete conforming to the requirements of Section Structural Concrete .
The horizontal tolerance on the surface of the pad shall be .
in .
in ft. Dimensions may be modified per the wall suppliers recommendations with written approval of the Resident .
Backfill and Bedding Material Bedding and backfill material placed behind and within the reinforced concrete modules shall be gravel borrow conforming to the requirements of Subsection ..
The backfill materials shall conform to the following additional requirements backfill and bedding material shall only contain particles that will pass the inch square mesh sieve and the plasticity index PI as determined by AASHTO T shall not exceed .
Compliance with the gradation and plasticity requirements shall be the responsibility of the Contractor who shall furnish a copy of the backfill test results prior to construction .
Materials Certificate Letter The Contractor or the supplier as his agent shall furnish the Resident a Materials Certificate Letter for the above materials including the backfill material in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications .
A copy of all test results performed by the Contractor or his supplier necessary to assure contract compliance shall also be furnished to the Resident .
Acceptance will be based upon the materials Certificate Letter accompanying test reports and visual inspection by the Resident. . Design Requirements The Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall shall be designed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
The design to be performed by the wall system supplier shall be in accordance with AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications current edition except as required herein .
Design calculations that consist of computer generated output shall be supplemented with at least one hand calculation and graphic demonstrating the design methodology used .
Design calculations shall provide thorough documentation of the sources of equations used and material properties .
The design by the wall system supplier shall consider the stability of the wall as outlined below A .
Stability Analyses Wall systems shall be investigated for bearing resistance failure lateral sliding and overturning failure in accordance with LRFD Pullout resistance shall be investigated at every module level using nominal resistances and forces in accordance with Paragraph C. below .
The ratio of the sum of the nominal resistances to the sum of the nominal forces shall be greater than or equal to .. Traffic impact loads transmitted to the wall through guardrail posts shall be calculated and applied in compliance with LRFD with the exception that Article is modified such that the upper .
ft of concrete modular units shall be designed for an additional horizontal load of PH where PH lbs per linear ft of wall .
B. Backfill and Wall Unit Soil Parameters For overturning and sliding stability calculations earth pressure shall be assumed acting on a vertical plane rising from the back of the lowest wall stem .
For overturning the unit weight of the backfill within the wall units shall be limited to pcf .
For sliding analyses the unit weight of the backfill within the wall units can be assumed to be pcf .
Both analyses may assume a friction angle of degrees for backfill within the wall units .
These unit weights and friction angles are based on a wall unit backfill meeting the requirements for select backfill in this specification .
Backfill behind the wall units shall be assumed to have a unit weight of pcf and a friction angle of degrees .
The friction angle of the foundation soils shall be assumed to be degrees unless otherwise noted on the plans .
C. Internal Stability Internal stability of the wall shall be demonstrated using accepted methods such as Elias Method .
Shear keys shall not contribute to pullout resistance .
Soiltosoil frictional component along stem shall not contribute to pullout resistance .
The failure plane used to determine pullout resistance shall be found by the Rankine theory only for vertical walls with level backfills .
When walls are battered or with backslopes greater than degrees are considered the angle of the failure plane shall be per Jumikus Method .
For computation of pullout force the width of the backface of each unit shall be no greater than .
ft. A unit weight of the soil inside the units shall be assumed no greater than pcf when computing pullout .
Coulomb theory may be used .
D. Safety against Structural Failure Prefabricated units shall be designed for all strength and reinforcement requirements in accordance with LRFD .
E. External loads which affect the internal stability such as those applied through piling bridge footings traffic slope surcharge hydrostatic and seismic loads shall be accounted for in the design .
F. Stability During Construction Stability during construction shall be considered during design and shall meet the requirements of the AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications Extreme Limit State .
G. Hydrostatic forces Unless specified otherwise when a design high water surface is shown on the plans at the face of the wall the design stresses calculated from that elevation to the bottom of wall must include a ft minimum differential head of saturated backfill .
In addition the buoyant weight of saturated soil shall be used in the calculation of pullout resistance .
H. Not more than two vertically consecutive units shall have the same stem length or the same unit depth .
Walls with units with extended height curbs shall be designed for the added earth pressure .
A separate computation for pullout of each unit with extended height curbs or extended height coping shall be prepared and submitted in the design package described above. . Submittals .
The Contractor shall supply wall design computations wall details dimensions quantities and cross sections necessary to construct the wall .
Thirty days prior to beginning construction of the wall the design computations and wall details shall be submitted to the Resident for review by the Department .
The fully detailed plans shall be prepared in conformance with Subsection .
of the Standard Specifications and shall include but not be limited to the following items A .
A plan and elevation sheet or sheets for each wall containing the following elevations at the top of leveling pads the distance along the face of the wall to all steps in the leveling pads the designation as to the type of prefabricated module the distance along the face of the wall to where changes in length of the units occur the location of the original and final ground line .
B .
All details including reinforcing bar bending details shall be provided .
Bar bending details shall be in accordance with Department standards .
C. All details for foundations and leveling pads including details for steps in the leveling pads shall be provided .
The maximum calculated factored bearing pressure under the Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity wall shall be indicated on the wall plans .
D. All prefabricated modules shall be detailed .
The details shall show all dimensions necessary to construct the element and all reinforcing steel in the element .
E. The wall plans shall be prepared and stamped by a Professional Engineer .
F. Four weeks prior to the beginning of construction the contractor shall supply the Resident with two copies of the designsuppliers Installation Manual .
In addition the Contractor shall have two copies of the Installation Manual on the project site. . Construction Requirements Excavation The excavation and use as fill or disposal of all excavated material shall meet the requirements of Section Excavation and Embankment except as modified herein .
Foundation The area upon which the modular gravity wall structure is to rest and within the limits shown on the submitted plans shall be graded for a width equal to or exceeding the length of the module .
Prior to wall and leveling pad construction this foundation material shall be compacted to at least percent of maximum laboratory dry density determined using AASHTO T Method C or D. Frozen soils and soils unsuitable or incapable of sustaining the required compaction shall be removed and replaced .
A concrete leveling pad shall be constructed as indicated on the plans .
The leveling pad shall be cast to the design elevations as shown on the plans or as required by the wall supplier upon written approval of the Resident .
Allowable elevation tolerances are .
ft and .
ft from the design elevations .
Leveling pads which do not meet this requirement shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the Resident at no additional cost to the Department .
Placement of wall units may begin after hours curing time of the concrete leveling pad .
Method and Equipment Prior to erection of the Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall the Contractor shall furnish the Resident with detailed information concerning the proposed construction method and equipment to be used .
The erection procedure shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Any precast units that are damaged due to handling will be replaced at the Contractors expense .
Installation of Wall Units A field representative from the wall system being used shall be available as needed during the erection of the wall .
The services of the representative shall be at no additional cost to the Department .
Vertical and horizontal joint fillers shall be installed as shown on the plans .
The maximum offset in any unit joint shall be in .
The overall vertical tolerance of the wall plumb from top to bottom shall not exceed in per ft of wall height .
The prefabricated wall units shall be installed to a tolerance of plus or minus in in ft in vertical alignment and horizontal alignment .
Select Backfill Placement Backfill placement in the interior of the wall units and behind the wall shall progress simultaneously following the erection of each row of prefabricated wall units .
The maximum lift thickness shall be in .
loose measure and be thoroughly compacted by mechanical or vibratory compactors .
The Contractor shall decrease the lift thickness if necessary to obtain the specified density .
Gravel borrow backfill shall be compacted in accordance with Subsection .
except that the minimum required compaction shall be percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D. Backfill compaction shall be accomplished without disturbance or displacement of the wall units .
Sheepsfoot rollers will not be allowed .
Puddling for compaction will not be allowed .
Whenever a compaction test fails no additional backfill shall be placed over the area until the lift is recompacted and a passing test achieved .
The moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be uniform throughout each layer .
Backfill material shall have a placement moisture content less than or equal to the optimum moisture content .
Backfill material with a placement moisture content in excess of the optimum moisture content shall be removed and reworked until the moisture content is uniform and acceptable throughout the entire lift .
The optimum moisture content shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D. At the end of the days operations the Contractor shall shape the last level of backfill so as to direct runoff of rain water away from the wall face . .
Method of Measurement Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall will be measured by the square foot of front surface not to exceed the dimensions shown on the contract plans or authorized by the Resident .
Vertical and horizontal dimensions will be from the edges of the facing units .
No field measurements for computations will be made unless the Resident specifies in writing a change in the limits indicated on the plans . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Retaining Wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot complete in place .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all labor equipment and materials including excavation foundation material backfill material precast concrete units hardware joint fillers woven drainage geotextile castinplace coping or traffic barrier and technical field representative .
Cost of castinplace concrete for leveling pad will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall .
There will be no allowance for excavating and backfilling for the Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall beyond the limits shown on the approved submitted plans except for excavation required to remove unsuitable subsoil in preparation for the foundation as approved by the Resident .
Payment for excavating unsuitable material shall be full compensation for all costs of pumping drainage sheeting bracing and incidentals for proper execution of the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Prefabricated Concrete Modular Gravity Wall Square Foot SECTION SOIL NAIL WALL SECTION SOLDIER PILE AND LAGGING WALL Reserved SECTION MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH RETAINING WALL .
Description The work under this item shall consist of design fabrication furnishing transportation and erection of Mechanically Stabilized Earth MSE retaining wall system of the required type including miscellaneous items necessary for a complete installation .
The MSE retaining walls shall consist of reinforcing strips or reinforcing mesh earth wall systems utilizing architectural precast concrete facing panels supported on castinplace concrete leveling pads .
All reinforcing strips or mesh material shall consist of galvanized steel .
The wall structures shall be dimensioned to achieve the design criteria shown on the plans and specified herein .
The MSE retaining walls shall be constructed in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines grades design criteria and dimensions shown on the plans or established by the Geotechnical Engineer. . Quality Assurance .
The MSE retaining wall system shall be one of the approved wall systems noted in the Plans or on the Departments Qualified Product List QPL .
All necessary materials except backfill and cast inplace concrete shall be obtained from the approved system designer .
Mechanically Stabilized Earth MSE retaining walls shall be designed and constructed as specified herein .
The design shall be subject to review and acceptance by the Geotechnical Engineer .
The acceptability of a MSE retaining wall design shall be at the sole discretion of the Geotechnical Engineer .
Any additional design construction or other costs arising as a result of rejection of a retaining wall design by the Geotechnical Engineer shall be borne by the Contractor .
Precast facing panels shall be manufactured in a concrete products plant with approved facilities .
Before proceeding with production precast sample units shall be provided for the Residents acceptance .
These samples shall be kept at the plant to be used for comparison purposes during production .
All calculations and Shop Drawings shall be signed and sealed by a licensed Professional Engineer registered in accordance with the laws of the State of Maine and specializing in geotechnical construction .
The Contractor installing the MSE retaining walls shall have demonstrated experience constructing MSE walls and shall use personnel having demonstrated experience in the installation procedures recommended by the manufacturer and as specified herein .
All MSE walls shall be built in accordance with the plans and accepted shop drawings for the proposed wall systems .
A qualified representative from the wall designsupplier shall be present during construction of the MSE walls .
The services of the qualified representative shall be at no additional cost to the project .
The qualified experienced technical representative will advise the Contractor and the Resident concerning proper installation procedures .
The vendors representative shall specify the required backbatter so that the final position of the wall is vertical .
Furthermore footing berms shall be placed in front of the first three levels of panels erected to maintain verticality. . Design Requirements The MSE retaining walls shall be designed to provide the grade separation shown on the plans with a service life of not less than years .
The MSE wall system shall be designed in accordance with .
The manufacturers requirements .
The Contract Plans .
The requirements specified herein .
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications current edition .
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications current edition .
FHWANHI Design and Construction of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes Volume I November .
FHWANHI Design and Construction of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes Volume II November .
FHWANHI CorrosionDegradation of Soil Reinforcements for Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes November .
Where conflicting requirements occur the more stringent requirements shall govern .
The MSE wall design shall follow the general dimensions of the wall envelope shown on the plans .
Base of footing elevation shall be as shown on the plans or may be lower .
All wall elements shall be within the rightofway limits shown on the plans .
The panels shall be placed so as not to interfere with drainage or other utilities or other potential obstructions .
All appurtenances behind in front of under mounted upon or passing through the wall such as drainage structures utilities fences concrete parapet wall or other appurtenances shown on the plans shall be accounted for in the stability design of the wall .
Facing panels shall have tongue and groove ship lap or similar approved connections along all joints both vertical and horizontal .
Where foundation conditions indicate large differential settlements vertical fullheight slip joints shall be provided .
The shape of the panels shall be such that adjacent panels will have continuous vertical joints or as noted on the plans .
MSE facing panels shall be installed on castinplace concrete leveling pads .
The top of the leveling pad shall be located at or below the theoretical leveling pad elevation .
The minimum wall embedment shall be .
ft as measured to the top of the leveling pad or as shown on the plans whichever is greater .
The top of the face panels shall be at or above the top of the panel elevation shown on the plans .
Where coping or barrier is used the wall face shall extend up into the coping or barrier a minimum of in .
The MSE walls shall be dimensioned so that the factored bearing pressure resistance of the foundation soils as noted on the plans is not exceeded .
Requirements for over excavation of native foundation soils and replacement with compacted structural fill are detailed on the plans .
The design by the wall system supplier shall consider the stability of the wall as outlined below and in the Contract Documents a Failure Plane The theoretical failure plane within the reinforced soil mass shall be determined per LRFD Section and be analyzed so that the soil stabilizing components extend sufficiently beyond the failure plane within the reinforced soil mass to stabilize the material .
External loads which affect the internal stability such as those applied through piling bridge footings traffic slope surcharge hydrostatic and seismic loads shall be accounted for in the design .
b External Stability Load and Resistance Factors Loads and load combinations selected for design shall be consistent with AASHTO LRFD .
Application of load factors shall be taken as specified in AASHTO LRFD .
Sliding resistance factors and bearing resistance factors shall be consistent with LRFD Section .
Overturning provisions of LRFD Section shall apply .
MSE walls shall be designed to resist failure by instability of temporary construction slope .
Passive pressure in front of the wall mass shall be assumed to be zero for design purposes .
The factored applied bearing pressures under the MSE mass for each reinforced length shall be clearly indicated on the design drawing .
c Internal Stability Load and Resistance Factors Evaluation of reinforcement pullout reinforcement rupture and panel connection pullout or rupture shall be consistent with LRFD Section .
Loads load combinations and load factors shall be as specified in LRFD Article .
Resistance factors for internal design shall be consistent with LRFD Article .
Maximum reinforcement loads shall be calculated using the Simplified Method approach .
Calculations for factored stresses and resistances shall be based upon assumed conditions at the end of the design life .
The design life of steel soil reinforcements shall comply with LRFD Section .
d Backfill and Foundation Soils Parameters .
The friction angle of the select backfill used in the reinforced fill zone for the internal stability design of the wall shall be assumed to be unless noted otherwise .
The friction angle of the foundation soils and random backfill shall be assumed to be unless otherwise shown on the plans .
e Reinforcement Length .
The soil reinforcement shall be the same length from the bottom to the top of each wall section .
The reinforcement length defining the width of the entire reinforced soil mass may vary with wall height .
The minimum length of the soil reinforcement shall be ft but shall not be less than percent of the wall height H for walls with level surcharges or percent of H for walls with a sloped surcharge or walls supporting an abutment .
The mechanical wall height H or H shall be the vertical difference between the top of the leveling footing and the elevation at which the failure surface as described above intercepts the ground surface supported by the wall .
f Steel Reinforcement For steel reinforcements all structural connections tie strips and loop inserts the following galvanization and carbon steel loss rates shall be assumed Mil.yearside Zinc galvanizing first years .
Zinc galvanizing subsequent years to depletion .
Carbon Steel after zinc depletion to yrs .
Calculations for factored stresses and resistances in steel reinforcements and connections including tiestrips and loop inserts shall be based upon assumed conditions at the end of the design life .
or The nominal longterm design strength in steel reinforcements and connections including tiestrips and loop inserts shall be determined at the end of the service life .
The applied factored reinforcement loads shall be calculated in accordance with LRFD Section and shall be checked against the nominal tensile strength multiplied by a resistance factor per LRFD Table Transverse and longitudinal grid members shall be sized in accordance with ASTM A .
When the expected differential settlement normal to the wall exceeds in the lower level reinforcement facing connections shall be designed to accommodate the increased tensile forces due to settlement .
g Facing Panel Requirements .
Facing panels shall be designed to resist compaction stresses that occur during wall erection . .
The minimum thickness for concrete panels in the zone of embedded connections shall be .
in and .
in elsewhere .
The minimum concrete cover shall be .
in .
Facing panels shall meet the design requirements of LRFD .
The wall facing shall be designed to accommodate differential settlements of ft. .
The minimum spacing between adjacent panels shall be  inches in order to accommodate differential settlements without impairing the appearance of the facing or compromising the structural integrity of the individual panels .
Joints between panels shall be no more than .
in .
Joint between panels shall have a ship lap configuration or tongue and groove connection .
There shall be no openings through the wall facing except for utilities to pass through the wall .
Slip joints to accommodate differential settlement shall be included where shown on the plans. . Where wall or wall sections intersect with an angle of  or less a special vertical corner element panel shall be used .
The corner element panel shall cover the joint of the panels that abut the corner and allow for independent movement of the abutting panels .
Corner elements shall not be formed by connecting standard facing panels that abut the acute corner. . Materials The Contractor shall be responsible for the purchase or manufacture of the precast concrete facing panels reinforcing mesh or strips panelreinforcement connections bearing pads joint filler and all other necessary components .
The Contractor shall furnish to the Resident the appropriate Certificates of Compliance certifying that the applicable wall materials meet the requirements of the project specifications .
All materials used in the construction of the MSE retaining walls shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections of the Maine Standard Specifications and as specified herein .
Materials not conforming to this section of the specifications or from sources not listed in the contract documents shall not be used without written consent from the Resident. . Reinforced Concrete Facing Panels Reinforced concrete facing panels shall meet the requirements specified in the following subsections Structural Precast Concrete Units .
Drainage Geotextile . . Precast Panel Tolerances and Surface Finish Concrete surface for the front face shall have a smooth steel formed finish or as noted on the plans .
The rear face shall have an unformed surface finish .
The rear face of the panel shall be roughly screeded to eliminate open pockets of aggregate and surface distortions in excess of  in .
All uncoated steel projecting from the panel unit shall be galvanized in accordance with ASTM A A M AASHTO M with a minimum coating thickness of ozft .
Precast panel tolerances shall comply with the following units that do not meet the listed tolerances will be rejected. . Panel dimensions edge to edge of concrete within in. . Panel thickness  in. . Squareness The length difference between the two diagonals shall not exceed  in . .
Distance between the centerline of dowel and dowel sleeve and to centerline of reinforcing steel shall be in. . Face of panel to centerline of dowel and dowel sleeve and to centerline of reinforcing steel shall be in . .
Position of panel connection devices Tie Strip shall be in . .
Location of Coil and loop Imbeds shall be in. . Warping of the exposed panel face shall not exceed in .
in ft. .
Surface defects on smoothformed surfaces measured over a length of ft shall not exceed in .
Surface defects on texturedfinished surfaces measured over a length of ft shall not exceed in . .
Reinforcing All reinforcing tie strips and attachment devices shall be carefully inspected to insure they are true to size and free from defects that may impair their strength and durability .
A .
Reinforcing Mesh shall be shop fabricated from cold drawn steel wire conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A yield strength minimum of ksi and shall be welded into the finished mesh fabric in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A . Galvanizing shall be in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A AM after fabrication .
The minimum coating thickness shall be ozft .
Any damage done to the mesh galvanization prior to the installation shall be repaired in an acceptable manner and provide a minimum galvanized coating of ozft .
B .
Reinforcing Strips shall be fabricated from hot rolled bars to the required shape and dimensions .
Their physical and mechanical properties shall conform to AASHTO M ASTM A AM Grade or approved equal .
Reinforcing strips shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A AM after fabrication .
The minimum galvanization coating thickness shall be ozft .
Any damage done to the mesh galvanization prior to the installation shall be repaired ozft .
C. Tie strips shall be fabricated of hot rolled steel conforming to ASTM A ASTM A AM Grade or equivalent .
Tie strips shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A AM after fabrication .
The minimum coating thickness shall be ozft .
D. The tie strips and reinforcing strips shall be cut to lengths and tolerances shown on the submitted plans .
Holes for bolts shall be punched in the locations shown. . Attachment Devices A .
Steel clevis loop embeds shall be fabricated of cold drawn steel wire conforming to ASTM A UNS G or AASHTO M ASTM A . Loop embeds shall be welded in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A .
Both shall have electrodeposited coatings of zinc applied in accordance with ASTM B .
B .
Fasteners shall consist of hexagonal cap screw bolts and nuts which are galvanized and conform to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A or equivalent .
C. Connector pins and mat bars shall be fabricated from AASHTO M ASTM A AM steel and welded to the soil reinforcement mats as shown on the plans .
Galvanization shall conform to AASHTO M ASTM A AM with a minimum coating thickness of ozft .
Connector bars shall be fabricated of cold drawn steel wire conforming to the requirements of ASTM A AASHTO M and galvanized in accordance with ASTM A AM .
D. Structural plate connectors and fasteners used for yokes to connect reinforcements to wall panels around pile or utility conflicts shall conform to the material requirements for reinforcing strips and fasteners in .
c. . Joint Materials Joint material shall be installed to the dimensions and thicknesses specified below or in accordance with the plans or approved shop drawings .
A .
Provide flexible foam strips for filler for vertical joints between panels and in horizontal joints where pads are used .
B .
Provide in horizontal joints between panels either preformed EPDM rubber pads conforming to ASTM D for AA or rubbers or neoprene elastomeric pads having a Durometer Hardness of or high density polyethylene pads with a minimum density of .
gcm in accordance with ASTM D . Nonwoven Drainage Geotextile Cover all joints between panels on the back side of the wall with a geotextile fabric meeting the minimum requirements of .
Class .
Slit film and multifilament woven and resin bonded woven geotextile fabrics are not allowed for this application .
The minimum width of the fabric shall be in .
Lap fabric at least in .
where splices are required .
Nonwoven Drainage Geotextile shall be bonded with an approved adhesive compound to the back face covering all joints between panels .
Adhesives used to hold the geotextile filter fabric material to the rear of the facing panels prior to backfill placement shall be supplied by the wall supplier and approved by the Resident . .
Concrete Leveling Pad The castinplace leveling pad shall be constructed of Class A concrete conforming to the requirements of Section Structural Concrete .
Leveling pad shall have minimum dimensions of in thickness and in width and be placed at the design elevation shown on the shop drawings within a in tolerance. . Backfill Materials All backfill materials used in the MSE Walls volume shall conform to Gravel Borrow conforming to the requirements of Section .
with and the following additional requirements A .
The maximum aggregate size is limited to in U.S Sieve Size mm B .
Soundness The material shall be substantially free of shale or other soft poor durability particles .
The materials shall have a magnesium sulfate soundness loss as determined by AASHTO T ASTM C of less than percent after four cycles .
C. Electrochemical Requirements The backfill materials shall meet the following criteria D. The plasticity index PI as determined by AASHTO T shall not exceed .
E. The select backfill material shall exhibit a peak angle of internal friction of not less than degrees as determined by the standard Direct Shear Test AASHTO T ASTM D on the portion finer than the mm sieve compacted to percent of AASHTO T Methods C or D with oversized correction as outlined in Note at optimum moisture content .
No testing is required for backfills where percent of sizes are greater than in .
mm Before construction begins the borrow material selected shall be subject to show conformance with this frictional requirement .
Compliance with the test requirements shall be the responsibility of the Contractor who shall furnish a copy of the backfill test results prior to construction . .
Crushed Stone for Abutment Foundation Crushed stone for use in the foundation layer below the abutment shall be crushed stone conforming to the requirements of MaineDOT Standard Specification Section .
Crushed Stone inch. . Impervious Membrane An impervious geomembrane shall be installed near the top of the reinforced backfill to reduce the chance of water infiltrating into the reinforced backfill .
The geomembrane shall be bonded to the inside face of the wall panels and extend perpendicularly from the wall face into the fill while being parallel to the top of the wall .
The membrane should be sloped to drain away from the facing and outlet beyond the reinforcing zone .
The impervious geomembrane shall extend into the fill a distance of ft beyond the MSE reinforcement .
The geomembrane shall have a minimum thickness of .
mm mil .
in in The geomembrane shall have both sides textured with a rough finish to improve resistance against sliding .
The texture shall be approved by the Resident before installation .
The geomembrane shall be shown on the design drawings of the MSE submittal of the Contractor . .
Acceptance of Material The Contractor shall furnish to the Resident a Certificate of Compliance certifying that the above materials comply with the applicable contract specifications including the backfill material in accordance with Section .
A copy of all test results performed by the Contractor necessary to assure contract compliance shall also be Requirements Test Methods Resistivity ohmcentimeters AASHTO T pH between Between and inclusive AASHTO T Chlorides parts per million AASHTO T Sulfates parts per million AASHTO T Organic Content AASHTO T furnished to the Resident .
Acceptance will be based on the Certificate of Compliance accompanying test reports and visual inspection by the Resident. . Submittals A .
Design computations demonstrating compliance with the criteria specified herein and shown on the plans shall be prepared signed and stamped by a licensed Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine and specializing in geotechnical engineering .
Design calculations that consist of computer generated output shall be supplemented with at least one hand calculation and graphic demonstrating the design methodology used .
Design calculations shall provide thorough documentation of the sources of equations used and material properties .
The design calculations shall include .
Statement of all assumptions made and copies of all references used in the calculations . .
Analyses demonstrating compliance with all applicable earth water surcharges seismic or other loads as specified herein and required by AASHTO LRFD . .
Analyses or studies demonstrating durability and corrosion resistance of retaining wall systems for the proposed location and environment .
The designer shall provide all corrosion protection devices necessary for the retaining wall to have a minimum service life of years in the proposed location and environment .
B .
A detailed resume of the wall designer listing similar projects with references and demonstrating necessary experience to perform the MSE retaining wall design including a brief description of each project that is similar in scope .
C. A detailed listing of MSE walls that the Contractor has constructed including a brief description of each project and a listing of personnel who will construct the walls demonstrating their experience in construction of MSE retaining walls .
A reference shall be included for each project listed .
As a minimum the reference shall include an individuals name address and current phone number .
D. Manufacturers product data for the MSE wall system including material manufacture and erection specifications all specified erection equipment necessary details of buried MSE wall elements special details required of reinforcing layout around drainage structures and sign foundations structures design properties type of backfill and details for connections between facing panels .
E. Details of precast yard and concrete mix design .
F. Shop drawing showing the configuration and all details dimensions quantities and cross sections necessary to construct the MSE wall including but not limited to the following .
A plan view of the wall which shall include Contract limits stations and offsets and the face of wall line shown on the plans. . An elevation view of the wall which shall include the elevation at the top of the wall at all horizontal and vertical break points and at least every ft along the face of the wall all steps in the leveling pads the designation as to the type of retaining wall systems and an indication of the final ground line and calculated factored bearing pressures .
The face of wall shown on the plans shall be indicated. . A typical cross section or cross sections showing the elevation relationship between existing ground conditions and proposed grades and the proposed wall configuration including details for the proposed methods for connecting to existing conditions .
The sections shall also indicate the location of the face of wall shown on the plans. . General notes pertaining to design criteria and wall construction. . A listing of material quantities for each wall . .
Details of sleeves and pipes and other embedded items to be installed through the walls. . Clearly indicated details for construction of walls or reinforcing elements around drainage foundations utilities or any other potential obstructions . .
Details of the architectural treatment of facing panels. . Drainage design detail and design scheme . .
Location of utilities. . Sequence and schedule of construction including overall construction schedule. . Methods of excavation and backfill . .
Method of maintaining stability of excavated trenches . .
Method of monitoring plumbness and deviation of wall. . Excavation support system if any. . Any acceptance testing and frequency . .
Details and location of all necessary construction and expansion joints along the wall . .
Connection details at the interface of the wall and any adjacent proposed cast in place retaining wall or abutment structure . .
Details of impermeable membrane connection to abutment in roadway runoff collection system . .
Delivery Storage and Handling A .
Contractor shall check the material upon delivery to assure that the proper material has been received .
A product certification should be provided with each shipment .
B .
Material shall be stored above  F C. Contractor shall prevent excessive mud wet cement epoxy and like substances which may affix themselves to the material from coming in contact with the material .
D. Material may be laid flat and stored outside for days .
For extended storage material shall be stored in or beneath a trailer or covered with a colored tarpaulin to prevent longterm exposure. . Wall Excavation The excavation and use as fill disposal of all excavated material shall meet the requirements of Section Excavation and Embankment except as modified herein .
Temporary excavation support as required shall be the responsibility of the contractor. . Foundation Preparation .
The foundation for the structure shall be graded level for a width equal to the length of reinforcement elements plus ft or as shown on the plans .
Prior to wall construction the foundation shall be compacted with at least passes of a smooth wheel vibratory roller weighing at least lbs .
Any foundation soils found to be unsuitable or incapable of sustaining the required compaction shall be removed and replaced with Special Borrow Material .
The foundation for the structure shall be approved by the Resident before erection is started .
A concrete leveling pad shall be constructed as indicated on the submitted plans .
The leveling pad shall be cast to the design elevations as shown on the plans .
Allowable elevation tolerances are .
ft and .
ft from the design elevations .
Placement of wall panels may begin after hours curing time of the concrete leveling pad. . Wall Erection A field representative from the proprietary wall system being used shall be available as needed during the erection of the wall .
The services of the representative shall be at no additional cost to the project .
Precast concrete panels shall be placed so that their final position is vertical or battered as shown on the plans .
The vendor representative shall specify the required backbatter so that the final position of the wall is vertical .
Earth berms at the footing shall be placed to maintain the desired position of panels .
For erection panels are handled by means of lifting devices connected to the upper edge of the panel .
Panels should be placed in successive horizontal lifts in the sequence shown on the approved shop drawings as backfill placement proceeds .
As backfill material is placed behind the panels the panels shall be maintained in position by means of temporary wedges or bracing according to the wall suppliers recommendations .
Concrete facing vertical tolerances and horizontal alignment tolerances shall not exceed  inch when measured with a ft straightedge  inyd .
During construction the maximum allowable offset in any panel joint shall be  in .
The overall vertical tolerance of the wall from top to bottom shall not exceed  inch per ft of wall height. . Backfill Placement Backfill shall not be placed between November st and April st. Backfill placement shall closely follow erection of each course of panels .
Backfill shall be placed and compacted in such a manner as to avoid any damage or disturbance of the wall materials or misalignment of the facing panels or reinforcing elements .
Any wall materials which become damaged during backfill placement shall be removed and replaced at the Contractors expense .
Any misalignment or distortion of the wall facing panels due to placement of backfill outside the limits of this specification shall be corrected by the Contractor at his expense .
Prior to the placement of the soil reinforcement the backfill elevation after compaction shall be at the required elevation of the reinforcements .
At each reinforcement level the backfill shall be placed to the level of the connection .
Backfill placement methods near the panels shall assure that no voids exist directly beneath the reinforcing element .
Gravel borrow backfill shall be compacted in accordance with Subsection .
except that the minimum required compaction shall be percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D with oversize correction as outlined in Note of that test .
If percent or more of the backfill material is greater than in .
in size AASHTO T is not applicable and the acceptance criterion for control of compaction shall be either a minimum of percent of the relative density of the material as determined by ASTM D and D or a method of compaction consisting of at least four passes by a heavy roller .
Where spread footings support bridge or other structural loads the top ft below the bottom of footing elevation shall be compacted to percent of the maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D with oversize correction as outlined in Note of that test .
The moisture content determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be uniformly distributed throughout each layer .
Backfill materials shall have be placed at a moisture content not more than percentage points less than or equal to the optimum moisture content .
Backfill material with a placement moisture content in excess of the optimum moisture content shall be removed and reworked until the moisture content is uniformly acceptable throughout the entire lift .
At each reinforcing level backfill shall be leveled before placing and bolting the reinforcing .
The maximum lift thickness after compaction shall not exceed in .
The Contractor shall decrease this lift thickness if necessary to obtain the specified density .
Heavy compaction equipment shall not be used to compact backfill within ft of the wall face .
Compaction within ft of the back face of the wall shall be achieved by at least three passes of lightweight mechanical tamper lightweight roller or vibratory system .
The specified lift thickness shall be adjusted as warranted by the type of compaction equipment actually used .
No vehicular equipment shall be operated within ft of the panels .
The frequency of sampling of the backfill material necessary to assure gradation control throughout construction shall be as directed by the Resident .
At the end of each days operation the Contractor shall slope the last level of the backfill away from the wall facing to rapidly direct runoff away from the wall face .
In addition the Contractor shall not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the wall construction site. . Reinforcement Placement Prior to placing the first layer of reinforcements strips mats or grids backfill shall be placed and compacted in accordance with Subsection .
Backfill Placement .
Bending of reinforcements in the horizontal plane resulting in a permanent deformation in their alignment shall not be allowed .
Gradual bending in the vertical direction that does not result in permanent deformations is allowable .
Cutting of longitudinal or transverse reinforcement bars to avoid conflicts with utility obstructions or piles will not be allowed .
A structural connection yokes from the wall panel to the reinforcement shall be used whenever it is necessary to avoid cutting or excessive skewing of reinforcement due to pile or utility conflicts .
Soil reinforcements shall be placed normal to the face of the wall unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed by the Resident .
If skewing of the soil reinforcements is required due to obstructions in the reinforced fill rotatable bolted connections shall be used and the maximum skew angle shall not exceed  from the normal position except in the case of acute corner where redundant reinforcements are used .
The tensile capacity of splayed reinforcement shall be reduced by the cosine of the splay angle . .
Method of Measurement Mechanically Stabilized Earth Retaining Wall will be measured by the square foot of face area computed using the plan dimensions .
No adjustment in the pay quantity will be made if the computed quantity based on the working drawings varies from the plan quantity .
Vertical dimension limits will be from the top of leveling pad to the top of the wall facing units as shown on the plans .
The horizontal dimension limits will be from the edges of the facing units at each end of a wall as shown on the plans .
No field measurements will be made unless the Resident specifies in writing a change to the limits indicated on the plans .
The wall surface area as shown on the plans includes the surface area of nominal panel joint openings and wall penetrations such as pipes and other utilities . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Retaining Wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot .
Payment shall be full compensation for design fabrication and erection of MSE retaining walls furnishing all labor equipment and materials including concrete face panels fasteners reinforcing mesh reinforcing strips tie strips hardware joint fillers coping woven drainage geotextile impervious membrane select granular backfill and technical field representative .
Cost of castinplace concrete for leveling pad will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Mechanically Stabilized Earth Retaining Wall .
Excavation including extra excavation due to unsuitable foundation material will be measured and paid for under Item .
Common Excavation .
Foundation material and select backfill material will be considered incidental to the Mechanically Stabilized Earth Retaining Walls .
The unit price for Mechanically Stabilized Earth Wall shall include costs for .
All design work preparation of written submittals and plans revision of submittals sample submittals and any other necessary preliminary work prior to and after acceptance of the retaining wall by the Resident. . All materials including transportation for the MSE walls including facing panels MSE reinforcing elements attachment devices fasteners bearing blocks and shims joint materials copings vertical corner elements concrete masonry reinforcing steel crushed stone select backfill and incidentals. . All labor and equipment required to excavate and prepare the wall foundation form and cast the leveling pad erect the MSE wall to the lines and grades shown on the plans place and compact backfill place and compact the drainage layer and construct any other items necessary to complete the MSE wall. . All temporary sheeting temporary excavation and temporary dewatering necessary to perform the other work in this section .
There will be no allowance for excavating and backfilling for the Mechanically Stabilized Earth Retaining Wall beyond the limits shown on the approved submitted plans except for excavation required to remove unsuitable subsoil in preparation for the foundation .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Mechanically Stabilized Earth Retaining Wall Square foot SECTION GEOSYNTHETIC REINFORCED MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH RETAINING WALL Reserved SECTION FIELDSTONE RETAINING WALL .
Description .
This work shall consist of supplying material for and constructing a FieldStone Retaining Wall FSRW in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades design and dimensions shown on the plans and Special Details or as directed by the Resident .
An FSRW will consist of the following components A leveling pad an in thick bed of crushed stone used to provide a level surface to place wall stones .
Wall stones hard durable flat quarried stones or fieldstones with flat faces in a mixture of sizes to be stacked in a compact and stable mass .
Filter Fabric drainage geotextile meeting the requirements of Section as shown on the plans .
Backfill soil is placed behind the FSRW and crushed stone fill .
Foundation soil mass supporting the FSRW .
Drainage underdrain pipe or other positive drainage system approved by the Resident. . Design Requirements .
Drainage System A positive drainage system to drain water from behind the wall and reduce freezethaw action of subsurface soils shall be included in the design of the FSRW .
Crushed Stone Drainage Layer A vertical layer of crushed stone shall be placed between the back of the wall stones and the backfill to promote drainage and prevent ice damage to the FSRW .
Design Life The design life of the wall shall be years unless otherwise noted on the plans .
Leveling Pad Location The top of the leveling pad shall be designed so that the embedment depth of the FSRW is adequate to maintain stability .
The minimum embedment depth to the top of the pad shall be in. . Design Approval The wall must be similar in appearance to that shown in the attached photograph. . Construction The FSRW shall be built by a skilled mason thoroughly experienced in this type of wall construction . .
The foundation shall have sufficient strength to maintain global stability of the FSRW .
The insitu soils may be used at the direction of the Geotechnical Engineer .
Foundation soils shall be brought to the desired grade as required for footing and base dimensions shown on the construction drawings or as directed by the Resident . .
The leveling pad shall be placed to the lines and grades as shown on the construction drawings and shall have a minimum thickness of in .
The leveling pad shall extend at least in beyond the wall stones in all directions .
Steps in the leveling pad shall have a minimum overlap of in . .
The backfill used behind the wall shall meet the requirements of Granular Borrow Section .
Material for Embankment Construction .
Backfill shall be placed spread and compacted from the back of the crushed stone drainage layer toward the limits of the excavation .
Backfill shall be placed in lifts not to exceed in and compacted with lightweight hand operated compaction equipment .
Backfill beyond ft from the back of the crushed stone shall be compacted to of the maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D. The moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be uniformly distributed throughout each layer and shall be within percentage points dry of optimum . .
The filter fabric shall be a geotextile meeting the requirements of Section .
Drainage Geotextile .
It shall be placed between the native soils and the leveling pad and backfill . .
The wall shall be constructed of hand fitted fieldstone or quarried stone .
The stones shall be placed such that a minimum of .
tons of palletized stone is used for each cubic yard of wall . .
Joints shall be level and horizontal only short vertical joints will be allowed and no more than two vertical joints may be stacked above each other .
Stones shall be stacked in a manner such that diagonal joints are kept to a minimum .
Joint size in the face of the wall should be kept to a minimum and should not exceed .
in . .
The top of the wall should be at least in wide .
The width of the base should be approximately of the wall height with a gradual taper from the base to the top of the wall .
Stones shall be placed so the face of the wall has a minimum batter of . . A hand fitted course of cap stones shall be placed on top of the wall .
This shall be constructed of stones of similar size and thickness .
Each stone in the cap shall be of sufficient size to withstand accidental movement .
Method of Measurement Field Stone Retaining Wall will be measured by the square foot of front surface not to exceed the measurements shown on the plans or as authorized by the Resident .
Vertical dimension limits will be from the top of the leveling pad to the top of the cap stone layer .
Horizontal dimension limits will be from each end of the wall .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Field Stone Retaining Wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot complete cleaned of debris and accepted in place .
The unit price shall be full compensation for excavation backfill and grading beyond the face of the wall and furnishing all materials labor equipment and other incidentals including drainage necessary to complete the work .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Field Stone Retaining Wall Square foot SECTION ROCKERY WALL Reserved SECTION PRECAST AGGREGATEFILLED CONCRETE BLOCK GRAVITY WALL .
Description The work under this item shall consist of the design fabrication furnishing and construction of a Precast Aggregatefilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall in accordance with these specifications and in conformance with the lines and grades shown on the Plans or established by the Resident .
The Precast Aggregatefilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall consist of blocks made of Structural Precast concrete made from Portland cement water chemical admixtures and aggregates supported on concrete leveling pads and if required geosynthetic reinforced backfill .
Included in the scope of the precast gravity wall construction are geotechnical design of any wall with an exposed height greater than .
ft or as specified on the Plans all grading necessary for wall construction compaction of the wall foundation soil backfill piped drainage construction of leveling pads and concrete wall unit installation .
The top of the upper row of concrete wall units shall be at or above the top of the face elevation shown on the Plans. . Quality Assurance The wall system shall be one of the approved combinations of facing block and soil reinforcement systems noted in the Plans or on the Departments Qualified Products List QPL .
Alternate wall systems will not be considered for this Item .
All design calculations and Shop Drawings shall be signed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
The Contractor shall require the wall designsupplier to provide an onsite qualified experienced technical representative to advise the Contractor concerning proper installation procedures .
The technical representative shall be onsite during initial stages of installation and thereafter shall remain available for consultation as necessary for the Contractor or as required by the Resident. . Materials Materials for walls shall meet the requirements of the following sections of Division Gravel Borrow .
Crushed Stone  Inch .
Underdrain Pipe .
or .
Reinforcing Steel .
Structural Precast Concrete Units .
Reinforcement Geotextile .
Drainage Geosynthetic .
The Contractor is cautioned that all of the materials listed are not required for every Precast Aggregatefilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall .
The Contractor shall furnish the Resident a Materials Certification Letter certifying that the applicable materials comply with this section of the specifications .
Materials shall meet the following additional requirements .
Concrete Units The Materials Certification Letter described above shall contain the date of concrete casting a lot identification number compressive strength results and entrained air results .
All prefabricated concrete units shall conform to the requirements of .
with the following exceptions A .
Materials Materials are modified as follows the maximum water cement ratio shall be .
use of calcium nitrite is not required unless the design of the concrete wall units requires fabrication with reinforcing steel the minimum day compressive strength shall be psi .
B .
Quality Control and Quality Assurance Quality Control and Quality Assurance is modified as follows delete the paragraph which begins with The contractor shall provide a private office C. Construction Construction requirements are modified as follows Replace the first sentence in the paragraph which begins Forms shall remain with the following The forms shall remain in place until the concrete has gained sufficient strength such that removal of the forms and subsequent handling will not damage the units .
Add the following paragraph at the end of the Construction section Face texture of the units shall be a formed finish on all exposed surfaces .
Pigment shall be added during the casting process of the concrete unit to achieve a consistent shade of gray or other color as determined by the Resident .
D. Concrete Testing The concrete testing requirements are modified as follows Replace the paragraph which begins The Contractor shall cast a minimum of .
With the following The Contractor shall make and test at least one set of cylinders for every CY of production concrete used to cast the concrete units .
Replace the paragraph which begins At least once with the following The Contractor shall make four cylinders for use by the Department to represent every CY or fraction thereof .
E. Tolerances Maximum dimensional deviation of formed unit dimensions shall not vary more than inch or percent of the unit dimension or the manufacturers published tolerances whichever is less .
Units not meeting the specified tolerances will be rejected. . Geosynthetic Reinforcement Geosynthetic Reinforcement shall be as required by the proprietary wall system manufacturer or wall designer .
Geosynthetic reinforcement shall consist of a geotextile or geogrid approved by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Substitution of a geosynthetic other than that required by the proprietary wall system manufacturer shall not be allowed unless approved by the Geotechnical Engineer after submittal of shop drawings and pullout and interface friction test data .
A. Geotextiles and Thread for Sewing Woven or nonwoven geotextiles shall consist of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns formed into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their position relative to each other during handling placement and design life .
At least percent by weight of the long chain polymer shall be polyolefin or polyester .
The material shall be free of defects and tears .
Geotextiles used for reinforcement shall conform as a minimum to the properties indicated for .
StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile and shall meet the requirements of part D and E below .
Geotextiles shall have a minimum permeability greater or equal to that shown on the Shop Drawings and the reinforced soil permeability .
B. Geogrids The geogrid shall be a regular network of integrally connected polymer tensile elements with aperture geometry sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the surrounding soil or rock .
The geogrid structure shall be dimensionally stable and able to retain its geometry under manufacture transport and installation .
Geogrids shall conform as a minimum to the criteria specified in part D and E below .
C. Required Properties The specific geosynthetic materials shall be preapproved and shall the have the ultimate tensile strength Tult shown on the approved Shop Drawings for the geosynthetic specified and for the fill type shown .
Tult shall be determined from wide width tests specified in ASTM D for geotextiles and ASTM D or GRIGG for geogrids .
The ultimate tensile strength value is based on the minimum average roll values MARV for the product .
D. The geosynthetic shall conform to the following criteria .
PP and HDPE Min .
retained strength of percent after hours per ASTM D. . HDPE Grade E E E E E E J J or J per ASTM D . . PET Molecular weight Mn per GRIGG and ASTM D. . PET Carboxyl end group CEG mmolkg GRIGG. . All polymers Minimum Weight per Unit Area of ozyd per ASTM D. . All Polymers Maximum percent post consumer recycled material by weight. . A default total reduction factor for creep durability and installation damage of RF may be used in design provided the criteria of through are satisfied and is adjusted to percent after hours is satisfied .
E.Manufacturer Quality Control .
The geosynthetic reinforcements shall be manufactured with a high degree of quality control .
The Manufacturer is responsible for establishing and maintaining a quality control program to ensure compliance with the requirements of the specification .
The purpose of the QC testing program is to verify that the reinforcement geosynthetic being supplied to the project is representative of the material used for performance testing and approval .
Conformance testing shall be performed as part of the manufacturing process and may vary for each type of product .
As a minimum the following index tests shall be considered as applicable for an acceptable QAQC program Property Test Procedure .
Specific Gravity HDPE only ASTM D . Ultimate Tensile Strength ASTM D GRIGG .
Melt Flow HDPE and PP only ASTM D . Intrinsic Viscosity PET only ASTM D . Carboxyl End Group PET only ASTM D F. Sampling Testing and Acceptance Sampling and conformance testing shall be in accordance with ASTM D. Conformance testing procedures are established above .
Geosynthetic product acceptance shall be based on ASTM D. The quality control certificate shall include .
Roll numbers and identification .
Sampling procedures .
Results of quality control tests including a description of test methods used .
G. Certification The Contractor shall submit a manufacturers certification that the geosynthetics supplied meet the respective index criteria set when the geosynthetic was approved measured in full accordance with all test methods and standards specified or referenced in this specification .
The manufacturers certificate shall state that the furnished geosynthetic meets the requirements of these specifications as evaluated by the manufacturers quality control program .
The values submitted shall be certified by a person having legal authority to bond the manufacturer .
In case of dispute over validity of values the Resident can require the Contractor to supply test data from an agency approved laboratory to support the values submitted at the Contractors cost . .
Concrete Leveling Pad Concrete for leveling pads shall be Fill Concrete conforming to the requirements of Section Structural Concrete .
Unless otherwise specified concrete for leveling pads shall be accepted under Method C requirements. . Drainage Stone Fill Concrete wall unit voids shall be filled with drainage stone material that conforms to the requirements of .
Crushed Stone  Inch. . Backfill Material Backfill material placed behind the concrete wall units shall meet the requirements of Section .
Gravel Borrow except that the backfill material shall only contain particles that will pass the inch square mesh sieve .
The contractor is required to submit a grain size distribution curve ASTM D and a moisturedensity relationship curve AASHTO T for acceptance of the proposed backfill material and determination of the appropriate installation damage reduction factor RFID .
Walls with reinforced backfill also require that the backfill material be subjected to pH testing to determine the appropriate durability reduction factor RFD. . Materials Certificate Letter The Contractor or the supplier as their agent shall furnish the Resident a Materials Certificate Letter for the above materials including the backfill material in accordance with Section of the Standard Specifications .
A copy of all test results performed by the Contractor or their supplier necessary to assure contract compliance shall also be furnished to the Resident .
The Resident will base acceptance upon the materials Certificate Letter accompanying test reports and visual inspection. . Design Requirements The wall shall be designed with a service life of not less than years .
The Precast Aggregatefilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall be designed and sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Maine .
The wall shall be designed in accordance with the following .
AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications current edition herein referred to as LRFD .
FHWANHI and FHWANHI Design and Construction of Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes Volumes I and II .
FHWANHI CorrosionDegradation of Soil Reinforcements for Mechanically Stabilized Earth Walls and Reinforced Soil Slopes .
The Contract Plans .
The requirements specified herein .
The manufacturers requirements Where conflicting requirements occur the more stringent requirements shall govern .
Fortyfive days prior to beginning construction of the wall the design computations shall be submitted to the Resident for review by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Any additional design or costs arising as a result of rejection of a wall design by the Geotechnical Engineer shall be borne by the Contractor .
Design calculations that consist of computer program generated output shall be supplemented with at least one hand calculation and graphic demonstrating the design methodology used .
Design calculations shall provide thorough documentation of the sources of equations used and material properties .
The design by the wall system supplier shall consider the stability of the wall as outlined below and in the Contract Documents A .
Failure Plane The theoretical failure plane within the reinforced soil mass shall be determined in accordance with LRFD Article and be analyzed so that the soil stabilizing components extend sufficiently beyond the failure plane within the reinforced soil mass to stabilize the material .
B .
External Loads External loads which affect the internal and external stability such as those applied through traffic loadings impact on traffic barrier posts slope surcharge hydrostatic and seismic loads shall be accounted for in the design .
Traffic surcharge and traffic impact loads shall be calculated and applied in compliance with LRFD Section .
C. External Stability Loads and load combinations selected for design shall be consistent with LRFD .
Application of load factors shall be taken as specified in LRFD Section .
Sliding resistance factors and bearing resistance factors shall be consistent with LRFD .
Overturning and sliding provisions of LRFD shall apply .
D. Internal Stability Evaluation of reinforcement pullout reinforcement rupture and reinforcementblock connection pullout or rupture shall be consistent with LRFD Section and checked at each level .
Loads load combinations and load factors shall be as specified in LRFD Section .
Resistance factors for internal design are specified in LRFD Section .
Maximum reinforcement loads shall be calculated using the Simplified Method approach .
Calculations for factored stresses and resistances shall be based upon assumed conditions at the end of the design life .
a. Geosynthetic Reinforcement Design Tensile Resistance The nominal long term reinforcement design strength Tal shall be determined by reducing Tult by reduction factors RF in accordance with the documents referenced above .
The designer shall procure and use the manufacturers tested and certified geosynthetic reinforcement reduction factors for creep RFCR durability RFD and installation damage RFID to determine Tal .
In absence of manufacturers tested and certified reduction factors a combined default reduction factor RF shall be used in accordance with the referenced documents .
For RFID the installation damage reduction factor shall be checked in accordance with LRFD and FHWANHI .
b. ReinforcementFacing Connection Design Strength The nominal long term connection strength between the geosynthetic reinforcement and the concrete blocks shall be checked in accordance with LRFD and FHWA NHI and FHWA NHI .
c. Reinforcement Pullout The pullout resistance factor F and scale effect correction factor  used in pullout design shall be determined from project specific pullout tests using the proposed geosynthetic in the specified project backfill material or equivalent soil .
The pullout resistance factors shall be determined in accordance with LRFD and FHWANHI and FHWA NHI .
In the absence of test data empirical relationships may be used to determine the pullout resistance factors any empirical relationships used in design shall be referenced in the design calculations .
E. Backfill and Foundation Soils Parameters The friction angle of the backfill used in the reinforced fill zone for internal stability design shall be assumed have a friction angle of degrees unless specific project select backfill is tested for frictional strength .
The friction angle of the foundation soils and random backfill shall be assumed to be degrees unless otherwise shown on the plans .
F. Reinforcement Length The soil reinforcement shall be the same length from the bottom to the top of each wall section .
The reinforcement length defining the width of the entire reinforced soil mass may vary with wall height .
The minimum length of the soil reinforcement shall be ft but shall not be less than percent of the wall height H for walls with level surcharges or percent of H for walls with a sloped surcharge or walls supporting an abutment .
The mechanical wall height H or H shall be the vertical difference between the top of the leveling footing and the elevation at which the failure surface as described above intercepts the ground surface supported by the wall .
G. Bearing Resistance The factored bearing pressures under the Precast Aggregatefilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall be clearly indicated on the Shop Drawings .
Walls shall be dimensioned so that the factored bearing resistance of the foundation soils as noted on the Plans is not exceeded .
H. Facing Stability Stability calculations for the concrete facing blocks shall be in accordance with LRFD and shall include an evaluation of the maximum vertical spacing between reinforcement layers .
I .
Stability During Construction Walls shall be designed to resist failure by instability of temporary construction slope .
Passive pressure in front of the wall mass shall be assumed to be zero for design purposes .
J .
Design Life The wall design life shall be a minimum of years .
K. Depth of Embedment The depth of embedment for frost protection and stability shall be at or below the elevation shown on the Plans and the approved Shop Drawings .
L. Drainage System Piped drainage shall be designed to collect and dispose of water from the base of the reinforced soil zone and backfill soil .
This shall outlet into surrounding drainage systems or ditches. . Submittals The Contractor shall supply wall design computations wall details dimensions quantities and cross sections necessary to construct the wall .
A sample hand calculation including all equations parameter values used units theory freebody diagram comparison to design requirements etc .
shall be provided .
Spreadsheet calculations alone are not acceptable .
Fortyfive days prior to beginning construction of the wall four sets of the wall design computations and Shop Drawings shall be submitted to the Resident for review by the Geotechnical Engineer .
Mix design information shall be submitted at the same time including aggregate source current gradation aggregate quality information and concrete unit weight .
The contractor shall also submit backfill material test results as part of the wall submittal package .
Backfill material test results shall include grain size distribution curve moisture density relationship curve and pH test results required for reinforced backfill only .
If geotechnical design is required the fully detailed plans shall be prepared in conformance with Section and shall include but not be limited to the following items A .
A plan and elevation sheet or sheets for each wall containing the following elevations at the top of leveling pads the distance along the face of the wall to all steps in the leveling pads the location of the original and final ground line .
B .
All details for foundations and leveling pads including details for steps in the leveling pads as well as allowable and actual maximum bearing pressures shall be provided .
C. Details for the barriers posts curbs and facing as required by the project conditions .
D. Design computations prepared and sealed by a licensed Professional Engineer .
E. Prior to the beginning of construction the contractor shall supply the Resident with two copies of the designsuppliers Installation Manual .
In addition the Contractor shall have two copies of the Installation Manual on the project site. . Construction Requirements The Precast AggregateFilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall shall have the following construction requirements A. Excavation .
The excavation and use as fill or disposal of all excavated material shall meet the requirements of Section Excavation and Embankment except as modified herein .
B .
Foundation .
The area upon which the prefabricated aggregatefilled concrete block gravity wall structure is to rest and within the limits shown on the submitted plans shall be graded for a width equal to or exceeding the length of the blocks .
Prior to wall and leveling pad construction this foundation material shall be compacted to at least percent of maximum laboratory dry density AASHTO T Method C or D. Frozen and unsuitable soil shall be removed and replaced with gravel borrow compacted to percent of AASHTO T or as shown on the plans .
A concrete leveling pad shall be constructed a minimum of inches beyond the front and back of the concrete wall units or as indicated on the plans .
Dimensions may be modified per the wall suppliers recommendations with written approval of the Geotechnical Engineer .
The leveling pad shall be cast to the design elevations as shown on the plans or as required by the wall supplier upon written approval of the Geotechnical Engineer .
The allowable elevation tolerances from the design elevations are .
ft and .
ft .
Leveling pads which do not meet this requirement shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the Resident at no additional cost to the Department .
Placement of wall units may begin after the strength of the concrete leveling pad reaches psi or is adequate to support the proposed loads .
Contractor may begin placement of concrete block units after hours at their own risk .
C. Method and Equipment .
Prior to erection of the wall the Contractor shall furnish the Resident with detailed information concerning the proposed construction method and equipment to be used .
The erection procedure shall be in accordance with the manufacturers instructions .
Any units that are damaged due to handling will be replaced at the Contractors expense .
D. Installation of Concrete Wall Units .
A field representative from the wall system being used shall be available as needed during the erection of the wall .
The services of the representative shall be at no additional cost to the project .
The contractor shall place the first course of wall units directly on the leveling pad and check for level and alignment .
Adjacent units should be in contact .
The prefabricated concrete wall units shall be installed to a tolerance of plus or minus inch in ft in vertical and horizontal alignment .
Fill all voids between and within the wall units with drainage stone as described in this specification .
The drainage stone fill shall extend a minimum of in behind the tails of the wall units unless a geotextile filter is placed over the inside joint at the back of adjacent wall units .
If used the drainage geotextile shall conform to the requirements of Section .. E. Backfill Placement .
Backfill placement shall closely follow the erection of each row of prefabricated wall units .
The maximum lift thickness shall be inches loose .
The Contractor shall decrease the lift thickness if necessary to obtain the specified density .
The backfill shall be compacted in accordance with Section .
except that the minimum required compaction shall be at least percent of maximum density as determined by AASHTO T Method C or D. Backfill compaction shall be accomplished without disturbance or displacement of the concrete wall units .
Sheepsfoot rollers will not be allowed .
Whenever a compaction test fails no additional backfill shall be placed over the area until the lift is recompacted and a passing test achieved .
The moisture content of the backfill material prior to and during compaction shall be uniform throughout each layer .
Backfill material shall have a placement moisture content less than or equal to the optimum moisture content .
Backfill material with placement moisture content in excess of the optimum moisture content shall be removed and reworked until the moisture content is uniform and acceptable throughout the entire lift .
The optimum moisture content shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D. At the end of the days operations the Contractor shall shape the last level of backfill so as to direct runoff of rainwater away from the wall face . .
Method of Measurement Precast Aggregatefilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall will be measured by the square foot of front surface not to exceed the dimensions shown on the Contract Plans unless authorized by the Resident .
Vertical and horizontal dimensions will be from the edges of the blocks .
No field measurements for computations will be made unless the Resident specifies in writing a change in the limits indicated on the Plans . .
Basis of Payment The accepted quantity of Precast AggregateFilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall will be paid for at the contract unit price per square foot complete in place .
Payment shall be full compensation for furnishing geotechnical design as required all labor equipment and materials including all precast concrete units hardware joint fillers geosynthetic drainage pipe and technical field representative .
Excavation foundation material and backfill material will all be incidental to the Precast AggregateFilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall .
Cost of castinplace concrete for leveling pad will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the Precast AggregateFilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall .
There will be no allowance for excavating and backfilling for the Precast AggregateFilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall beyond the limits shown on the approved submitted plans except for excavation required to remove unsuitable subsoil in preparation for the foundation .
Payment for excavating unsuitable subsoil shall be full compensation for all costs of pumping drainage sheeting bracing and incidentals for proper execution of the work and will be paid as common excavation in accordance with Section .
Payment will be made under Pay Item Pay Unit .
Precast AggregateFilled Concrete Block Gravity Wall Square Foot Chapter DIVISION MATERIALS GENERAL STATEMENT MATERIALS CERTIFICATION LETTER For all materials used in the work for which there is no specified acceptance testing by the project Inspectors or the Laboratory the Contractor shall submit a Materials Certification Letter similar to the following prior to acceptance as specified in Section Company Letterhead Mr.Mrs .
Resident Date Address Project No .
Town This is to certify that all materials incorporated into the project for which there is no specified acceptance testing by project inspectors or the laboratory comply with the pertinent specified material requirements of the contract .
Processing project testing and inspection control of raw materials shall be in conformity with the applicable drawings andor standards for all articles furnished .
All records and documents pertinent to this letter and not submitted herewith will be maintained and will be available by the undersigned for a period of not less than three years from the date of completion of the project .
The Materials Certification letter must be signed by a person having legal authority to bind the Contractor .
Materials listed in the above Certificate may be subject to random sampling and testing by the Department at any time .
When random verification samples are obtained from the project they shall be provided by the Contractor at no cost to the Department .
Certified materials which fail to meet specification requirements may not be accepted and may require replacement with materials that do meet the specifications .
The Contractor may be required to submit to the Resident for inclusion in the project records certification and other data from the Manufacturer pertaining to materials used on the project .
The Certificate shall include the actual test results of the material in storage from which the shipments are being made .
Certificates shall be supplied for each lot batch or blend of each type and grade of material .
A new certificate shall be issued at least every days or upon receiving or manufacture of a new material .
The Contractor shall give the supplier sufficient advance notice of orders to permit testing .
Material not represented by tests will not be accepted for use on the work .
Deliveries of asphalt materials shall be accompanied by a loading invoice delivery ticket or slip as required under Section l .. f. The Loading Invoice shall include the applicable certificate number and shall include a printed or stamped statement such as the following THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE ASPHALT MATERIAL REPRESENTED BY THIS LOADING INVOICE CONFORMS TO THE SPECIFICATIONS OF THE PURCHASER FOR THE MATERIAL TYPE AND GRADE STATED THEREON .
In the event an intermediate hauler of the asphalt material is involved a copy of their own delivery slip shall be furnished as well as a copy of the suppliers loading invoice .
The haulers delivery slip and the suppliers loading invoice shall be crossreferenced by use of their respective serial numbers .
All test procedures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO unless otherwise noted .
Gradation tests shall be completed in accordance with AASHTO T except that the sample may be separated on the  inch screen .
Testing as specified in AASHTO T shall be performed on any materials for which there is a specification limit on the amount of material passing a No .
sieve .
The Department may require the Contractor to submit for inclusion into the project records certification that new Work Zone Category and Category Devices meet National Cooperative Highway Research Program NCHRP Report guidelines .
Work Zone Category Devices include plastic drums cones and tubular markers .
Work Zone Category Devices include portable sign stands with signs Type I Type II and Type III barricades vertical panels intrusion alarms and other work zone devices under pounds .
All Work Zone Category and Category Devices shall meet NCHRP Report and MUTCD guidelines .
VendorsContractors will be allowed to selfcertify Work Zone Category Devices with a letter of selfcertification .
A letter of selfcertification shall contain at a minimum a .
A title e.g .
Certificate of Crashworthiness b .
Name and Address of the Vendor making certification c. Unique identification of the certificate such as a serial number and of each page and the total number of pages d. Description and unambiguous identification of the item tested e. Identification of the basis for the selfcertification process used and to what test level of NCHRP f. Signature and title of persons accepting responsibility for the content of the certificate and date of issue and g. A statement that the certificate shall not be reproduced except in full .
Crash test information is available on the FHWA Office of Highway Safetys Homepage httpsafety.fhwa.govprogramsroadside_hardware.htm .
SECTION STRUCTURAL CONCRETE RELATED MATERIAL .
Portland Cement and Portland Pozzolan Cement Portland cement shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type II .
A Type I Type II or Type III cement meeting AASHTO M may be used when making precast units .
A Type IP MS Portlandpozzolan cement blended hydraulic cement with moderate sulfate resistance meeting the requirements of AASHTO M may be used instead of Type II or where Type I Portland cement meeting the requirements of AASHTO M is allowed .
The definitions of the two hydraulic cements mentioned above are as follows See ASTM C Portland cement a hydraulic cement produced by pulverizing Portland cement clinker and usually containing calcium sulfate .
Portlandpozzolan cement a hydraulic cement consisting of an intimate and uniform blend of Portland cement or portland blast furnace slag cement and fine pozzolan produced by intergrinding Portland cement clinker and pozzolan by blending Portland cement or portland blast furnace slag cement and finely divided pozzolan or a combination of intergrinding and blending in which the amount of the pozzolan constituent is within specified limits .
Only one brand of cement shall be used on any one contract unless otherwise permitted in writing by the Resident .
The cement shall be protected from dampness during storage .
Partially set cement or cement that contains caked lumps shall not be used .
The Contractor shall arrange for the cement supplier to provide a Manufacturers Certification Mill Test Report for all cement materials furnished for use on the project .
Reports shall include all mandatory and optional requirements specified in AASHTO M or AASHTO M including any processing additions .
Reports shall represent the cement incorporated into the project and reports shall be supplied at a minimum on a monthly basis .
Reports shall be submitted to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer. . Water Water used in mixing or curing concrete shall be reasonably clean and free of oil salt acid alkali sugar vegetation or substances injurious to the finished product .
If required by the Resident it shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO T . Water known to be of potable quality may be used without testing .
Where the source of water is relatively shallow the intake shall be so enclosed as to exclude silt mud grass or other foreign materials. . AirEntraining Chemical Admixtures Airentraining admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List. . Water Reducing Chemical Admixtures Water reducing admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type A .
The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List. . High Range Water Reducing Chemical Admixture High range waterreducing admixture commonly referred to as both high rangewaterreducers andor superplasticizers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type F. The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List. . Setretarding Chemical Admixtures Setretarding admixtures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Types B or D. The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List. . Curing Materials Sheet materials for curing concrete shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Burlap cloth shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class ozyd .
Liquid membraneforming compounds shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M and shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List .
The two types of approved liquid membraneforming compounds are Type D clear or translucent with fugitive dye which must be readily distinguishable for at least hours and must be inconspicuous in days and Type white pigmented. . Waterstops Waterstops shall be polyvinylchloride and conform to the requirements of US Army Corps of Engineers Specification CRD C. .
Smooth Surfaced Asphalt Roll Roofing formerly called Heavy Roofing Felt Wherever heavy roofing is called for on the plans an approved standard brand of smooth surface asphalt roofing organic felt conforming to ASTM D Type I. .
Fly Ash Fly Ash shall conform to the chemical and physical requirements of AASHTO M Class F fly ash .
The Contractor shall arrange for the fly ash supplier to provide a Manufacturers Certification Mill Test Report for all fly ash materials furnished for use on the project .
Reports shall include all mandatory and optional requirements specified in AASHTO M including procedure A in Table .
Reports shall represent the fly ash incorporated into the project and reports shall be supplied at a minimum on a monthly basis .
Reports shall be submitted to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer. . Calcium Nitrite Solution Chemical Admixture Calcium nitrite solutions shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type C accelerating admixtures .
An approved calcium nitrite based corrosion inhibitor shall be added to the concrete mix as an aqueous solution .
The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List. . Silica Fume The silica fume material for use in Portland Cement Concrete shall conform to the chemical and physical requirements of AASHTO M and be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List .
The Contractor shall arrange for the silica fume supplier to provide a Manufacturers Certification Mill Test Report for all silica fume materials furnished for use on the project .
Reports shall include all mandatory and optional requirements specified in AASHTO M . Reports shall represent the silica fume incorporated into the project and reports shall be supplied at a minimum on a monthly basis .
Reports shall be submitted to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer . .
Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag Ground granulated blast furnace slag shall conform to the chemical and physical requirements for Grade or as listed in AASHTO M . The Contractor shall arrange for the slag supplier to provide a Manufacturers Certification Mill Test Report for all slag materials furnished for use on the project .
Reports shall include all mandatory and optional requirements specified in AASHTO M including any processing additions .
Reports shall represent the slag incorporated into the project and reports shall be supplied at a minimum on a monthly basis .
Reports shall be submitted to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer .
SECTION BITUMINOUS MATERIAL .
Asphalt Cement Performance Graded Asphalt Binder shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M or AASHTO M whichever is indicated in the contract documents .
For PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binder PGAB the Contractor shall arrange for the Supplier to furnish the following items to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer .
a .
A QualityControl Plan for PGAB that conforms to the requirements of AASHTO R Certifying Suppliers of PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binders and b .
A CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS for all asphalt materials furnished for use on the project .
The original of each Certificate of Analysis shall be mailed to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer. . Emulsified Asphalt Emulsified Asphalt shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Cationic emulsified asphalt shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Use of all emulsified asphalt shall comply with all Department of Environmental Protection DEP regulations regarding maximum amount of oil distillate seasonal limitations etc .
For emulsified asphalts the Contractor shall arrange for the Supplier to furnish the following item to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer .
A CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS for all asphalt emulsion materials furnished for use on the project .
The Certificate shall include the actual test results of the material in storage from which the shipments are being made .
Certificates shall be supplied for each lot or batch for each gradetype of emulsion .
A new certificate shall be issued at least every days or upon receiving or manufacture of a new material .
The original of each Certificate of Analysis shall be mailed to the Departments Materials Testing Engineer .
Deliveries of emulsion materials shall be accompanied by a loading invoice delivery ticket or slip as required under Section l .. f. The Loading Invoice shall include the applicable certificate number and shall include a printed or stamped statement such as the following THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT THE ASPHALT MATERIAL REPRESENTED BY THIS LOADING INVOICE CONFORMS TO THE SPECIFICATIONS OF THE PURCHASER FOR THE MATERIAL TYPE AND GRADE STATED THEREON .
In the event an intermediate hauler of the asphalt material is involved a copy of their own delivery slip shall be furnished as well as a copy of the suppliers loading invoice .
The haulers delivery slip and the suppliers loading invoice shall be crossreferenced by use of their respective serial numbers . .
Temperature Application Range F Type and Grade Spray Mix RS to to RC to to RC to to RC to to RC to to MC to to MC to to MC to to MC to to MC to to All emulsions to to PerformanceGraded Asphalt Binder all grades .
As required to achieve a viscosity of .
to .
PAs . .
Temperature Volume Correction Tables All asphalt material shall be corrected for volume by use of the following multipliers to reduce the volume at the observed temperature to the volume at F. Emulsified Asphalts Asphalts ASTM D All Types And Grades Tem p. F Sp .
Gr. . Sp .
Gr. . Tem p. F Sp .
Gr. . Sp .
Gr. . Tem p. F Sp .
Gr. . Sp .
Gr .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Asphalt Filler for Structural Plate Arches Asphalt for filling spaces between the structural plates and the substructure metal connectors of the arch shall conform to the requirements for bituminous material of AASHTO M or of AASHTO M Table for PG or PG . . Emulsified Asphalt Sealing Compound Emulsified asphalt sealing compound shall be an approved commercially prepared product manufactured for specific protective coating colored as required .
It shall contain fillers pigments and sand or fibrous materials suspended in a suitable emulsified asphalt or tar .
It shall be of such consistency that it can be applied at atmospheric temperatures and capable of being easily diluted with the addition of water and mixed by hand stirring at the site of application .
SECTION AGGREGATES .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete Fine aggregate for concrete shall consist of natural sand or when approved by the Resident other inert materials with similar characteristics or combinations thereof having strong durable particles .
Fine aggregate from different sources of supply shall not be mixed or stored in the same pile nor used alternately in the same class of construction or mix without permission of the Resident .
All fine aggregate shall be free from injurious amounts of organic impurities .
Should the fine aggregate when subjected to the colorimetric test for organic impurities AASHTO T produce a color darker than the reference standard color solution laboratory designation Plate III the fine aggregate shall be rejected .
Fine aggregate shall have a sand equivalent value of not less than when tested in accordance with AASHTO T . Fine aggregate sources shall meet the Alkali Silica Reactivity ASR requirements of Section ..
The fineness modulus shall not be less than .
or more than ..
If this value is exceeded the fine aggregate will be rejected unless suitable adjustments are made in proportions of coarse and fine aggregate .
The fineness modulus of fine aggregate shall be determined by adding the cumulative percentages of material by weight retained on the following sieves Nos .
and dividing by .
Fine aggregate from an individual source when tested for absorption as specified in AASHTO T shall show an absorption of not more than .
percent .
Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves  inch No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
. . Coarse Aggregate for Concrete Coarse aggregate for concrete shall consist of crushed stone or gravel having hard strong durable pieces free from adherent coatings and of which the composite blend retained on the  inch sieve shall contain no more than percent by weight of flat and elongated particles when performed in accordance with test method ASTM D Flat Particles Elongated Particles or Flat and Elongated Particles in Coarse Aggregate using a dimensional ratio of .
The coarse aggregate from an individual source shall have an absorption no greater than .
percent by weight determined in accordance with AASHTO T modified for weight of sample .
The composite blend shall have a MicroDeval value of .
percent or less as determined by AASHTO T or not exceed percent loss as determined by AASHTO T . Coarse aggregate sources shall meet the Alkali Silica Reactivity ASR requirements of Section .. Coarse aggregate shall conform to the requirements of the following table for the size or sizes designated and shall be well graded between the limits specified .
Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Grading A AA S LATEX Aggregate Size inch  inch  inch  inch inch  inch inch  inch  inch  inch No .
No .
No .
No .
No. . . . . . Alkali Silica Reactive Aggregates .
All coarse and fine aggregates proposed for use in concrete shall be tested for Alkali Silica Reactivity ASR potential under AASHTO T ASTM C Accelerated Detection of Potentially Deleterious Expansion of Mortar Bars Due to AlkaliSilica Reaction prior to being accepted for use .
Acceptance will be based on testing performed by the Department .
Sampling will be performed by the Department from stockpiles located at the Contractorssuppliers ready mixed concrete plants .
Aggregate approvals will be performed on a year cycle unless the source or character of the aggregate in question has changed within years from the last test date .
A list of preapproved coarse aggregate and aggregatecementpozzolan blends is maintained by the Department and will determine the acceptability of concrete mix designs proposed for use .
As per AASHTO T ASTM C Use of a particular coarse or fine aggregate will be allowed with no restrictions when the mortar bars made with this aggregate expand less than or equal to .
percent at days from casting .
Use of a particular coarse or fine aggregate will be classified as potentially reactive when the mortar bars made with this aggregate expand greater than .
percent at days from casting .
Use of this aggregate will only be allowed with the use of cementpozzolan blends andor chemical admixtures that result in mortar bar expansion of less than .
percent at days from casting .
Acceptable pozzolans and chemical admixtures that may be used when an aggregate is classified as potentially reactive include the following a .
Class F Coal Fly Ash meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . b .
Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag Grade or meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . c. Densified Silica Fume meeting the requirements of AASHTO M . d. Lithium Hydroxide Monohydrate LiOHHO .
Pozzolans or chemical admixtures required to offset the effects of potentially reactive aggregates will be incorporated into the concrete at no additional cost to the Department .
Aggregates classified as potentially reactive by the requirements of this specification may be used if certified test results from an accredited independent laboratory utilizing the current AASHTO T ASTM C Accelerated Detection of Potentially Deleterious Expansion of Mortar Bars Due to AlkaliSilica Reaction indicating an acceptable alkaliaggregate combination are submitted to the Department . .
Aggregate for Sand Leveling Aggregate for sand leveling shall be sand of hard durable particles free from vegetable matter lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances .
The aggregate shall meet the grading requirements of the following table .
Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves  inch No .
. .
Aggregate for Base and Subbase The following shall apply to Sections a. and c. below .
The material shall have a MicroDeval and replace with The material shall have a minimum degradation value of .
or less as determined by AASHTO T . If the Micro Deval value exceeds .
the Washington State Degradation DOT Test Method T T Method of Test for Determination of Degradation Value January version shall be performed except that the test shall be performed on the reported degradation value will be the result of testing a single specimen from that portion of the sample that passes the  in sieve and is retained on the No .
sieve .
If the material has a Washington Degradation value of less than the material shall be rejected .
The material minus any reclaimed asphalt pavement used in Section b. below shall have a MicroDeval value of .
or less as determined by AASHTO T . If the MicroDeval value exceeds .
the material may be used if it does not exceed percent loss on AASHTO T Resistance to Degradation of SmallSize Coarse Aggregate by Abrasion and Impact in the Los Angeles Machine .
If AASHTO T is used for acceptance of the material the material shall be retested at intervals of and completion of the course .
Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP shall not be used for or blended with aggregate base or subbase .
a .
Aggregate for base Type A and B shall be crushed ledge or crushed gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetable matter lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances .
The gradation of the part that passes a inch sieve shall meet the grading requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Type A Type B  inch  inch No .
No .
. . At least percent by weight of the material retained on the No .
sieve shall have at least one fractured face as tested by AASHTO T . Type A aggregate for base shall only contain particles of rock that will pass the inch square mesh sieve .
Type B aggregate for base shall only contain particles of rock that will pass the inch square mesh sieve .
b .
Aggregate for base Type C shall be crushed ledge or crushed gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetable matter lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances .
The material shall meet the grading requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Type C inches inches inches inch  inch No .
No. . At least percent by weight of the material coarser than the No .
sieve shall have at least one fractured face as tested by AASHTO T . c. Aggregate for subbase shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetable matter lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances .
The gradation of the part that passes a inch sieve shall meet the grading requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Type D Type E  in  inch No .
No .
. .
Type D aggregate for subbase gravel may contain up to percent by weight Recycled Concrete Aggregate RCA .
When RCA is used the portion of the resulting blend of gravel and RCA retained on a  square mesh sieve shall contain a total of no more than percent by weight of other recycled materials such as brick concrete masonry block or asphalt pavement as determined by visual inspection .
RCA shall be substantially free of wood metal plaster and gypsum board as defined in Note in Section .
of AASHTO M . RCA shall also be free of all substances that fall under the category of solid waste or hazardous materials .
Aggregate for subbase shall not contain particles of rock which will not pass the inch square mesh sieve . .
Aggregates for HMA Pavements Coarse aggregate and fine aggregate for hot mix asphalt pavements shall be of such gradation that when combined in the proper proportions including filler if required the resultant blend will meet the composition of mixture for the type of pavement specified .
Coarse aggregate that material retained on the No .
sieve shall be crushed stone or crushed gravel and unless otherwise stipulated shall consist of clean tough durable fragments free from an excess of soft or disintegrated pieces and free from stone coated with dirt or other objectionable matter .
Coarse aggregate shall not exceed an absorption of .
percent by weight as determined by AASHTO T . Fine aggregate material that passes the No .
sieve shall consist of natural sand manufactured sand or a combination of these .
It shall consist of hard tough grains free from injurious amounts of clay loam or other deleterious substances .
Fine aggregate shall not exceed an absorption of .
percent by weight as determined by AASHTO T . The composite blend minus any reclaimed asphalt pavement used RAP shall have a MicroDeval value of .
percent or less as determined by AASHTO T . In the event the material exceeds the MicroDeval limit a Washington Degradation test shall be performed .
The material shall be acceptable if it has a value of or more as determined by Washington State DOT Test Method T Method of Test for Determination of Degradation Value January version except that the reported degradation value will be the result of testing a single composite specimen from that portion of the sample that passes the  inch sieve and is retained on the No .
sieve minus any reclaimed asphalt pavement used .
Aggregates shall also meet the following consensus properties except that aggregates extracted from RAP will not be included in the sand equivalent test .
The Department reserves the right to sample and test the composite aggregate for any of the following properties at any time TABLE Aggregate Consensus Properties Criteria Estimated Traffic Million kip ESALs AASHTO T Coarse Aggregate Angularity minimum AASHTO T Method A Uncompacted Void Content of Fine Aggregate min ASTM D . Flat and Elongated Particles maximum AASHTO T Clay Content Sand Equivalent minimum . . to . . to to ASTM D denotes that percent of the coarse aggregate has one fractured face and percent has two fractured faces .
AASHTO T Criteria are presented as percent air voids in loosely compacted fine aggregate U. ASTM D Criteria are presented as maximum percent by weight of flat and elongated particles ratio .
The entire HMA wearing course shall come from the same source of material and the same job mix formula except when permission is obtained from the Resident to change sources . .
Recycled Asphalt Pavement Recycled asphalt pavement shall consist of salvaged asphalt materials from milled pavements or production waste that has been processed before use to meet the requirements of the job mix formula .
It shall be free of winter sand granular fill construction debris or other materials not generally considered asphalt pavement. . RAP for Asphalt Pavement Recycled Asphalt Pavement RAP may be introduced into hotmix asphalt pavement at percentages approved by the Department according to the MaineDOT Policies and Procedures for HMA Sampling and Testing .
If approved by the Department the Contractor shall provide documentation stating the source test results for average residual asphalt content and stockpile gradations showing RAP materials have been sized to meet the maximum aggregate size requirements of each mix designation .
The Department will obtain samples for verification and approval prior to its use .
The maximum allowable percent of RAP shall be determined by the asphalt content the percent passing the .
mm sieve and Coarse MicroDeval loss values as tested by the Department .
The numerical average of the percent passing the .
mm sieve values will be used for the approval .
The maximum percentage of RAP allowable shall be the lowest percentage as determined according to Table below TABLE Maximum Percent RAP According to Test Results Classification Maximum RAP Percentage Allowed Asphalt content standard deviation Percent passing .
mm sieve Residual aggregate MD loss value Class III NA .
Class II . . Class I . .
The Department will monitor RAP asphalt content and gradation during production by testing samples from the stockpile at approximately T intervals in terms of mix production .
The allowable variance limits from the numerical average values used for mix designs for this testing are determined based upon the maximum allowable RAP percentage and are shown below in Table .
TABLE RAP Verification Limits Classification Maximum RAP Percentage Allowed Asphalt content compared to aim Percent passing .
mm sieve compared to aim Percent passing .
mm sieve Class III . . NA Class II .
. . Class I . . . For specification purposes RAP will be categorized as follows Class III A maximum of .
percent of Class III RAP may be used in any base intermediate base surface or shim mixture .
A maximum of .
percent of Class III RAP may be used in handplaced mixes for item .. Class II A maximum of .
percent Class II RAP in any base binder surface or shim course .
Class I A maximum of .
percent Class I RAP may be used in any base intermediate base surface or shim mixture without requiring a change to the specified asphalt binder .
A maximum of .
percent Class I RAP may be used in in any base or intermediate base mixture provided that a PG asphalt binder is used .
A maximum of .
percent Class I RAP may be used in any surface or shim mixture provided that PG or asphalt binder is used .
Mixtures exceeding .
percent Class I RAP must be evaluated and approved by the Department .
The Contractor may use up to two different RAP sources in any one mix design .
The total RAP percentage of the mix shall not exceed the maximum allowed for the highest classification RAP source used i.e .
if a Class I Class III used total RAP must not exceed ..
The blended RAP material must meet all the requirements of the classification for which the RAP is entered i.e .
Class III with Class I blend must meet Class I criteria .
The Department may take belt cuts of the blended RAP to verify the material meets these requirements .
If the Contractor elects to use more than one RAP source in a design the Contractor shall provide an acceptable point of sampling blended RAP material from the feed belt .
In the event that RAP source or properties change the Contractor shall notify the Department of the change and submit new documentation stating the new source or properties a minimum of hours prior to the change to allow for obtaining new samples and approval. . HMA Mixture Composition The coarse and fine aggregate shall meet the requirements of Section ..
The several aggregate fractions for mixtures shall be sized graded and combined in such proportions that the resulting composite blends including RAP aggregate will meet the grading requirements of the following table Aggregate Gradation Control Points Nominal Maximum Aggregate SizeControl Points Percent Passing Sieve Designation Type mm Type mm Type .
mm Type .
mm Type .
mm Thin Lift Mixture TLM Type .
mm Percent By Weight Passing Combined Aggregate .
mm mm mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm m m m .. .. .. .. .. .. For .mm nominal maximum aggregate size mixtures the maximum design aim for the percent passing the m sieve is .. Gradation Classification The combined aggregate gradation shall be classified as coarse graded when it passes below the Primary Control Sieve PCS control point as defined in the following table .
All other gradations shall be classified as finegraded .
Gradation Classification If a Grading D mixture is allowed per Special Provision Section it shall meet the following gradation and the aggregate requirements of Section .. Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves  inch  inch No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
.. .
Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course Aggregate for untreated surface course and leveling course shall be screened or crushed gravel consisting of hard durable particles which are free from vegetable matter lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances .
If this item is to be used underneath pavement it must have a Micro Deval value of .
or less as determined by AASHTO T . If the MicroDeval value exceeds .
the material may be used if it does not exceed percent loss on AASHTO T Resistance to Degradation of SmallSize Coarse Aggregate by Abrasion and Impact in the Los Angeles Machine .
The aggregate shall meet the grading requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Untreated Aggregate Surface Course Type A Type B inch  inch No .
No .
PCS Control Point for Mixture Nominal Maximum Aggregate Size percent passing Nominal Maximum Aggregate Size Type mm Type mm Type .
mm Type .
mm Primary Control Sieve .
mm .
mm .
mm .
mm PCS Control Point percent passing No . . . .
Aggregate for Shoulder The gradation of that portion passing a inch sieve shall meet the gradation requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Paved or Unpaved Lifts inches or Greater Paved Lifts inches Unpaved Lifts inches inch  inch No .
No .
.. .. .. Shall not contain particles larger than inches or the thickness of the lift being placed whichever is less . .
Aggregate for Crushed Stone Surface Crushed stone surface shall be of quarried stone and have a MicroDeval value of .
percent or less as determined by AASHTO T . The aggregate shall meet the grading requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch  inch  inch  inch No . .
Crushed Stone Inch Aggregate for Crushed Stone inch shall be of quarried stone and have a MicroDeval value of .
percent or less as determined by AASHTO T . The aggregate shall meet the grading requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch  inch  inch  inch No. . Filler These materials shall conform to the following specification requirements for the designated materials .
Mineral filler shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . . Common Borrow Common borrow shall consist of earth suitable for embankment construction .
It shall be free from frozen material perishable rubbish peat and other unsuitable material including material currently or previously contaminated by chemical radiological or biological agents unless the material is from a DOT project and authorized by DEP for use .
The moisture content shall be sufficient to provide the required compaction and stable embankment .
In no case shall the moisture content exceed percent above optimum which shall be determined in accordance with AASHTO T Method C or D. . Granular Borrow Granular borrow shall consist of sand or gravel of hard durable particles free from vegetable matter lumps or balls of clay frozen material and other deleterious substances .
The gradation of that portion passing a inch sieve shall meet the gradation requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Material for Underwater Backfill Material for Embankment Construction inch No .
No .
. . Granular borrow shall contain no particles or fragments with a maximum dimension in excess of the compacted thickness of the layer being placed. . Gravel Borrow Gravel borrow shall consist of well graded granular material having no rocks with a maximum dimension of over inches .
The gradation of that portion passing a inch sieve shall meet the gradation requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves  inch No .
. . Rock Borrow Rock borrow shall consist of hard durable rock broken to various sizes that will form a compact embankment with a minimum of voids .
The maximum size for any rock shall be feet in its greatest dimension. . Underdrain Backfill Material .
Material for underdrain shall be free from organic matter frozen material and shall conform to the following tables Type B material shall conform to the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch  inch No .
No .
No .
No . .
Type C material shall conform to the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch  inch  inch No .
No. . Stone for French Drains Stones for French drains shall consist of hard durable rock and shall conform to the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch  inch No. . Stone Fill Stones for stone fill shall consist of hard sound durable rock that will not disintegrate by exposure to water or weather .
Stone for stone fill shall be angular and rough .
Rounded subrounded or long thin stones will not be allowed .
Stone for stone fill may be obtained from quarries or by screening oversized rock from earth borrow pits .
The maximum allowable length to thickness ratio will be .
The minimum stone size lbs shall have an average dimension of inches .
The maximum stone size lbs shall have a maximum dimension of approximately inches .
Larger stones may be used if approved by the Resident .
Fifty percent of the stones by volume shall have an average dimension greater than inches lbs . .
Plain and Hand Laid Riprap Stone for riprap shall consist of hard sound durable rock that will not disintegrate by exposure to water or weather .
Stone for riprap shall be angular and rough .
Rounded subrounded or long thin stones will not be allowed .
The maximum allowable length to width ratio will be .
Stone for riprap may be obtained from quarries or by screening oversized rock from earth borrow pits .
The minimum stone size lbs shall have an average dimension of inches .
The maximum stone size lbs shall have an average dimension of approximately inches .
Larger stones may be used if approved by the Resident .
Fifty percent of the stones by volume shall have an average dimension greater than inches lbs. . Stone Blanket Stones for stone blanket shall consist of sound durable rock that will not disintegrate by exposure to water or weather .
Stone for stone blanket shall be angular and rough .
Rounded or subrounded stones will not be allowed .
Stones may be obtained from quarries or by screening oversized rock from earth borrow pits .
The minimum stone size lbs shall have minimum dimension of inches and the maximum stone size lbs shall have a maximum dimension of approximately inches .
Fifty percent of the stones by volume shall have average dimension greater than inches lbs . .
Heavy Riprap Stone for heavy riprap shall consist of hard sound durable rock that will not disintegrate by exposure to water or weather .
Stone for heavy riprap shall be angular and rough .
Rounded subrounded or thin flat stones will not be allowed .
The maximum allowable length to width ratio will be .
Stone for heavy riprap may be obtained from quarries or by screening oversized rock from earth borrow pits .
The minimum stone size lbs shall have minimum dimension of inches and at least fifty percent of the stones by volume shall have an average dimension greater than inches lbs .
Stone Ditch Protection Rock used for ditch protection shall consist of sound durable rock that will not disintegrate by exposure to water or weather .
Fieldstone rough quarry stone blasted ledge rock or tailings may be used .
The rock shall be graded within the following limits or as otherwise approved Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves inch inch The size of any stone shall not exceed inches when measured along its longest axis . .
Crushed Stone Inch Crushed stone shall be obtained from rock of uniform quality and shall consist of clean angular fragments of quarried rock free from soft disintegrated pieces or other objectionable matter .
The stone which shall be similar to railroad ballast shall meet the following gradation requirements Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves  inch inch inch  inch .
Definitions ASTM D Table .
Angular Particles have sharp edges and relatively plane sides with unpolished surfaces Subrounded Particles have nearly plane sides but have wellrounded corners and edges Rounded Particles have smoothly curved sides and no edges .
Stone Ballast Aggregate for stone ballast shall be clean and graded crushed stone aggregate with a hard dense angular particle structure providing sharp corners and cubicle fragments with prime consideration for drainage efficiency .
The material retained on the  inch sieve shall contain not more than percent by weight of flat and elongated particles when performed in accordance with test method ASTM D Flat Particles Elongated Particles or Flat and Elongated Particles in Coarse Aggregate using a dimensional ratio of .
The material shall have an absorption no greater than .
percent by weight and a bulk specific gravity of less than .
as determined in accordance with AASHTO T modified for weight of sample .
The material shall not exceed percent loss on ASTM C Resistance to Degradation of LargeSize Coarse Aggregate by Abrasion and Impact in the Los Angeles Machine .
The material shall meet the grading requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Type Type A  inch inch  inch inch  inch inch No. . max. . max .
SECTION MASONRY UNITS .
Clay or Shale Brick Except as modified below brick shall conform to the requirements of one of the following specifications Type of Brick Specification Sewer Catch Basin and Manhole AASHTO M Grade MS or SM Building AASHTO M Grade SW .
Brick for Paving Brick for paving shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M C Grade SW for Building brick or shale with the following modifications a .
The absorption limits shall be from percent to percent for the average of bricks .
b .
The compressive strength shall not be less than psi .
c. The modulus of rupture shall not be less than psi .
d. The bricks shall be No .
water struck type for paving .
The bricks shall be  inches by  inches by inches with permissible variations not to exceed inch in depth  inch in width and  inch in length .
Before ordering new brick samples shall be submitted in whole straps to show color range . .
Concrete Masonry Blocks Concrete masonry blocks may be rectangular or segmented and when specified shall have ends shaped to provide interlock at vertical joints .
Solid blocks for catch basins and manholes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C . SECTION JOINT MATERIAL .
Preformed Expansion Joint Filler Preformed expansion joint filler shall be non extruding and resilient bituminous type and shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . . Joint Mortar Joint mortar shall consist of part Portland cement parts sand and sufficient water to obtain the required consistency .
Mortar shall be used within minutes after its preparation .
The cement shall conform to the requirements of Portland cement AASHTO M Type II or IIA .
The sand shall meet the requirements of the following table Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves Joints Thicker Than  inch Joints  inch or Thinner  inch  inch No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
No .
. .
When necessary material retained on the No .
sieve may be removed .
The sand shall be subjected to the colorimetric test for organic impurities AASHTO T and when a color darker than the reference standard color solution laboratory designation Plate III is produced the material shall be rejected . .
Flexible Watertight Gaskets Flexible gaskets either rubber or plastic shall conform to AASHTO M . SECTION NONMETALLIC PIPE .
Reinforced Concrete Pipe This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Elliptical pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Unless otherwise specified pipe wall design and use of elliptical reinforcement in circular pipe are optional .
Pipe arch shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M MM .
Aggregates shall meet the requirements of Section .
and Section .
for fine aggregates and coarse aggregates respectively except that grading requirements are hereby waived .
Fine and coarse aggregate sources shall meet the Alkali Silica Reactivity ASR requirements of Section .. Precast reinforced concrete special sections shall conform to the requirements of the cited specifications to the extent to which they apply . .
Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe for Underdrain Option I and Option III Culvert Pipe Six inch diameter underdrain pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M slotperforated .
Twelve to sixty inch diameter Option IIII shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type S. Pipe to be used for Underdrain Type C shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Type SP and have Class I perforations .
All polyethylene pipe shall be smooth lined and shall meet the pipe stiffness requirements shown on the Standard Details .
The manufacturing plants of polyethylene pipe shall participate annually in the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP process for plastic pipe and resins which includes audits by the AASHTO Materials Reference Laboratory AMRL .
Plants shall be listed as Compliant on the NTPEP website and take immediate corrective action for any deficiencies found during audits .
Continued compliance with all elements of the NTPEPAMRL program and the Maine DOT manufactured Materials Verification Program will be required in order to continue supplying product to the Maine DOT. . PVC Polyvinylchloride Pipe This pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . All pipe shall be supplied with gasket type joints. . PVC Polyvinylchloride Perforated Pipe This pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M or ASTM F for inch underdrain and AASHTO M for underdrain larger than inch diameter . .
Corrugated Polypropylene Pipe for Option I and Option III Culvert Pipe Option IIII pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type S dual wall or Type D triple wall .
All polypropylene pipe shall be smooth lined and shall meet the pipe stiffness requirements of AASHTO M . The manufacturing plants of polypropylene pipe shall participate annually in the National Transportation Product Evaluation Program NTPEP process for plastic pipe and resins which includes audits by the AASHTO Materials Reference Laboratory AMRL .
Plants shall be listed as Compliant on the NTPEP website and take immediate corrective action for any deficiencies found during audits .
Continued compliance with all elements of the NTPEPAMRL program and the Maine DOT manufactured Materials Verification Program will be required in order to continue supplying product to the Maine DOT .
SECTION METALLIC PIPE .
Corrugated Steel Metallic Coated Pipe This pipe and special fittings such as elbows tees and wyes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M Type I IR II or III for the specified sectional dimensions sheet thickness and coating . .
Corrugated Steel Metallic Coated Pipe for Underdrain This pipe and special fittings such as elbows tees and wyes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M Type III Class perforations . .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe and Pipe Arches This pipe and special fittings such as elbows tees and wyes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M Type I IR or II .
Special sections such as elbows and metal end sections shall be of the thickness called for on the plans and shall conform to the applicable requirements of AASHTO M M M. Aluminum sheet shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M. . Polymer Precoated Galvanized Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe Arches This pipe and special fittings such as elbows tees and wyes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M Type with Grade polymer coating .
Steel sheet shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M. .
Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe for Underdrain This pipe and special fittings such as elbows tees and wyes shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M Type III Class perforations or Type IIIR Class perforations. . Steel Structural Plate Pipe Pipe Arches Arches Box Culverts and Fasteners Plates bolts nuts and other accessories shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M and the following additional requirements a .
All shop welding shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of AWS D. Structural Welding Code Steel .
b .
Annually the fabricator shall have quality control tests performed on uncoated random samples of the lightest and heaviest thickness plates produced by welding .
The sampling and testing shall be done by a recognized independent testing agency and copies of the test reports including all welding parameters shall be submitted to the Fabrication Engineer on an annual basis .
c. The Fabrication Engineer reserves the right to conduct unannounced inspections of the fabricators facilities and to take random samples of welded plates representative of gages supplied to the Department .
d. No field welding will be allowed. . Aluminum Coated Type Corrugated Steel Pipe This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M using steel sheet conforming to AASHTO M . . Zinc Coated Galvanized Corrugated Steel Pipe This pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M using steel sheet conforming to AASHTO M . . Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe Pipe Arches Arches Box Culverts and Fasteners Plates for this pipe shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M M M. Bolts and nuts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F M alloy T and F alloy T. SECTION PAINTS AND PRESERVATIVES .
Exterior Ready Mixed Paint Exterior paint for wood structures should be a good quality house paint approved by the Resident. . Pavement Marking Paint Paint for final and temporary pavement marking shall meet the requirements of the Maine DOT Maintenance FastDry WaterBased Traffic Paint on file at the Traffic Section in Augusta .
Glass beads shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type I. . Tree Wound Paint Tree wound paint shall be an approved waterproof adhesive and elastic paint manufactured and customarily used for painting cuts on trees .
It shall contain an antiseptic ingredient and be free from kerosene creosote coal tar or any other injurious material . .
Timber Preservative Timber preservatives shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . SECTION REINFORCING STEEL AND WELDED STEEL WIRE FABRIC .
Reinforcing Steel Reinforcing steel whether plain galvanized epoxy coated or zinc and epoxy dualcoated shall be deformed bars conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A .
Bars shall be Grade unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
Epoxy coated reinforcing steel shall also conform to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A .
The requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A Sections .. . . and .
shall be mandatory .
Zinc and epoxy dualcoated reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A. Lowcarbon chromium reinforcing steel shall be deformed bars conforming to the requirements of ASTM A .
Bars shall be Grade unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
Stainless Steel Reinforcement shall be deformed stainless steel bars conforming to the requirements of ASTM A .
Bars shall be at a minimum Grade unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
The chemical composition shall conform to one of the types listed in Table of ASTM A unless otherwise specified on the Plans .
Heat treatment condition per ASTM A is hot rolled .
Bars shall be finished in accordance with ASTM A section .
Fabricated deformed steel reinforcing grids shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A. Welding and welder qualifications for reinforcing bar grids shall conform to the requirements in Section . . Welded Steel Wire Fabric Welded steel wire fabric shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Steel Welded Wire Fabric Plain for Concrete Reinforcement or AASHTO M Steel Welded Wire Fabric Deformed for Concrete Reinforcement as specified. . Steel Strand Prestressing strand shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M Steel Strand Uncoated SevenWire for Concrete Reinforcement .
Lateral posttensioned strands for precastposttensioned concrete products shall be .
inch diameter AASHTO M strand with a corrosion inhibitive coating covered with an extruded polypropylene sheath .
SECTION FENCE AND GUARDRAIL .
Barbed Wire Barbed wire shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The Design number shall be R with coating Type Z metallic coating Class if zinc coated or coating Type A . ozft if aluminum coated. . Woven Wire Wire and stays shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The Design number shall be Grade coating Type Z coating Class if zinc coated .
The Design number shall be Grade coating Type Aif aluminum coated. . Chain Link Fabric Chain Link fabric shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Type I Class D if zinc coated or Type II if aluminum coated or Type IV Class B if PVC coated .
The wire shall be gauge and the mesh shall be inch unless otherwise noted on the plans .
Tension wire shall be seven gauge .
inch diameter steel coil spring wire and have a zinc coating or an aluminum coating .
Zinc coating shall be Class and aluminum coating shall be a minimum of .
ozft. . Metal Beam Rail Galvanized steel rail elements shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Class A Type II .
When corrosion resistant steel is specified rail shall conform to AASHTO M Class A Type IV .
Beams of corrosion resistant steel shall not be painted or galvanized .
They shall be so handled and stored that the traffic face of these beams used in a continuous run of guardrail shall not show a distinctive color differential .
When metal beam rail is to be installed on a curve having a radius of curvature of ft. or less the beam sections shall be fabricated on an arc to the required radius and permanently stamped or embossed with the designated radius .
The Department may take one piece of guardrail a backup plate and end or buffer section from each pieces in a lot or from each lot if less than pieces are included therein for determination of compliance with specification requirements .
If one piece fails to conform to the requirements of this specification two other pieces shall be tested .
If either of these pieces fails to conform to the requirements of this specification the lot of material represented by these samples shall be rejected .
A lot shall be considered that quantity of material offered for inspection at one time that bears the same heat and coating identification. . Cedar Rail Fence Rails and posts for cedar rail fence shall be of cedar reasonably straight machine or hand peeled and branch stubs cut flush . .
Fence Posts and Braces Wood posts shall be of cedar white oak or tamarack of the diameter or section and length shown on the plans .
Round wood posts shall be of seasoned stock straight and sound and shall have been cut from live growing trees with the outer and inner bark removed and all knots trimmed flush with the surface of the post .
Rotted loose or hollow knots plugged or open holes will not be permitted .
Sound knots will be permitted if the diameter of any one knot or the combined diameter of or more knots occurring in the same cross section is not greater than onethird of the circumference of the post at that cross section .
Posts shall be of uniform taper from top to bottom not to exceed  inches of taper in feet .
The minimum diameter of heartwood in line posts at their small end shall be no less than inches .
The minimum diameter of line posts at the small end shall be no less than inches .
The maximum diameter of line posts at the small end shall be inches .
The minimum diameter of heartwood in end corner gate and barway posts shall be  inches at the small end .
The minimum diameter of end corner gate and barway posts at the small end shall be  inches .
The maximum diameter of end corner gate and barway posts shall be inches .
That portion of wood posts to be set below ground shall be immersed to a depth of feet in a tank or barrel containing an approved commercial timber preservative solution for a minimum of minutes .
All wood posts so treated unless otherwise specified by the Resident shall have been peeled and air seasoned to permit thorough drying for at least months before treatment .
After being treated the posts shall be piled to permit thorough drying before being set in the ground .
Braces shall be of spruce eastern hemlock Norway pine pitch pine or tamarack timbers or spruce cedar or tamarack round posts of sufficient length to make a diagonal brace between adjacent posts .
If other than cedar white oak or tamarack braces shall be treated as described above for posts except that they shall be immersed full length .
Metal posts and braces for woven wire fence shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Posts and post assemblies shall be galvanized according to the requirements of AASHTO M . Assembly hardware shall be zinc coated in accordance with AASHTO M MM .
The type of post furnished shall be channel or U unless otherwise noted on the plans .
Metal posts rails and bracing for chain link fence shall be as specified in AASHTO M . Type I Grade or Grade posts shall be used with zinc coated chain link fabric .
Type II Grade or shall be used with aluminum coated chain link fabric .
End and corner posts shall be inch inside diameter .
Line posts shall be  inch inside diameter .
Top and brace rails shall be  inch inside diameter .
Expansion sleeves turnbuckles and other fittings and hardware shall be galvanized in accordance with the applicable requirements in AASHTO M . . Guardrail Posts Posts shall be of wood or steel .
a .
Wood posts shall be of cedar tamarack white oak Norway pine southern yellow pine pitch pine Douglas fir maple beech birch red pine white pine eastern hemlock or red oak .
They shall be of wellseasoned straight and sound timber cut from live growing trees free from loose knots or other structurally weakening defects including shake holes and heart rot over inch in diameter .
The posts shall be free from season checks that exceed  inch in width .
A tolerance of inch in length and  inch in width or thickness is permitted in the dimensions of rectangular posts .
They shall be well sawn and have square edges except that wane not more than  inches wide and extending not more than  the length of the piece will be allowed on that portion of the post to be placed below ground .
Sound tight well spaced knots to  inches or less in diameter will be permitted .
Wood posts and offset brackets shall be preservative treated in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M using pentachlorophenal or chromate copper arsenate preservative .
Treatment shall be according to the Standards of AWPA C. Composite material blocks tested and meeting the requirements of the National Cooperative Research Program Report and approved by the FHWA may be used as offset brackets .
b. Galvanized steel posts shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M Grade if a rolled section or ASTM A Grade if a welded section .
Fabrication will be in accordance with Section Structural Steel .
Galvanizing shall be in accordance with Section Shop Applied Protective Coating Steel .
c. Corrosion resistant steel posts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade W if a welded section .
Fabrication will be in accordance with Section Structural Steel .
The portion of the post that is underground shall meet the galvanized steel post requirements in Section b. above. . Guardrail Hardware Guardrail hardware shall conform to the applicable standards contained in the latest ARTBA Bulletin No .
B A Guide to Standardized Highway Barrier Rail Hardware approved by the AASHTOARTBAAGC Joint Cooperative Committee Technical Bulletin Number B .
All galvanized fittings bolts washers and other accessories shall be in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M M or AASHTO M Class Type I whichever applies .
All galvanizing shall be done after fabrication .
Hardware for corrosion resistant guardrail shall be in accordance with ASTM A MA Type except the inch bolts and nuts for attaching the metal beam rail to the posts which may be galvanized as specified above .
SECTION MISCELLANEOUS BRIDGE MATERIAL .
Steel Pipe Piles Splices and Tips Steel pipe piles shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A .
The steel pipe piles shall be Grade Fy ksi with either straight or spiral buttwelded seams .
Lap welded seams are not acceptable .
The steel shall be a Prequalified Base Metal from the AWS D. Structural Welding Code Steel .
Cast steel points splices and open end cutting shoes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Grade or ASTM A Grade .
Pipe pile splice backup ring material shall be any steel listed in AWS Structural Steel Welding Code D. Table .
with the exception of ksi minimum yield strength steels .
Gabions Each shipment of gabions to a job site shall be accompanied by a certificate that states that the material conforms to the requirements of this specification .
The certificate shall be on manufacturers letterhead and shall be signed by an officer of the company having legal authority to bind the company .
Mesh openings shall be hexagonal in shape measuring approximately inches by inches and shall be uniform in size .
Double twist mesh joints shall be flexible with each pair of wires twisted three half turns commonly called triple twisted to prevent unraveling .
Steel wire and galvanizing shall meet the requirements of ASTM A MA and ASTM A shall have a Class coating and shall be soft temper .
The wire mesh shall have a sufficient elasticity to permit elongation of the mesh equivalent to a minimum of percent of its length .
a. Galvanized Gabions without Polyvinylchloride Coating The diameter of the steel wire mesh shall be .
inches after galvanizing .
The diameter of the selvedge wire running through all the edges perimeter wire shall be .
inches after galvanizing .
The diameter of the wire for assembling and lacing the gabion units shall be .
inches after galvanizing .
The above wire sizes shall have a tolerance of .
percent .
b. Polyvinylchloride PVC Coated Gabions When specified on the plans all galvanized steel wire shall be coated with a minimum of .
inches of gray or green PVC which shall be suitable to resist the destructive effects of immersion in acidic salt or polluted water exposure to ultra violet light and abrasion and retain these characteristics after a period of not less than hours when tested in accordance with ASTM A .
The diameter of the steel wire mesh shall be .
inches after galvanization and .
inches overall core wire plus PVC coating .
The diameter of the selvedge wire running through all the edges perimeter wire shall be .
inches after galvanizing and .
inches overall core wire plus PVC coating .
The diameter of the wire for assembling and lacing the gabion units shall be .
inches after galvanizing and .
inches overall core wire plus PVC coating .
All wire sizes shall have a tolerance of .
percent the thickness of the PVC excluded .
The mesh shall be capable of withstanding the test described below An uncut section of mesh feet long and of a minimum width of feet including all selvedge bindings shall have the ends securely clamped for feet along the width of the sample .
When the width of the section under test exceeds feet the clamps shall be placed in the middle portion of the width and the excess width shall be allowed to fall free on each side of the clamped section .
The sample shall then be subjected to sufficient tension to cause percent elongation of the sample section between clamps .
After elongation and while clamped as described above and otherwise unsupported the section shall be subjected to a load applied to an area of ft located approximately in the center of the sample section between the clamps and in a direction perpendicular to the direction of the tensile force .
The sample shall withstand without rupture of any wire or opening of any mesh fastening an actual load so applied equaling or exceeding pounds .
The ram head used in the test shall be circular with its edges beveled or rounded to prevent cutting the wires. . Stones for Gabions Stones to fill gabions shall be of clean hard and durable rock with a minimum dimension of inches in all directions and a maximum dimension of inches .
Stones to fill hand filled gabions shall be of clean hard durable crushed ledge or quarried rock with a minimum dimension of inches in all directions and a maximum of inches. . Bridge Drains Bridge drains shall be fabricated in conformance with the details shown in the Contract documents and to the requirements of Section Structural Steel .
All bridge drain parts shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with the requirements ofSection Shop Applied Protective CoatingSteel. . Stud Shear Connectors Anchors and Fasteners Shear connectors shall meet the dimensional tolerances of Figure .
of the ANSIAASHTOAWS D. Bridge Welding Code D. Code .
Shear connectors anchors and fasteners shall meet the material requirements of Section of the D. Code .
Shear connectors shall meet the mechanical property requirements of Table .
Type B of the D. Code .
Anchors and fasteners shall meet the mechanical property requirements of Table .
of the D. Code Type A. . Mattresses Each shipment of mattresses on a job site shall be accompanied by a certificate that states that the material conforms to the requirements of this specification .
The certificate shall be on the manufacturers letterhead and shall be signed by an officer of the company having legal authority to bind the company .
Mesh openings shall be hexagonal in shape measuring approximately  by  inches and shall be uniform in size .
Double twist mesh joints shall be flexible with each pair of wires twisted three half turns triple twisted to prevent unraveling .
Steel wire and galvanizing shall meet the requirements of ASTM A MA and ASTM A shall have a Class coating and shall be soft temper .
The wire mesh shall have a sufficient elasticity to permit elongation of the mesh equivalent to a minimum of percent of its length .
a. Galvanized Mattresses without Polyvinylchloride Coating The diameter of the steel wire mesh shall be .
inches after galvanizing .
The diameter of the selvedge wire running through all the edges perimeter wire shall be .
inches after galvanizing .
The diameter of the wire for assembling and lacing the units shall be .
inches after galvanizing .
The above wire sizes shall have a tolerance of .
percent .
b. Polyvinylchloride PVC Coated Mattresses When specified on the plans all galvanized steel wire shall be coated with a minimum thickness of .
inches of gray or green PVC which shall be suitable to resist the destructive effects of immersion in acidic salt or polluted water exposure to ultra violet light and abrasion and retain these characteristics after a period of not less than hours when tested in accordance with ASTM A The diameter of the steel wire mesh shall be .
inches after galvanization and .
inches overall minimum core wire plus PVC Coating .
The diameter of the selvedge wire running through all the edges perimeter wire shall be .
inches after galvanizing and an overall minimum diameter of .
inches core wire plus PVC coating .
The diameter of the wire for assembling and lacing the units shall be .
inches after galvanizing and .
inches nominal overall core wire plus PVC coating .
All wire sizes shall have a tolerance of .
percent the thickness of the PVC excluded .
The mesh shall be capable of withstanding the test described below An uncut section of mesh feet long and a minimum width of feet including all selvedge bindings shall have the ends securely clamped for feet along the width of the sample .
When the width of the section under test exceeds feet the clamps shall be placed in the middle portion of the width and the excess width shall be allowed to fall free on each side of the clamped section .
The sample shall then be subjected to sufficient tension to cause percent elongation of the sample section between clamps .
After elongation and while clamped as described above and otherwise unsupported the section shall be subjected to a load applied to an area of ft located approximately in the center of the sample section between the clamps and in a direction perpendicular to the direction of the tensile force .
The sample shall be able to withstand without rupture of any wire or opening of any mesh fastening an actual load so applied equaling or exceeding pounds .
The ram head used in test shall be circular with its edges beveled or rounded to prevent cutting the wires. . Stones for Mattresses Stones to fill mattresses shall be of clean hard and durable rock with a minimum dimension of inches in all directions and a maximum dimension of inches. . Neoprene Pads The neoprene shall be either chloroprene or natural polyisoprene of Shore A durometer hardness and shall conform to the requirements of Sections .. of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications where applicable. . HBeam Piles Splices and Tips Steel Hbeam piles shall be ASTM A Grade minimum .
Steel Hbeam pile splicers shall be ASTM A Grade minimum .
HBeam pile tips shall consist of pile points equipped with cutting teeth .
The slope forming the point shall not be steeper than  .
Material for HBeam pile tips shall consist of plain cast steel pile points conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM A Grade or ASTM A Grade .
The use of pile tips fabricated by welding sections of plate in an H configuration will not be allowed. . Elastomer Elastomer for bearings shall conform to AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specification Section .. except that the elastomer compound shall be Grade or or unless otherwise noted on the Plans .
A higher grade of elastomer may be substituted for a lower one . .
Stainless Steel Stainless steel shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Type or ASTM A Type . . Polytetrafluoroethylene PTFE The PTFE filled or unfilled shall conform to the requirements of Section .
of AASHTO LRFD Bridge Construction Specifications .
PTFE resin shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D or D . SECTION MISCELLANEOUS HIGHWAY MATERIAL .
Calcium Chloride Calcium chloride shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . . Stone Curbing and Edging Stone for curbing and edging shall be approved granite from acceptable sources .
The stone shall be hard and durable predominantly gray in color free from seams that impair its structural integrity and of smooth splitting character .
Such natural variations may include bands or clusters of mineral or both of mineral crystallization that do not impair the structural integrity of the curb stone .
The dimensions shape and other details shall be as shown on the plans .
The exposed face of stone curb shall be free from indications of drill holes .
Half drill holes not larger than  inch diameter will be permitted in the arris line in the plane of the back .
a. Vertical Curb shall have a top surface sawed or dressed to an approximate true plane with no depression or projection on that surface of over  inch .
The top front arris line shall be pitched straight and true with no variations from a straight line greater than  inch .
The top back arris line shall meet the same requirement except that indentations of a maximum of  inch will be allowed .
There shall be no projection or depression on the back face that would exceed a batter of horizontal on vertical for a distance from the top of inches .
The front face shall be at right angles to the top and shall be smooth split and have no projections greater than inch or depressions greater than  inch measured from the vertical plane of the face through the top arris line for a distance down from the top of inches .
The remainder of the face shall have no projections or depressions greater than inch from the plane of the face .
The ends of the curb shall be approximately square with the planes of the top back and face and so finished that when the sections are placed end to end with the required minimum spacing of  inch no more than  inch space shall show in the joint for the full width of the top surface and for the entire exposed front face .
The remainder of the end may extend back no more than inches from the plane of the joint .
Drill holes through the curb will be allowed providing they are at least inches below the top and are mortared full with Portland cement mortar before placing the stone .
b. Miscellaneous Stone Curb When a depressed or modified section of curb is called for on the plans or ordered by the Resident for driveways crossings closures transitions or for other reasons the Contractor shall furnish curbing with the required modifications .
c. Curb Inlets Inlets used at catch basins shall conform to the applicable requirements of Vertical Curb Type and to the shape dimensions and details as shown on the Standard Detail Natural grain size and color variations characteristic of the source deposit will be permitted .
d. Dimensions The stone curb units shall be of the dimensions indicated on the plans and shall be cut in lengths of not less than feet nor greater than feet .
Random lengths of curb less than feet in length may be obtained if the Resident determines it necessary to meet field conditions .
All curb to be set on a radius of feet or less shall be cut .
e. Vertical Bridge Curb shall conform to the requirements above except as indicated on the plans and as follows .
The back face of the curb stones shall have no projections or depressions greater than inch measured from the vertical plane of the back face through the arris or pitch line down to the bottom of the stone .
The front face shall be finished as required for Vertical Curb Type except that it shall be finished the full distance down on the face .
Bottoms of curb stones shall be approximately parallel to the top and sawed or dressed to lay with a bedding of approximately inch for the full length of the stone. . Anchor holes shall be provided in the back of the stones pitched down as shown on the plan a maximum of inches from each end of the stone and spaced horizontally at a maximum of feet apart .
A minimum of anchor holes shall be provided in each stone . .
The ends of stones at expansion joints between spans and at ends of the bridge shall be cut to present a vertical face when set in position beveled to the skew angle if any and the entire end finished in the same manner as the top . .
The exposed edges of the stones at intermediate joints shall be trimmed square with the planes of the top and front face so that a neat parallel joint free from drill holes is formed between the stones .
Length of stones shall be so scheduled that joints will be uniform in width along any run of curb .
Joints shall be  inch  inch .
A joint shall be provided at each curb and sidewalk contraction joint of the bridge. . Stones set transversely at ends of a bridge when the grade exceeds percent shall have the top beveled to fit the grade of the bridge. . Mortar for bedding shall be composed of part Portland cement and parts sand with sufficient water to form a workable mix .
Cement sand and water shall conform to Section Structural Concrete. . Mortar for pointing shall be composed of equal parts sand and Portland cement with sufficient water to form a workable mix and shall conform to Section Structural Concrete. . Portland cement grout shall be made the same as mortar for pointing except that consistency shall be such that it will flow readily .
f. Curb Type The exposed face shall be smooth split to an approximate true plane having no projections or depressions which will allow over inch to show between a foot straightedge and the face when the straightedge is placed as closely as possible on any part of the face .
Half drill holes not more than inches in length and  inch in diameter will be permitted along the bottom .
The arris line top front shall be straight and true with no variation from a straight line greater than  inch .
The arris lines at the bottom of the face shall be straight and true so that not over inch shall show between the stone and a straightedge for the full length of the stone .
The ends shall be square to the length at the face and so finished that when the stones are placed end to end no space more than  inches will show in the joint for the width of the face .
When Type Curbing is required on a curve the pieces shall be shaped as described in the table on the Standard Detail plans. . Preformed Plastic Type of Material This section covers reflectorized plastic materials preformed into rolls or ribbons of various lengths pliability and widths suitable for use as reflecting pavement markings on Portland cement concrete or hot mix asphalt pavement .
General Characteristics The preformed marking materials shall consist of white or yellow films with pigments selected and blended to provide the appropriate highway colors for traffic markings .
Glass or ceramic beads shall be incorporated to provide immediate and continuing retroreflection .
The size quality and refractive index of the beads shall be such that the performance requirements of this specification shall be met .
The edges of the preformed material shall be clean cut and true .
The preformed plastic material may be supplied complete with a precoated factory applied adhesive for immediate pavement application without the use of heat solvent or other types of adhesive for immediate pavement application without the use of heat solvent or other types of adhesive operations or it may be furnished with separate adhesives as recommended by the manufacturer .
The affixed material shall be capable of molding itself to the pavement contoured by the action of traffic and maintain its original dimensions and placement under normal traffic conditions at the pavement temperatures which could occur within the State .
After application the markings shall be immediately ready for traffic .
Physical Requirements Color Pigments shall be selected and blended to conform to standard highway colors throughout the expected life of the material .
When tested by Federal Test Method Standard Method the white shall be no darker than Color Number of Federal Standard Number and the yellow shall conform to Color Number of Federal Standard Number Highway Yellow Color PR .
RetroReflectivity The retroreflective preformed film shall have a layer of reflective spheres bonded to the top surface .
The white and yellow film shall have the following initial minimum retroreflectance values at .
and .
observation angles and entrance angle as measured in accordance with the photometric testing procedures of ASTM D . Retroreflectance values shall be expressed as specific luminance in millicandelas per square meter per lux mcdmlx millicandelas per square footfoot candle mcd ftfc White Yellow Observation Angle . . . . SLmcdmlx mcd ftfc The test distance shall be feet and the sample size a by  foot rectangle .
The angular aperture of both the photoreceptor and light projector shall be minutes of arc .
The reference center of the sample and the reference axis shall be taken perpendicular to the test sample .
Bead Retention When tested with a by inch sample bent over a  inch diameter mandrel with the inch dimension perpendicular to the mandrel axis microscopic examination of the arc on the mandrel shall show no more than percent of the beads are entrapped in the binder and less than percent of the surface of the bead .
Application The preformed plastic material shall be capable of application to non defective pavement surfaces that are dry and free from dirt or other foreign matter .
For normal application the pavement temperature should be at least F and rising .
Special instructions should be supplied by the vendor for application to be made at pavement temperatures below F. Application shall be according to manufacturers recommended procedures .
Plastic pavement marking materials shall only be applied to surfaces with temperatures within the range specified by the manufacturer for optimum adhesion .
Adhesive activators or special coatings for various types of pavement surfaces shall be provided with the preformed plastic material .
Detailed information must be supplied with the material outlining required application procedures for such adhesives activators or special coating .
Preformed plastics shall be capable of being applied to new asphalt pavement immediately prior to the final rolling of the new surface and of being rolled into place with conventional pavement and highway rollers .
The plastic material and adhesives used in such applications shall be of the type that water used on the roller to prevent asphalt pickup shall not be harmful to the successful application of the plastic .
Special equipment necessary for the successful installation of any preformed plastic material shall be available from the manufacturer of the plastic material on a lease loan or purchase basis .
Longitudinal lines shall be offset at least inches from construction joints of Portland cement concrete pavement .
When directed by the Resident opening of inch lengths shall be left at foot intervals in edge lines not inlaid into the pavement surface that are placed on the inside of superelevated curves so as to prevent the ponding of water on the pavement surface. . Precast Concrete Units Precast concrete units shall conform to the plan dimensions and shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M except as modified below .
Approved structural fibers may be used as a replacement of x gauge welded wire fabric when used at an approved dosage rate for the construction of manhole and catch basin units .
The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List of Structural Fiber Reinforcement .
Cement shall conform to Section .
An approved airentraining admixture shall be added to obtain the required air content .
Aggregates shall meet the quality requirements of Section .
Fine Aggregate for Concrete and Section .
Coarse Aggregate for Concrete except that limitations on grading and the fineness modulus may be omitted .
The concrete mix design shall be approved by the Department .
Concrete shall contain .
percent air content plus or minus .
percent tolerance when tested according to AASHTO T . All concrete shall develop a minimum compressive strength of psi in days when tested according to AASHTO T . The absorption of a specimen when tested according to AASHTO T Test Method A shall not exceed .
percent of the dry mass . .
Structural Precast Concrete Units Structural precast concrete units shall conform to the dimensions shown on the Plans the requirements of this Specification and with the reviewed Working Drawings .
Materials Materials for concrete shall conform to the requirements of Standard Specification Section .
Materials .
Cement shall be Type I Type II or Type III .
Coarse aggregate for concrete shall conform to Class A AA or Latex .
The maximum water cement ratio shall be .. For the purpose of calculating water cement ratios one U.S. gallon of water shall be considered to weigh .
pounds .
Concrete shall contain a minimum of gallons per cubic yard of calcium nitrite solution .
The minimum day compressive strength shall be psi unless otherwise stated in the Contract .
Material for reinforcing shall meet the requirements of Standard Specification Section .
Reinforcing Steel or Section .
Welded Steel Wire Fabric .
Only one mat of steel is required for concrete member thicknesses of seven inches or less two mats of steel one at each face are required for concrete member thicknesses greater than seven inches .
Grout concrete patching material and geotextiles shall be one of the products listed on the Departments Qualified Products List QPL .
Quality Control and Quality Assurance Quality Control QC is the responsibility of the Contractor .
The Quality Control Inspector QCI shall inspect all aspects of the work .
The Contractor shall generate a nonconformance report NCR for materials andor workmanship that is nonconforming .
The NCR shall describe the nonconformance and the proposed corrective action .
Copies of the NCR shall be provided to the Departments Quality Assurance Inspector QAI and the Fabrication Engineer for review .
Nonconforming material andor workmanship shall be corrected or replaced .
In the event that an item fabricated under this Specification does not meet the Contract requirements but is deemed suitable for use by the Department it may be accepted in accordance with Section .
NonConforming Work of the Standard Specifications .
Acceptance is the prerogative of the Department .
The Department will conduct Quality Assurance QA in accordance with Standard Specification Subsection ..
Testing deemed necessary by the Department that is in addition to the minimum testing requirements will be scheduled to minimize interference with the production schedule .
The QAI will witness or review documentation workmanship and testing to assure the Work is being performed in accordance with the Contract Documents .
The QAI has the authority to reject materials and products that do not meet the Contract requirements including Work rejected due to denial of access or the lack of adequate notice of the beginning of production .
The acceptance of material or workmanship by the QAI will not prevent subsequent rejection if the Work is later found to be unacceptable .
The Contractor shall provide a private office at the fabrication plant for the QAI in accordance with the Facilities for Inspection requirements in Standard Specification Section .
Construction The precast units shall be manufactured at a facility that has had a minimum of five years of experience in producing similar type products .
The plant shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M. Facilities that are certified by the PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute PCI or the National Precast Concrete Association NPCA will be considered prequalified .
The Contractor shall notify the Department of the planned start of production date of the precast units a minimum of two weeks prior to beginning production for inMaine work and a minimum of three weeks prior to beginning production for outofMaine work .
If the production schedule changes notify the Fabrication Engineer no less than three Working Days prior to the initial production startup date .
Any Work done without the QAI present will be rejected .
Advise the Fabrication Engineer of the production schedule and any changes to it .
If Work is suspended on a project the Fabrication Engineer will require hours of notice prior to the resumption of Work .
The Contractor shall calibrate all production equipment on the following schedule unless there is reason to believe calibration should be performed sooner Water gauges every days admixture dispensers every days concrete cylinder compression testing machine annually batch plant scales every six months .
Use proving rings load cells and solid standard weights as applicable .
The calibration shall be performed by a testing laboratory acceptable to the Department using calibration equipment the accuracy of which is traceable to a National Institute of Standards and Technology NIST standard .
Provide calibration certifications to the QAI prior to beginning fabrication .
All precast members for a distinct system or Contract Pay Item including end blocks steps caps box culverts arch sections wall units or other elements shall be manufactured from the same material sources of aggregates brand and type of cement and color pigment .
Gradations of coarse and fine aggregates shall be furnished to the QAI prior to beginning work and at least once per week thereafter .
Concrete mix designs shall be submitted for review and approval by the Department prior to use .
Reinforcing steel shall be fabricated handled and placed in accordance with Standard Specification Section Reinforcing Steel and the reviewed Working Drawings .
Forms shall be sufficiently rigid and accurate to maintain the members dimensions .
All forms shall be well built substantial and unyielding securely braced strutted and tied to prevent motion and distortion while concrete is being placed in them .
Corners within the forms shall be fitted with consistent width chamfer strips of inch inch mitered at their intersections all exposed corners shall be chamfered .
Forms shall be treated with a bond breaking agent they shall be clean and free of foreign material .
Recess inserts one inch unless noted otherwise in the Contract .
The QAI is not responsible for verifying the location of inserts or other hardware installed for the convenience of the Contractor .
Curing The units shall be cured by one of the following methods .
Curing by Moisture Retention Cure the concrete in accordance with the latest edition of the PrecastPrestressed Concrete Institute Manual for Quality Control for Plants and Production of Structural Precast Concrete Products MNL Section .. Moist cure the concrete until it has reached design strength .
Do not use membraneforming curing compounds without the approval of the Fabrication Engineer .
If membraneforming curing compounds are authorized follow the requirements of MNL and the curing compound manufacturers published recommendations . .
Accelerated Curing of Concrete Cure the concrete in accordance with MNL Section .
except as modified herein .
After initial set the temperature gain of the concrete shall not exceed F per hour .
Initial set shall be determined in accordance with ASTM C Standard Test Method for Time of Setting of Concrete Mixtures by Penetration Resistance a strength gain of psi indicates initial set .
The maximum allowable concrete temperature shall be F. Concrete temperature shall be measured during curing with recording thermometers .
In order to qualify for accelerated cure the concrete temperature shall attain a minimum temperature of F that temperature shall be maintained for a minimum of hours and the concrete shall achieve a minimum of percent of design strength .
The accelerated curing cycle shall be considered complete when the method of supplying heat is stopped andor the concrete temperature drops below F. Two cylinders shall be tested immediately upon completion of the accelerated cure cycle .
Products that have not achieved all of the above criteria shall be moist cured until the concrete has achieved design strength .
If the precast units have achieved percent of design strength during the accelerated curing cycle no further curing will be required .
The forms shall remain in place until the concrete attains a minimum compressive strength of psi .
Concrete Testing Acceptance of structural precast units for each days production will be determined by the Department based on compliance with this specification and satisfactory concrete testing results .
Process control test cylinders shall be made and tested in accordance with the following standards AASHTO T ASTM C Test Method for Compressive Strength of Cylindrical Concrete Specimens AASHTO T ASTM C Practice for Making and Curing Concrete Test Specimens in Field AASHTO T ASTM C Practice for Sampling Freshly Mixed Concrete AASHTO T ASTM C Test Method for Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Pressure Method AASHTO T ASTM C Standard Test Method for Air Content of Freshly Mixed Concrete by the Volumetric Method ASTM C Test Method for Temperature of Freshly mixed Portland Cement Concrete ASTM C Standard Test Method for Slump Flow of SelfConsolidating Concrete Tested concrete shall conform to the following a .
Temperature shall be from o F to o F. b .
Air content shall be .
to .
concrete with higher air content may be used at the Contractors option provided extra cylinders are made to demonstrate that stripping strength and design strength are achieved .
c. Slump flow shall be homogenous with no sign of segregation .
d. Visual stability index VSI of SCC shall not exceed if a mortar paste halo is present it shall not exceed an average of .
inch .
The Contractor shall cast a minimum of concrete test cylinders for each continuous concrete placement for QC purposes cylinders shall be standard cured in accordance with AASHTO T ASTM C to be tested for day strength and a minimum of cylinders shall be field cured under the same conditions as the units and tested for stripping and design strength .
Unit identification entrained air content watercement ratio slump flow and temperature of the sampled concrete shall be recorded at the time of cylinder casting .
The Contractor shall perform all testing in the presence of the QAI .
The QAI will designate the loads to be tested .
At least once per week the Contractor shall make concrete cylinders cylinders when the Contract includes permeability requirements for use by the Department cylinders shall be standard cured in accordance with AASHTO T ASTM C. If the Contractor fails to make enough cylinders to demonstrate that the product meets the Contract requirements the product will be considered unacceptable .
The compressive strength of the concrete will be determined by averaging the compressive strength of two test cylinders made from the same sample .
For the purpose of determining design strength the average of two cylinders shall meet or exceed the design strength and the difference in strength between the two shall be no more than percent of the higher strength cylinder .
Perform compressive strength testing to determine transfer and design strength in the presence of the QAI .
Cylinder tests not witnessed by the QAI will not be acceptable .
All QC Inspectors performing concrete testing shall hold a current ACI Field Testing Technician Grade I Certification or other equivalent certification .
Surface Finish and Repairs Exposed surfaces shall be finished and repaired in conformance with the referenced specification .
If the finish is not specified then surfaces shall have a uniform appearance only minor repairs to remove and blend fins patch minor spalls tie holes and handling device recesses and to repair small entrapped air pockets shall be permitted Tolerances Dimensional tolerances shall be in conformance with the applicable referenced specification or the established industry standards for the product being produced .
Documentation The producer of the structural precast units shall keep accurate records of aggregate gradations concrete batching testing curing and inspection activities verifying that forms reinforcing and unit dimensions conform to these requirements .
Copies of reports shall be furnished to the Department .
Marking The date of manufacture production lot number and type of unit shall be clearly and indelibly inscribed by the Contractor on a rear or unexposed portion of each unit .
Handling Storage and Shipping The Contractor shall handle store and ship units in such a manner as to prevent chipping cracking fractures and excessive bending stresses .
Damaged units shall be repaired or replaced. . Catch Basin and Manhole Frames Grates and Covers Drainage Sewer Utility and related castings shall conform to the plan dimensions and shall be gray iron or ductile iron castings conforming to the requirements of AASHTO M . .
Corrugated Metal Units The units shall conform to plan dimensions and the metal to AASHTO MMM .
Bituminous coating when specified shall conform to AASHTO M Type A. . Catch Basin and Manhole Steps Steps for catch basins and for manholes shall conform to ASTM CM ASTM C Section for either of the following material a Aluminum stepsASTM BM ASTM B Alloy T or T. b Reinforced plastic steps Steel reinforcing bar with injection molded plastic coating copolymer polypropylene .
Polypropylene shall conform to ASTM D . .
Flashing Lights Flashing Lights shall be power operated or battery operated as specified .
a Power operated flashing lights shall consist of housing adapters lamps sockets reflectors lens hoods and other necessary equipment designed to give clearly visible signal indications within an angle of at least degrees and from to ft under all light and atmospheric conditions .
Two circuit flasher controllers with a twocircuit filter capable of providing alternate flashing operations at the rate of not less than nor more than flashes per minute shall be provided .
The lamps shall be lumens volt traffic signal lamps with sockets constructed to properly focus and hold the lamp firmly in position .
The housing shall have a rotatable sun visor not less than inches in length designed to shield the lens .
Reflectors shall be of such design that light from a properly focused lamp will reflect the light rays parallel .
Reflectors shall have a maximum diameter at the point of contact with the lens of approximately inches .
The lens shall consist of a round onepiece convex amber material which when mounted shall have a visible diameter of approximately inches .
They shall distribute light and not diffuse it .
The distribution of the light shall be asymmetrical in a downward direction .
The light distribution of the lens shall not be uniform but shall consist of a small high intensity portion with narrow distribution for long distance throw and a larger low intensity portion with wide distribution for short distance throw .
Lenses shall be marked to indicate the top and bottom of the lens .
b Battery operated flashing lights shall be self illuminated by an electric lamp behind the lens .
These lights shall also be externally illuminated by reflexreflective elements built into the lens to enable it to be seen by reflexreflection of the light from the headlights of oncoming traffic .
The batteries must be entirely enclosed in a case .
A locking device must secure the case .
The light shall have a flash rate of not less than nor more than flashes per minute from minus F to plus F. The light shall have an on time of not less than percent of the flash cycle .
The light beam projected upon a surface perpendicular to the axis of the light beam shall produce a lighted rectangular projection whose minimum horizontal dimension shall be degrees each side of the horizontal axis .
The effective intensity shall not have an initial value greater than .
candelas or drop below .
candelas during the first hours of continuous flashing .
The illuminated lens shall appear to be uniformly bright over its entire illuminated surface when viewed from any point within an angle of degrees each side of the vertical axis and degrees each side of the horizontal axis .
The lens shall not be less than inches in diameter including a reflexreflector ring of  inch minimum width around the periphery .
The lens shall be yellow in color and have a minimum relative luminous transmittance of .
with a luminance of Kelvin .
The lens shall be onepiece construction .
The lens material shall be plastic and meet the luminous transmission requirements of this specification .
The case containing the batteries and circuitry shall be constructed of a material capable of withstanding abuse equal to or greater than .
mm thick steel No .
U.S. Standard Gage Steel .
The housing and the lens frame if of metal shall be properly cleaned degreased and pretreated to promote adhesion .
It shall be given one or more coats of enamel which when dry shall completely obscure the metal .
The enamel coating shall be of such quality that when the coated case is struck a light blow with a sharp tool the paint will not chip or crack and if scratched with a knife will not powder .
The case shall be so constructed and closed as to exclude moisture that would affect the proper operation of light .
The case shall have a weep hole to allow the escape of moisture from condensation .
Photoelectric controls if provided shall keep the light operating whenever the ambient light falls below lx foot candles .
Each light shall be plainly marked as to the manufacturers name and model number .
If required by the Resident certification as to conformance to these specifications shall be furnished based on results of tests made by an independent testing laboratory .
All lights are subject to random inspection and testing .
All necessary random samples shall be provided to the Resident upon request without cost to the Department .
All such samples shall be returned to the Contractor upon completion of the tests. . Copper Tubing Copper tubing and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM BM Type A ASTM B Type K or better. . Nonmetallic Pipe Flexible Nonmetallic pipe and pipe fittings shall be acceptable flexible pipe manufactured from virgin polyethylene polymer suitable for transmitting liquids intended for human or animal consumption. . Nonmetallic Pipe Rigid Nonmetallic pipe shall be Schedule polyvinylchloride PVC that meets the requirement of ASTM D. Fittings shall be of the same material. . Metallic Pipe Metallic pipe shall be ANSI Standard B .
Schedule steel pipe conforming to the requirements of ASTM A Types E or S Grade B .
End plates shall be steel conforming to ASTM AAM .
Both the sleeve and end plates shall be hot dip galvanized .
Pipe sleeve splices shall be welded splices with full penetration weld before galvanizing. . Epoxy Resin Epoxy resin for grouting or sealing shall consist of a mineral filled thixotropic flexible epoxy resin having a pot life of approximately one hour at F. The grout shall be an approved product suitable for cementing steel dowels into the preformed holes of curb inlets and adjacent curbing .
The sealant shall be an approved product light gray in color and suitable for coating the surface . .
Hot Mix Asphalt Curb The performance graded asphalt binder for hot mix asphalt curb shall meet a PG or a PG .
The aggregate shall conform to the requirements of Subsection ..
The coarse aggregate portion retained on the No .
sieve may be either crushed rock or crushed gravel .
The mineral constituents of the hot mix asphalt shall be sized and graded and combined in a composite blend that will produce a stable durable curbing with an acceptable texture .
Hot Mix Asphalt for curb shall meet the requirements of Section Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement. . Precast Concrete Slab Portland cement concrete for precast slabs shall meet the requirements of Section Structural Concrete Class A .
The slabs shall be precast to the dimension shown on the plans and cross section and in accordance with the Standard Detail plans for Concrete Sidewalk Slab .
The surface shall be finished with a float finish in accordance with Subsection .c .
Lift devices of sufficient strength to hold the slab while suspended from cables shall be cast into the top or back of the slab. . Stone Slab Stone slabs shall be of granite from an acceptable source hard durable predominantly gray in color free from seams which impair the structural integrity and be of smooth splitting character .
Natural color variations characteristic of the deposit will be permitted .
Exposed surfaces shall be free from drill holes or indications of drill holes .
The granite slabs in any one section of backslope must be all the same finish .
The granite slabs shall be scabble dressed or sawed to an approximately true plane having no projections or depressions over  inch under a ft straightedge or over inch under a ft straightedge .
The arris at the intersection of the top surface and exposed front face shall be pitched so that the arris line is uniform throughout the length of the installed slabs .
The sides shall be square to the exposed face unless the slabs are to be set on a radius or other special condition which requires that the joints be cut to fit but in any case shall be so finished that when the stones are placed side by side no space more than inch shall show in the joint for the full exposed height .
Lift pin holes in all sides will be allowed except on the exposed face .
SECTION STRUCTURAL STEEL AND RELATED MATERIAL .
Structural Steel Highway bridge steel shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M .The grade of steel shall be as specified on the plans .
Main loadcarrying components subject to tensile stresses or stress reversal shall meet the notch toughness requirements in AASHTO M M Table Zone for nonfracture critical steel or Table Zone for fracture critical steel .
Frequency of tension tests shall comply with the requirements of S. Impact test sampling and testing procedures shall be in accordance with AASHTO T. Steel for ancillary bridge products and steel structures shall conform to AASHTO M or one or more of the following ASTM A ASTM A ASTM A ASTM A ASTM A ASTM A Grade C ASTM A ASTM A ASTM A Ancillary bridge products shall be as described below a bearings b drainage components c expansion devices gland seal compression seal finger joint d modular expansion devices e steel bridge rail f catwalks and inspection walkways .
High Strength Bolts Bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Type or Type .
Type bolts shall be supplied for all structures utilizing unpainted AASHTO M Mweathering steel .
Nuts shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M or AASHTO M . Circular and beveled washers shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Direct Tension Indicators DTIS shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . DTIs for use with painted steel shall have a plain as fabricated finish .
DTIs for use with unpainted steel shall be galvanized to the requirements of AASHTO M Class Type I and have a fusionbonded epoxy coating .
DTIs used with galvanized steel metalized steel and steel coated with a zincrich primer shall be galvanized to the requirements of AASHTO M Class Type I .
Twist Off Type Tension Control Structural BoltNutWasher Assemblies shall meet the requirements of ASTM F. They shall meet the chemical and mechanical requirements of ASTM A . Bolts nuts and washers specified to be galvanized may be galvanized by either hot dip galvanizing to the requirements of AASHTO M Class C or mechanically galvanized to the requirements of AASHTO M Class Type I .
All fastener bolts and nuts whether black or galvanized shall be coated with a suitable lubricant .
Galvanized nuts shall be lubricated with a lubricant containing a visible dye .
Each lot of bolts nuts washers and DTIs shall be tested by the manufacturer in accordance with the tests tabulated in Table Test Schedule .
The testing frequency for bolts nuts and washers from each shipping lot of fasteners shall be as specified in the applicable AASHTOASTM Standard Specifications .
The testing frequency for each production lot of DTIs shall be as specified in ASTM F . TABLE Test Schedule Bolts Tensile Strength Wedge Test Proof Load Hardness Coating Thickness ASTM F ASTM F ASTM F AASHTO M Nuts Proof Load Hardness Coating Thickness ASTM F ASTM F AASHTO M Washers Hardness Coating Thickness ASTM F AASHTO M DTIs Coating Thickness Compression Load AASHTO M ASTM F The suppliers shall submit test reports for all testing required in this Table .
Test reports shall contain in addition to the test results the name and address of the testing agency the manufacturer lot tested and Mill Test Reports for all steel used in the manufacture of the fastener assemblies and DTIs .
The supplier shall perform or cause to be performed a Rotational Capacity Test RCT for every production lot combination of bolts washers and nuts .
Each combination shall be designated with a unique RCT lot number .
The test results shall be furnished to the Engineer. . Preformed Pads Preformed pads shall be made with new unvulcanized rubber and unused fabric fibers and shall be approximately  inch thick after compression and vulcanizing with a proportion of fiber content sufficient to maintain strength and stability .
The surface hardness shall be to Shore A Durometer .
The ultimate breakdown limit of the pad under compressive loading shall be no less than psi . .
Bronze or CopperAlloy Bearing and Expansion Plates Bronze bearing and expansion plates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM B Alloy No .
and copper alloy bearing and expansion plates shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M ASTM B Alloy No .
or unless otherwise specified .
The bearing surfaces subject to sliding action shall be provided with trepanned recesses not grooves filled with a lubricating compound .
The lubricating compound shall consist of graphite and metallic substances with a lubricating binder capable of withstanding the atmospheric elements .
The compound shall be pressed into the recesses to form dense nonplastic lubricating inserts .
The lubricating area shall comprise between percent and percent of the total area of the plate subject to sliding action .
The sliding surfaces shall be planed parallel to the prevailing direction of movement of the structure and subsequently polished unless detailed otherwise. . Coldfinished Carbon Steel Shafting Coldfinished carbon steel shafting shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Grade Designation inclusive cold drawn either semikilled or fullykilled shall be furnished unless otherwise specified . .
Castings Gray iron castings for use other than for drainage castings Section .
shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . Class Number shall be furnished unless otherwise specified .
Malleable iron castings shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A . Grade Number shall be furnished unless otherwise specified .
CarbonSteel Castings for General Applications shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . The grade of steel shall be used unless otherwise specified .
Castings shall be true to pattern in form and dimensions free from pouring faults sponginess cracks blow holes and other defects in positions affecting their strength and value for the service intended .
Castings shall be boldly filleted at angles and the arrises shall be sharp and perfect .
All castings must be sand blasted or otherwise effectively cleaned of scale and sand to present a smooth clean and uniform surface. . Metal Bin Type Retaining Wall The metal for bin type retaining wall members shall be galvanized and shall conform to the applicable requirements of AASHTO M . When fiberglass aramid or carbon graphite fiber coating is specified the galvanized metal sheets used to form the retaining wall except the base plates and connecting channels shall additionally be coated on both sides with a layer of fiberglass aramid or carbon graphite fibers applied in sheet form by pressing it into the molten spelter .
Immediately after the metallic bond has solidified the fibers shall be thoroughly saturated with a bituminous saturant conforming to the following requirements Penetration at F . oz sec .
. . inches Loss on heating at F . oz hrs Not more than .
percent Flash point open cup Not less than F Penetration at F . oz sec .
of residue after heating at F as compared with penetration of asphalt before heating Not less than percent Insoluble in carbon disulfide Not more than percent Testing shall be in accordance with methods specified in AASHTO M . Whenever possible in the manufacture of the units a minimum forming radius of inch is to be maintained .
All units that are formed with less than inch radius shall be hotdipped galvanized after forming .
Bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F Class .
ASTM A_ and galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . . Steel Extrusions Material for steel extrusions for expansion devices shall be ASTM A A M ASTM A A M or ASTM A A M except that ASTM A A M shall not be used for extrusions that are to be welded .
SECTION JOINT SEALS .
Elastomer for Seal Elements The preformed elastomeric polychloroprene joint seal elements both compression and gland type shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M . .
Fabric for Seal Elements Fabric used for reinforcement in a seal element shall be a nonwicking fabric conforming to the requirement of ASTM D . . Lubricant Adhesive The lubricantadhesive shall be a part moisture curing polyurethane and aromatic hydrocarbon solvent mixture and shall have the following physical properties Solids content percent by weight Service Range F to F minimum Film Strength ASTM D psi minimum Elongation at Break percent minimum Each lot of lubricantadhesive shall be delivered in sealed containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark and the date of manufacture .
Maximum shelf life shall not exceed months. . Sealant The sealant shall be a one part moisture curing polyurethane base nonsag elastomeric product conforming to the requirements of Federal Specification TTSOC Type II Class A or ASTM C Type S Grade NS Class .
Each lot of sealant shall be delivered in sealed containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark and the date of manufacture .
Maximum shelf life shall be as recommended by the manufacturer . .
Compression Seals Compression seals shall be multichannel extruded shapes made of material conforming to the requirements of Section .
Elastomer for Seal Elements and in a configuration as determined by each particular manufacturer and as shown in the contract documents .
The seal shall be marked on the top surface with the manufacturers name or trademark the lot number and the size designation at intervals of feet or less .
Actual seal dimensions shall not differ from the nominal dimensions by more than inchinch of depth or width or a maximum of  inch whichever is less .
The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List. . Gland Type Seals Gland type seals shall be single membrane extruded or molded shapes made of material conforming to the requirements of Section .
Elastomer for Seal Elements and of a configuration as determined by each manufacturer and as shown in the contract documents .
The seals shall be marked on the top surface with the manufacturers name or trademark the lot number and the size designation at intervals of feet or less .
If fabric is used to reinforce the seal it shall conform to the requirements of Section .
Fabric for Seal Elements .
The material used shall be one of the products listed on the Maine Department of Transportations Qualified Products List .
SECTION LIGHTING MATERIAL .
Steel Conduit Galvanized steel conduit shall be of uniform thickness with scalefree smooth circular bore to permit cutting of clean true threads .
Steel conduit and couplings shall be Schedule galvanized steel pipe conforming to the requirements of ASTM A . Threaded couplings shall be conduit type permitting the end of conduits to fully abut each other squarely within the coupling .
Other fittings for metal conduit exclusive of bushings shall be threaded malleable iron conforming to the requirements of ASTM A and shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AASHTO M . All bushings shall be threaded insulated grounding type. . NonMetallic Conduit Nonmetallic conduit shall be rigid unplasticized polyvinylchloride conduit suitable for Type II or Type III installations whichever is required and shall conform to the standards of the NEMA or the UL. . Prewired Conduit Prewired conduit will no longer be accepted .
Secondary Wiring Secondary wiring cables including neutrals and grounding conductors shall be volt cables and shall consist of single conductor stranded softdrawn or annealed copper wire insulated with flame retardant moisture and heat resistant thermoplastic material .
The cable shall be UL approved and listed as THW THWN or XHHW .
Wire shall be of sufficient size to allow a maximum voltage drop of percent from source of power to the most remote luminaire .
Phase identification shall be made by factoryapplied color coding .
Terminal lugs shall be cast copper alloy solderless mechanical type .
All conduit connections in above ground junction boxes and light standards shall be made by connector kits fused or nonfused as indicated on the plans .
Splices for the roadway lighting shall be made by straight through or wye connector kits as required .
Where these connector kits can not be used as verified by the Resident connections on cables in junction boxes shall be made by splicing as described elsewhere .
The connector kits shall be a quick disconnect type .
Double connector kits shall be used where there is more than one phase conductor .
Fused wye connectors shall be composed of a wye line side housing assembled with a load side and fuse terminal housing .
The housing shall be formed from waterresistant synthetic rubber .
Each housing shall provide a water seal around the cables and when fully assembled shall form a watertight connector .
The interior shall be arranged to receive and retain line side wiring and the fuse contacts .
The fuse contacts shall be springloaded copper designated for amperes volts shall have percent minimum conductivity and shall be suitable for gripping amperes or as designated on the plans volt cartridge type midget fuse approximately inch in diameter and  inches long .
The contacts shall be fully annealed .
The load side conductors shall be connected by crimping and the line side conductors shall be connected with screws .
The connector shall be of the nonlocking type that will break off under extreme tensile stress leaving no exposed metal contacts on the line side of the connector .
The cable diameter used will determine the size of each housing .
The load side housing shall retain the fuse when disconnected .
Nonfused connectors shall be similar to the fused wye connectors .
The cable diameter will determine the size of each housing of each connector .
Fuses for connectors shall be rated at amperes or as indicated on the plans. . Luminaire LED fixtures The luminaire shall be designed for the wattage rating and voltage indicated on the plans and for operating on a multiple circuit .
All luminaries shall be new and be the product of the same manufacture The LED shall have a minimum of hours and have a ten year warranty on the fixture and led modules .
Light color temperature shall be k. Each fixture shall have a minimum of at least separate light sources .
Lenses or refractors shall be guaranteed not to yellow for a period of years .
Fixtures shall be IES full cutoff .
Lm test data shall be supplied in the bid package The LED fixtures must be equipped with a Smart Driver .
The Smart Driver shall provide current regulation for individual light clusters .
Current accuracy over the LED operating temperature range must be .
It shall have over temperature protection shut down at critical temperature and resume operation temperature .
Under voltage lockout for power off or brownout .
The line side of each fixture retrofit must have surge suppression that meets or exceeds ANSIIEEE C. Category C. Led fixtures shall have a lamp lumen depreciation of no more than LLD over hours years .
On any contract supplying at least light fixtures additional spare fixture for each fixtures shall be supplied to Maine Department of Transportation. . Luminaire Lamp and Ballast for High Mast Lighting Shall conform to ..
The luminaire shall provide ANSIIES Type I Type IV or Type V distributions. . Photo Electric Control The control shall meet the following minimum requirements a .
Unit Design The photoelectric unit shall consist of a light sensitive element connected directly to a control relay without intermediate amplifications .
The unit shall be zenith sensing type .
b .
Housing The photoelectric control shall be housed in a weatherproof housing .
c. Operating Levels The operating levels shall be factory set to turn on at approximately .
foot candles and off at approximately .
foot candles .
d. Supply Voltage The control shall be capable of operation on a supply voltage of to volts .
e. Base The base of the unit shall be provided with a prong EEINEMA standard twist lock plug mounting .
f. Directional Design The control shall be oriented in a northerly direction according to the manufacturers recommendation .
g. Surge Protection The unit shall have a builtin surge protective device for protection from induced high voltage and follow through currents. . Service Equipment The service pole or service rack and other entrance equipment shall be as detailed on the plans .
All service equipment new or upgraded shall be marked with an appropriate arc flash plaque or decal with the following information Flash hazard boundary Calcm hazard at inches PPE level Shock hazard when cover is Limited approach boundary Restricted approach boundary The prohibited approach boundary This shall be located on the outside of the equipment and shall be visible weatherproof and fade resistant and not easily removed .
All new controller cabinets traffic signal or lighting shall be configured to eliminate arc flash .
All electrical equipment will be dead front no open terminals bus bars breakers or exposed terminal strips .
All live parts over volts shall be covered with Lexan or a suitable barrier to eliminate the possibility of an arc flash .
The control cabinet shall be fabricated from cast aluminum sheet aluminum galvanized steel or stainless steel .
The following are required a. Hinged cover with weather protected hasp for padlocking .
The lock will be provided by others .
b .
Mounting brackets .
c. Suitable bossed and threaded holes in the case wall for conduit installation .
d. Independent single pole magnetic trip circuit breakers .
e. Manual control switch .
f. Lightning arresters in load and line side rated Volts RMS indoor type .
g. Contactor One double pole single throw solenoid shall be nonmercury contactor with contacts rated at the voltage and amperes shown on the plans .
The coil shall be capable of operating at the voltage shown on the plans hertz .
The contactor shall be normally open unless otherwise specified .
The contacts shall be mercury .
h. Ground rods shall be copperclad steel or galvanized  inch diameter feet long complete with ground clamp and square head bolt .
DryType transformers shall be designed for indoor and outdoor installation .
The following are required a. KVA rating volt primary volt secondary single phase wire system if single phase service is supplied .
b .
Frequency hertz .
c. Keyhole mounting slots and lifting groove .
d. Insulation system for F rise at F ambient .
e. Wiring compartment located on bottom front of unit .
Access through a single cover .
f. Heat barrier to protect connecting cables .
g. Connecting leads to extend inches from box and identified with metal tags .
h. Core and coils to be contained within a nonventilated weatherproof enclosure .
i. Conduit knockouts to be located on bottom back and sides of wiring compartment .
j .
Maximum sound level to be decibels .
Rackmounted circuit breakers shall be enclosed in NEMA R enclosures with raintight hubs .
The breakers shall be rated for pole amperes volt wire service .
Lugs for padlocking shall be supplied .
The service entrance rack shall be constructed as shown on the plan .
Minor modifications will be permitted if approved by the Resident to accommodate variations in equipment dimensions .
Lumber shall be as shown on the plan .
Bolts and hardware shall be hotdipped galvanized steel . .
Lowering System for High Mast Lighting Each pole shall be furnished with a mechanical lowering system operated by cables and an electrically operated winch that will permit servicing of the luminaires and associated electrical and mechanical apparatus from the ground .
Lowering systems shall permit lowering of the complete assembly including luminaires ballasts fuses and other apparatus which may require periodic inspection or servicing to a height of feet or less above the pole base plate .
At the top of the pole shaft there shall be mounted a detachable head assembly which remains fixed in position during the raising and lowering operation .
The head assembly shall consist of or more symmetrically located fixed support arms which will carry the weight of the lowering assembly .
The fixed head assembly shall incorporate no moving parts except for the necessary pulleys rollers or sheaves that guide the lowering cables and electrical cable during the lowering operation of the assembly .
The fixed head assembly and luminaire lowering ring shall be galvanized steel .
All required pulley rollers or sheaves and associated bearings bushings and shafts shall be constructed of highly corrosion resistant materials not relying upon plating of the parent material for corrosion protection .
All pulleys and rollers attached to the head assembly shall have permanently lubricated bearings or bushings .
All parts of the head assembly shall be protected with covers screens shields as necessary to prevent entrance of dirt moisture ice accumulation nesting of insects or birds or other contaminants harmful to the operation of the lowering device .
All miscellaneous fittings fasteners or hardware shall be fabricated from corrosion resistant materials that do not rely on plating for their corrosion protection .
A lightning rod of approved design shall be attached to the top of each pole and shall be firmly attached to the pole shaft or head assembly to provide good electric bonding to the pole shaft .
The entire luminaire lowering ring assembly shall be raised and lowered by three or more symmetrically placed stainless steel aircraft type cables located inside the pole shaft and extending through the head assembly support arms and attached to the lowering ring .
Electrical cable supplying energy from the base of the pole to the luminaire ring shall be rough service mining type cable consisting of volt conductors assembled with a messenger into a single cable .
No electrical disconnect shall be permitted at the top of the pole .
In addition a stainless steel guide cable or equivalent shall be attached to the inside of the pole shaft to prevent the twisting of the lowering and electrical cables during the raiselower operation .
Each of the stainless steel lowering cables shall be capable of supporting the entire lowering assembly .
When the luminaire ring assembly is in the fully raised position a mechanism for securing the luminaire ring to the head assembly shall be provided .
Such mechanism shall provide support for the lowering ring and shall latch the ring to the head assembly thus permitting the removal of all tension on the cables .
All mechanisms shall be designed to provide the operator with a positive means of ascertaining when the raising operation is complete and the ring assembly is in the proper resting position .
The inner portion of the lowering ring shall be equipped with a protective bumper or roller system which will prevent damage to the pole shaft surface and preclude excessive swing during the loweringraising operation .
Winches shall be operated by an appropriately geared volt electric drive motor with adjustable torque limiter that can be easily handtransported .
One drive motor assembly shall be furnished which will operate all units .
A rubber covered heavyduty type SO rated volt cable with connectors shall be provided to test the luminaires when they are in a fully lowered position .
An approved junction box shall be installed in the hand hole of each pole that will accommodate the terminations of the underground cable with the cable in the pole serving the luminaires and to include a volt grounded receptacle .
Secondary lightning arresters shall be rated for volts RMS and shall be designed for outdoor use .
The arresters shall be installed in each phase conductor to ground and shall be attached in or on the luminaire lowering device in a location accessible for inspection and servicing when the device is lowered .
SECTION STRUCTURAL ALUMINUM AND RELATED MATERIAL .
Aluminum Railings a .
Aluminum Extrusions Traffic rails hand rails splice bars and pales brackets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B Alloy T or T. Post and post bases shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B Alloy T. Pales shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B Alloy T. Washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B Alloy Alclad T. b .
Aluminum Rivets Rivets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B Alloy T cold heading .
Rivets shall have a button type manufactured head .
Self plugging aluminum blind fasteners for pale panels shall meet the following requirements SleeveASTM B Alloy Stabilized Pin ASTM B Alloy Naturally Aged .
The driven fastener shall meet the requirements for ultimate shear and tensile strength of Military Specification MILR .
c. Miscellaneous Aluminum Parts Rail caps shall be either sand cast or permanentmold cast and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B or ASTM B Alloy A T. All aluminum bars and plates shall conform to the requirements of ASTM B Alloy T. Standard structural shapes conform to the requirements of ASTM Specification B . d. Steel Anchor Assembly Steel spacers for post anchors shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A .
Nuts embedded in concrete shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A . Anchor bolts exposed nuts and washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A or ASTM F Grade and shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with ASTM A or ASTM B Class Type .
e. Stainless Steel Parts Cap screws for fastening clamp bars and set screws for pale panel brackets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F Alloy Group Condition CW .
SECTION ROADSIDE IMPROVEMENT MATERIAL .
Fertilizer Fertilizer shall be commercial fertilizer having available elements in conformity with the standards of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemist .
The fertilizer shall be furnished in unopened bags with the weight contents and guaranteed analysis shown there on or on a securely attached tag .
a Grass Seed Fertilizer shall be Property Specification Breakdown of Property Nitrogen N percent At least from slow release sources Phosphorus P percent No phosphorus Pottasium K percent from potassium magnesium sulphate Iron Fe percent From iron sulphate b Slow Release Fertilizer tablets Planting Tablets shall be a long lasting plus minors  ounce tablet .
c Water Soluble Fertilizer shall be Property Specification Nitrogen percent Phosphorus percent Potassium percent Completely water soluble noncorrosive without chlorides or carbonates and containing a color tracer dye. . Humic Acid Soil Conditioner Humic Acid Soil Conditioner shall come from naturally occurring dry granular unaltered oxidized lignite also called Humate or equivalent product approved by the departments landscape architect crushed to a particle size which passes a US standard mesh screen inch .
Humate or equivalent product shall have a Humic Acid equivalent content of by weight . .
Agricultural Ground Limestone Agricultural ground limestone shall have the following mechanical analysis Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves No .
No .
No .
Total Carbonates Agricultural ground limestone may be shipped in containers or in bulk .
Packaged material shall be delivered in the manufacturers standard containers .
The containers shall be new and so constructed to assure safe arrival at the site .
The net weight of the contents shall not exceed pounds per container .
The manufacturers name a guarantee analysis and the net weight shall appear on each container .
Bulk shipments shall be accompanied by certificates stating manufacturers name weight and guarantee analysis .
Liquid lime may be substituted for agricultural ground limestone when seeding hydraulically .
Liquid lime shall be water soluble and contain the following analysis Property Specification Elemental Calcium Ca percent Nitrogen N . percent of which is from ammoniac nitrogen and .
is from Nitrate Nitrogen Liquid lime shall be delivered in the manufacturers unopened containers .
The manufacturers name a guaranteed analysis and the quantity shall appear on each container . .
Seed All seed shall be certified as to mixture germination purity and live seed .
Each variety shall conform to the following Property Specification Germination percent Pure Live Seed percent Purity percent Weed Seed .
percent All seed shall be from the current years crop unless recent tests by an approved testing agency demonstrate that older seed meets the above requirements .
Seed Mixtures shall consist of seed proportioned percent by weight as follows Method Park Mixture Property Specification Creeping Red Fescue Kentucky Bluegrass Chewings Fescue Perennial Ryegrass Annual Ryegrass Method Roadside Mixture Property Specification Red Fescue Sheep Fescue Red Top White Clover Annual Rye Method Roadside Mixture Property Specification Crown Vetch Perennial Lupine White Clover Perennial Rye Grass .
Mulch a Hay mulch shall consist of long fibered hay reasonably free from weeds and other undesirable material .
No material shall be used which is so wet decayed or compacted as to inhibit even and uniform spreading .
No chopped hay grass clippings or other short fibered material shall be used unless directed .
b Straw mulch shall consist of long fibered straw derived from oats wheat rye or other cultivated grains reasonable free from weeds and other undesirable material .
No material shall be used which is so wet decayed or compacted as to inhibit even and uniform spreading .
No chopped hay grass clippings or other short fibered material shall be used unless directed .
c Cellulose fiber mulch shall consist of elongated wood fibers from virgin or recycled sources and postconsumer newsprint .
The woods fibers shall be tested to show no lead asbestos or other heavy metals exceeding EPA toxic levels .
Cellulose fiber mulch shall be free of refuse physical contaminants and material toxic to plant growth .
Cellulose fiber shall not contain more than percent postconsumer newsprint .
d Bark mulch shall consist of soft wood bark fragments that have been aged for at least months .
Bark mulch shall be free of refuse physical contaminants material toxic to plant growth and reprocessed wood products .
Bark mulch shall be a wellgraded material conforming to the following Property Specification pH .
to .
inch Sieve Designation percent passing Soluble Salts Content .
mmhoscm e Erosion control mix shall be an organic substance of source separated materials separated at the point of waste generation that may include forest residues bark paper mill flume grit stump grindings and aged wood waste .
Erosion control mix shall be free of refuse physical contaminants material toxic to plant growth and reprocessed wood products .
Erosion control mix may contain rocks less than inches in diameter and shall be a well graded material conforming to the following Property Specification pH .
to .
inch Sieve Designation percent passing  inch Sieve Designation to percent passing Soluble Salts Content .
mmhoscm Organic Matter to percent dry weight basis f Stone mulch shall be clean native stone free of refuse physical contaminants material toxic to plant growth and limestone .
Stone mulch shall conform to the following Sieve Designation Percentage by Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves  inch  inch .
Mulch Binder Shall consist of a commercially developed product for the tacking of hay or straw .
Binder shall be free of refuse physical contaminants material toxic to plant growth or asphalt .
Paper fiber mulch may be used as a binder at the rate of lbunit .
Paper fiber mulch shall consist of percent postconsumer newsprint processed to be applied hydraulically . .
Erosion Control Blankets Shall consist of a machine produced rolled blanket of biodegradable organic fibers evenly distributed over the entire area of blanket of a consistent thickness sewn into a biodegradable mesh on the top and bottom surface using a cotton blend thread .
The blanket shall remain in place when subject to shear stress of .
lbft .
The blanket shall remain intact until grass is established .
See Section .
Seeding Maintenance and Acceptance . .
Ground Anchors Shall consist of metal staples or biodegradable stakes as recommended by the manufacturer of the erosion control blanket to be used. . Herbicide The herbicide shall be an approved chemical registered in the State of Maine for the required treatment. . Humus Humus shall be an organic substance meeting the following Property Specification pH .
to .
inch Sieve Designation percent passing Soluble Salts Content .
mmhoscm Organic Matter percent minimum Dewar Self Heating stability Humus may be a natural peat from sedge sphagnum or reed origin or compost from source separated materials that may include leaf and yard trimmings food scrapes food processing residues manure and other agricultural residuals or biosolids .
Humus shall contain no visible admixture of refuse or other physical contaminates or any material toxic to plant growth .
SECTION TRAFFIC SIGNALS MATERIAL .
Vehicular Signal Indications a. Vehicular signal heads for traffic signals and flashing beacons shall conform to or exceed the current edition of the ITE Standard for Adjustable Face Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads .
Each housing section shall be complete with a onepiece hinged door mounting for the lens and other parts of the optical system watertight gaskets and simple doorlocking device .
The optical system shall be mounted so that the various parts may be swung open for ready access or removal .
The sections shall be interchangeable and constructed so that sections can be removed or added .
All new traffic signal vehicular andor pedestrian heads shall have light emitting optical assemblies for all colors .
There shall be a round opening in the top and bottom of each head to receive  inch supporting pipe frame .
All parts of the housing including the doors and end plates shall be of die cast aluminum free from flaws cracks blow holes or other imperfections or polycarbonate .
All exposed bolts screws hinge pins and doorlocking devices shall be stainless steel .
All interior screws and fittings shall be stainless steel or approved nonferrous corrosion resistant material .
All gaskets including door optical assembly exclusive of lampholder gaskets shall be of neoprene .
Lampholder gaskets shall be of a material unaffected by heat .
All light emitting diode optical assemblies shall be wired so that a white wire will be connected to the ground and black or colored wire to the terminal of the LED optical assembly .
The wires shall in turn be connected to the terminal block mounted inside at the back of the housing .
The terminal block shall have sufficient screw type terminals to terminate all field wires and lamp wires with separate screws .
The terminals to which field wires are attached shall be permanently identified or the wiring shall be color coded to facilitate fieldwork .
Each LED assembly shall be provided with a removable visor hood unless tunnel hoods or louvered hoods are specified on the plans .
Hoods for inch sections shall be inches long hoods for inch sections shall be  inches long .
All heads to be modified shall be retrofitted with light emitting diode optical assemblies for all colors .
When or more vehicular signal heads or a combination of vehicular signal heads and pedestrian signal heads are installed on pole only conduit riser shall be used .
The signal heads shall not be connected together by the use of liquid tight flexible metal conduit and terminal fittings .
All new vehicular signal faces installed at any one intersection shall be of the same make and type .
LED optical assemblies for the inch units shall be lumen minimum initial output volt hour rated life clear traffic signal lamps .
Lamps for the inch units shall be lumen minimum initial output volt hour rated life .
The intensity and distribution of light from each illuminated signal LED optical assembly shall conform to the latest revisions of the ITE Standard for Adjustable Face Vehicle Traffic Control Signal Heads and the Standard for Traffic Signal LED .
b. Programmed Visibility Vehicular Indications The programmed visibility traffic signal vehicular indication shall optically determine the visibility zone of indication without the use of hoods or louvers .
The projected signal may be visible or selectively veiled anywhere within of the optical axis .
The signal head shall be adjustable to various angles between above and below horizontal .
No indication shall result from external illumination and each indication shall be illuminated separately .
The visibility of the signal indication shall be adjustable within the signal head to fit the lane or lanes in which traffic is to be controlled .
The illumination lamp shall be a nominal watt volt AC prong sealed beamed type having an integral reflector and an average rated life of hours .
A dimming device shall be provided to reduce the candela at each signal head for nighttime operation to approximately percent of the candlepower for daytime operation .
A circular reflector with a specular inner surface shall mate the lamp to a diffusing element .
An internal imaging surface shall be provided to permit an effective veiling system to be applied as determined by the desired visibility zone .
The Contractor shall notify the Resident hours prior to the application of the veiling system .
The optical limiteddiffuser shall be provided with positive indexing means and shall be composed of heat resistant glass .
The objective lens shall be a high resolution planar incremental lens thermetically sealed within a flat laminate of weather resistant acrylic .
The lens outline shall be symmetrical .
Lens colors shall conform to the latest ITE transmittance and chromaticity standards .
The signal shall be housed in cast aluminum conforming to the latest ITE alloy and tensile requirements .
Each section shall have a sun visor .
The cast aluminum shall have a chromate preparatory treatment before the application of green or yellow baked enamel prime and finish .
The lens cover and the interior of the case shall be flat black .
Hinge and latch pins shall be stainless steel .
All access openings shall be sealed with weather resistant rubber gaskets .
The lamp fixture housing shall be readily accessible and lamp replacement shall not require special tools nor necessitate major disassembly .
Electrical connections between the case and lamp holder shall be an interlock assembly that disconnects the lamp holder when open .
Number wire shall be used to connect the lamp receptacle to the signal head terminal .
The signal head shall be capable of being mounted to standard  inch fittings as a signal head section as a multiple section face or in combination with other signal heads .
The signal section shall be provided with a rigid connection that permits tilting from at least above or below the horizontal while maintaining a common vertical line through couplers and conduit .
No special tools should be needed for servicing or mounting .
c. All exposed wiring for traffic signals beacons solar panels etc shall be imsa rated and be of sufficient size to carry the full load unless approved by the resident engineer .
Pedestrian Signal Indications All pedestrian signal head indications shall be displayed within a rectangular background and shall consist of symbolized messages Upraised Hand and Walking Person.that shall be at least inches high .
All pedestrian heads shall be LED optical assemblies and shall have countdown displays .
LED optical assemblies shall be lumen minimum initial output volt hour rated life .
When or more pedestrian signal heads are installed on wood pole only conduit riser shall be used .
The pedestrian signal heads shall not be connected by the use of liquid tight flexible metal conduit .
Pedestrian signal heads which use fiber optic bundles to form the message shall achieve the color of the messages by filters between the light source and the optical bundles .
The legends shall be inches minimum in height with a  inch stroke .
The housing materials shall conform to the requirements for conventional pedestrian signal housings .
The message shall be illuminated by a light source designed to operate on a volt source and shall be rated for hour average life .
The flashing message shall be accomplished by use of a solidstate flasher required for conventional pedestrian signal indications. . Signal Mounting All trunnions brackets and suspensions used for assembling and mounting signal control faces shall be entirely weather tight .
The inside area of the cross section of the tubular arms shall not be less than the inside area of  inch IPS pipe to permit the signal control wires or cable to be inserted through them .
After final adjustment all vehicular and pedestrian signal heads regardless of mounting arrangement shall be fastened by a positive locking device acceptable to the Resident .
This device shall prevent any deviation from the position set but shall allow for readjustment of the signal head later in the same installation or in another installation without the necessity of damaging any part of the signal head. . Vehicular Loop Detectors Vehicle detectors shall consist of wire loops and self contained detection equipment capable of registering independently the presence or passage of any vehicle passing over the loop at any speed up to mph and at any temperature between and F. Each loop detector shall contain its own integral power supply and shall operate between VAC and VAC .
The input power shall be protected by fuse or resettable circuit breaker .
The detector amplifiers shall be selftuning solid state construction except for the output relay .
Printed circuit design shall allow the components to be removed and replaced without permanent damage to the printed circuit boards or tracks .
Detector amplifiers installed in a common cabinet shall have a frequency difference and shall not interfere with the operation of other detector amplifiers installed in the same cabinet .
All input and output circuits for each amplifier shall enter by a single connector provided with a threaded shell .
All controls indicator lights meters fuseholders circuit breakers and connectors shall be mounted on the front panel of the detector amplifier .
All controls shall be adjustable without the use of tools and the controls shall be clearly and permanently identified .
The detector unit shall show a visible indication of vehicle calls .
After a power interruption the units shall return to normal operation within seconds .
If any vehicle stops over a portion of the loop registering a call the detector shall be capable of detecting additional vehicles traversing the loop after approximately seconds .
Detectors shall detect vehicles by lanes of traffic and shall not detect traffic moving away from the intersection when properly positioned in normal travel lanes .
Detection must be positive and not erratic under all actual operating conditions with the exception of storm damage to the detector .
All detectors shall be capable of detecting all fourwheeled vehicles for all lengths of leadin up to feet for single detection loops and for a combined leadin length of feet in the case of multiple loops .
Detector loop wire shall be number THWN stranded wire moisture and heat resistant .
Leadin cable shall conform to the detector manufacturers recommendations .
The wire shall be encapsulated in vinyl tubing over its entire length .
No damage shall occur in the detector if the pavement loop or leadin becomes short circuited. . Microwave Detectors Microwave detectors shall work on an operational frequency of .
GHZ .
The detection method shall be microwave with adjustable patterns with a response time of milliseconds and an adjustable hold time of .
to seconds .
It shall be powered from VAC to VAC .
All contacts shall be form C amp rated .
The detector shall have a failsafe microprocessor circuit so that if the unit fails it will place the controller in recall on the apparent phase. . Pedestrian Detectors Pedestrian push button detectors shall be weatherproof and constructed to eliminate the possibility of electrical shock in all weather conditions .
The pedestrian push button switch shall be a phenolic enclosed precision snapacting type switching unit singlepole doublethrow with screw type terminals rated amperes at volts AC and shall have the following characteristics a .
The switching unit shall have a stainless steel plunger actuator and shall be provided with Uframe to permit recessed mounting in push button housing .
b .
Where a pedestrian push button is attached to a pole the housing shall be shaped to fit the curvature of the pole and secured to provide a rigid installation .
When required saddles shall be provided to make a neat fit . .
Controllers All controllers shall be solid state menu driven keyboard units meeting NEMA standards and capable of operating in fixed time semiactuated and actuated modes or as designated on the plans .
Controller shall have a programmable EE prom chip with an internal realtime clockcalendar capable of daily weekly and yearly events time programming .
The controller shall be designed to provide the number of intervals shown on the plans without any auxiliary equipment .
Solid state controllers shall be provided with conflict monitors as specified in Section .. All equipment inputs outputs and terminals shall be identified by the phase designations shown on the plans .
The reliability of the equipment shall be demonstrated by test performance that will confirm that the controller unit fully wired cabinet and auxiliary equipment meet the operational and functional requirements of the plans and specifications .
The Contractor shall be responsible for providing all information describing the operation of the equipment necessary to facilitate the completion of the tests .
All schematic wiring diagrams of the controllers and auxiliary equipment all cabinet diagrams and all operation manuals shall be submitted to the Resident at the time the controllers are delivered for testing .
These diagrams shall show in detail all circuits and parts .
Such parts shown thereon shall be identified by name or number and in such a manner as to be readily interpreted .
The controller shall be delivered with all documentation manuals as per Section .
to the Maine DOT Sign Shop with all internal connections made and ready for testing .
The test will be performed under simulated field loads or manufacturers design loads whichever are greater .
Testing will be performed by the Department .
The Contractor shall allow days for the testing of each controller commencing on the day the controller is delivered to the test site exclusive of the number of days necessary for the Contractor to respond to defect notices and the number of days the Contractor requires to correct the defective equipment .
The test shall consist of not less than five days of continuous satisfactory operation .
If unsatisfactory performance of the controller develops during the test the Contractor shall remove the defective equipment for repair within five working days after notification correct the deficiency and the controller shall be retested until the days of continuous satisfactory operation are obtained .
If repeated failures occur the entire controller may be rejected requiring the Contractor to submit a new controller for testing .
Delays to the contract resulting from unsatisfactory test performance due to continued equipment failure will not be considered as a valid reason to justify extension of the contract time .
The Contractor will be notified when testing of the traffic signal equipment has been completed .
It shall be their responsibility to transport the equipment to the work site .
Each traffic controller unit flasher and all other current interrupting devices shall be equipped with a suitable radio interference suppressor installed at the input power point .
Interference suppressors shall be designed to minimize interference in both broadcast and aircraft frequencies .
Suppressors shall be designed for percent of the total connected load and shall meet standards of the UL and the EIA .
The type of controller auxiliary equipment and other operational features shall be as noted on the plans .
All equipment except pedestrian push buttons shall be designed to operate on volt hertz .
Operation shall be satisfactory at voltages from to .
The voltage for pedestrian push buttons shall not exceed volts .
a. Auxiliary Functions All controllers shall be capable of providing flashing operation of the signal lights as indicated on the plans .
Transfer from flashing operation or to flashing operation shall conform to the MUTCD .
The clock for auxiliary functions shall be a solid state time clock or module .
If noted on the plans preempt circuits shall be provided for emergency vehicles andor railroad crossings .
The clearance and preempt indications shall be as noted on the plans .
Preempt circuits shall function during stop and go and flashing operation unless otherwise noted .
The duration of clearance and preempt intervals shall be adjustable over the range noted on the plans and shall be labeled according to function .
The railroad preempt circuit shall be designed to operate as a failsafe loop through a normally made contact on the railroads control relay in the railroads control cabinet .
Railroad preemption shall have precedence over all preemption intervals for other purposes .
Actuated vehicle phases and actuated pedestrian phases shall be served in that interval of the cycle indicated on the plans .
Time for an actuated interval shall be taken from the non actuated phases as noted on the plans .
Automatic transfer to or from flashing operation shall conform to the MUTCD .
Manual advance of the intervals by use of hand cord control shall cause the controller to advance to the next programmed interval only upon pulse signal from the hand cord circuit interval timing shall hold the interval for the minimum programmed amber and red clearance intervals .
b .
Solid State Controllers The controller unit shall be enclosed in a sheet metal case with protective painted finish designed to permit easy access to the interior and removal of printed circuit boards and modules without the use of special tools .
All program controls fuses and indicator lights shall be mounted on the front panel and shall be clearly and permanently labeled .
Modules of unlike function shall be mechanically keyed or electrically interlocked to prevent placement in the wrong location .
Each module shall be identified with the symbol shown on the plans with an embossed color contrasting plastic label .
All components shall be marked for identification compatible with the maintenance manual for the controller unit including components mounted on printed circuit boards .
When on manual operation all phases shall be called regardless of vehicle detection and the controller shall be advanced upon pulse from the hand cord circuit except yellow and red clearance intervals shall be timed for the duration programmed .
An exclusive pedestrian phase shall not extend or recycle until a vehicle phase has been serviced .
When on manual operation all phases shall be called regardless of vehicle detection and the controller shall be advanced upon pulse from the hand cord circuit except yellow and red clearance intervals shall be timed for the duration programmed .
Automatic transfer from or to flashing operation shall conform to the MUTCD .
Pedestrian phases shall not be extended by actuations during the walk or clearance interval .
Actuations during the clearance intervals shall be placed in memory . .
Controller Cabinet The traffic signal control equipment shall be enclosed within a dust and moistureproof aluminum or stainless steel housing with an auxiliary door in door feature .
The door hinge pins shall be made of stainless steel .
The cabinet shall be installed with the back toward the nearest line of traffic unless otherwise directed by the Resident .
All new controller cabinets traffic signal or lighting shall be configured to eliminate arc flash .
All electrical equipment will be dead front no open terminals busbars breakers or exposed terminal strips .
All live parts over volts shall be covered with Lexan or a suitable barrier to eliminate the possibility of an arc flash .
The controller cabinet shall be of sufficient size to accommodate all control equipment including temperature control equipment .
It shall be designed to be attached to the type of pole indicated in the contract plans .
If attached to a traffic signal post it shall be integral with the post giving the appearance of the signal post passing directly through the cabinet .
If the controller cabinet is to be ground mounted details of the installation will be shown on the plans .
Piano type hinges on controller cabinet doors shall be fabricated of stainless steel with a stainless steel hinge pin .
All manual control switches push button control flashing switch signal switch and any other specified switches shall be located to be accessible within the outside door without exposing the controller mechanism .
The flashing mechanism for flashing beacon installations must be enclosed within a dust and moisture proof aluminum cabinet with a hinged door .
The flasher cabinet shall be of sufficient size to accommodate a circuit solid state flashing mechanism and other necessary equipment .
It shall be designed to attach to the type of pole indicated in the contract plans .
The flasher cabinet shall be vented to prevent excessive heat buildup .
The locks for the door of the flasher cabinet shall be the type shown on the plans .
Two keys shall be furnished with each control lock .
All cabinets housing solidstate traffic signal control equipment shall be provided with a thermostatically controlled ventilating fan and throwaway glass fiber air filters .
The electric fan shall have ball or roller bearings and shall have a capacity of ft per minute .
The ventilating system shall be designed to prevent the entrance of rain snow dust and insects .
The fan and vents shall be arranged in such a manner that the air intake is at the cabinet bottom and the exhaust is at the cabinet top .
The filter shall be firmly held in place such that cracks and openings are eliminated to ensure that all air is filtered .
The fan shall be thermostatically controlled with an adjustable upper limit of F to F and a differential of not more than F. The locks for the switch compartment door of the controller cabinet shall be the type shown on the plans .
The main door shall be a lock of the tumbler type .
Two keys shall be furnished with each control lock .
All traffic signal controller cabinets shall be supplied with a convenience outlet a standard wire grounding duplex receptacle amp capacity and a lamp socket and lumen lamp .
A police panel shall be provided behind the auxiliary door and shall contain a switch to select flashautomatic function automaticmanual function signals onoff function and a manual control cord .
Switch terminals on the rear of the main cabinet door shall be insulated so that no live posts are exposed .
The signal onoff switch shall allow the signal indications to be deenergized but power to all other control circuits shall not be disrupted .
Switches shall be labeled and rated for load current .
Traffic signal controller cabinet main doors over ft in area shall be provided with a stop to limit door opening to both and .
The stop shall be provided with a catch that can be operated when the door reaches these positions and will hold the door open securely until released .
Controller cabinets designated on the plans to be ground mounted shall have a pliable seal composed of caulking compound or mastic placed between the cabinet base and the concrete foundation to prevent dust and dirt from entering the cabinet .
The bottom of the controller cabinet shall be mounted on an aluminum nonbreakaway transformer base as shown on the plans .
The cabinet shall be supplied with sufficient shelf space for all control units .
Receptacles for relays shelf spaces below all removable control equipment contactors switches fuses circuit breakers and terminal blocks shall be identified with plastic labels embossed with the symbol used on the plans to indicate the related function. . Flasher The flasher shall be a two circuit solidstate device with no contact points or moving parts producing between and flashes per minute with a percent to percent duty cycle .
The flasher mechanism shall be mounted on a plugin base with a plugin mounting .
The flasher relay shall energize the flasher and transfer signal light circuits from the controller unit to the flasher .
The flasher shall be capable of breaking and carrying amps on each circuit at volts .
All amber indications shall be on one circuit and all red indications shall be on the other circuit .
The flasher shall be protected from lightning damage by a device intended for use with solid state equipment .
The flashing mechanism shall be independent of the controller unit and shall remain in operation upon shutdown of the controller or removal of the controller unit from the cabinet .
The pedestrian indications shall be flashed with a separate solidstate flasher . .
Program Selection The weekly program selection unit shall be capable of automatically supervising the operation of cycle cycle cycle split split split reset reset reset and flashing operation .
The weekly program selection unit shall allow selection andor omission of these functions to be varied on a daily basis .
The weekly program selection unit shall enable function transfers to be made as often as minutes .
Solid state devices used to automatically select dial reset and flashing modes shall meet the applicable functional requirements of mechanical devices .
They shall maintain the preset program during power interruption and shall continue timing functions using a reserve power source . .
Contacts and Relays All contacts used in connection with interval indications shall be of pure coin silver or its equivalent and shall be capable of breaking and carrying at least amperes at volts AC .
The Contractor is directed to arrange the internal wiring and number of circuits so that the contact rating is not exceeded .
All actuated controllers shall be equipped with external type signal light relays .
Relays shall not be used in connection with any automatic nonflashing red yellow or green indication in installations having pretimed electromechanical equipment without the approval of the Resident .
Relays shall be designed for continuous duty .
Relays shall be designed to operate at ambient temperatures from F to F. Each relay shall be mounted on a plugin base with a plugin mounting .
Coils shall have a power consumption of voltamperes maximum and shall be designed for continuous duty on volts AC .
A leakage resistor which shall permit current to pass through the relay coil if the contacts should remain closed after the coil circuit is opened shall be installed with each external signal light relay to overcome residual magnetism effects .
All relays shall be of a rating sufficient to carry the electrical loads imposed upon them .
A sufficient number shall be provided so that the total load is distributed among the various circuits in such a manner that the rating of each relay is percent of the load .
The monitor unit shall be connected to the field terminals of the signal light circuit to provide protection against conflicting green yellow or walk indications being simultaneously energized as a result of controller failure relay or solid state switch failure short circuited field wiring or other failures .
When a conflict is detected the monitor unit shall cause the signal system to commence flashing operation energize the stoptiming circuit of the controller while controller power shall remain on lockin flashing operation until manual actuation of the momentary contact reset push button remove power from the signal light circuit disable all functions of the Flash Automatic and Automatic Manual switches in the police panel .
Each circuit of the solid state switching devices shall have a minimum rating of watts for tungsten lamp load at volts AC .
The solid state switching devices shall be plug in mounted to a base .
Solid state switching devices shall be protected from transient voltages and lightning by components especially designed for use with solid state devices .
Circuit breakers shall be approved and listed by the UL .
The operating mechanism shall be enclosed and shall be tripfree from operating handle under load and shall be tripindicating .
All circuit breakers shall be quickmake quickbreak on either automatic or manual operation .
Contacts shall be silver alloy enclosed in an arc quenching chamber .
Overload tripping of breakers shall not be influenced by an ambient temperature range of from to F. . Conductors The number and size of conductors required in each cable is indicated on the plans .
All conductors shall be stranded copper conductors .
Multiconductor cables shall conform to the latest revisions of IMSA Specification Number or .
The service ground rod shall be foot by  inch copperclad rod .
The service wiring shall be single conductor number AWG THW stranded copper black insulated and number AWG THW stranded copper white insulated rated volts .
All circuits for the timer and each auxiliary control unit shall terminate in a multiple contact connector .
Conductors shall be attached to all pins of the connector and cabled .
Conductors of the cable except spares shall be fitted with terminal ends compatible with the terminal block and shall have identifying bands .
The ends of all spare conductors shall be taped .
SECTION SIGNING MATERIAL .
Reflective Sheeting The reflective sheeting shall consist of a retroreflective lens system having a smooth outer surface .
The sheeting shall have a precoated adhesive on the back side protected by an easily removable liner .
The reflective sheeting and its components shall conform to all the requirements of FHWA Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges on Federal Highway Projects FP Section .. Engineering grade reflective sheeting shall meet the reflective intensity requirements for Type II sheeting as shown in Table Section .
Vehicular Signal Indications FP .
High intensity prismatic reflective sheeting shall meet the reflective requirements for Type III prismatic sheeting as shown in Table Section .
Vehicular Signal Indications FP .
Reflective sheeting used in sign construction shall have been manufactured within the six months immediately prior to fabrication of each sign .
Upon delivery at the job site of each shipment of signs a letter of certification shall be provided by the Contractor that the reflective sheeting conforms to the requirements contained herein .
Super high intensity fluorescent retroreflective sheeting ASTM D Type VII Type VIII or Type IX prismatic is required for all construction signs .
For Type I Guide Signs all reflective sheeting shall be color matched on each sign unit. . Demountable High Intensity Prismatic Reflectorized Letters Numerals Symbols and Borders Demountable reflectorized letters numerals symbols and borders shall consist of cut out high intensity prismatic sheeting conforming to FHWA Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges on Federal Highway Projects FP Section .d. . Aluminum Extrusions The extruded aluminum planks shall be bolted type with dimensions holes lengths and cross sections as detailed on the plans .
The extruded aluminum molding for edging of the extruded aluminum sign panels shall be of the cross section as detailed on the plans .
Extruded aluminum planks shall conform to ASTM B T T or T. The extruded aluminum planks and molding shall be free from all corrosion and dirt and the face and edges shall be true smooth and free from burrs and breaks .
a. Degreasing Required on aluminum plank by either of the following methods .
Vapor Degreasing shall be by total immersion of the plank in a saturated vapor of trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene .
Trademark printing shall be removed with lacquer thinner or controlled alkaline cleaning system. . Alkaline Degreasing Planks shall be immersed in a tank containing alkaline solutions controlled and titrated to the solution manufacturers specification .
Immersion time shall depend upon the amount of soil present and the gauge of the metal .
b. Etching .
Alkaline Etch The precleaned aluminum surface shall be well etched in an alkaline etching material that is controlled by titration use time temperature and concentration specified by the solution manufacturer and rinsed thoroughly .
Smut shall be removed with an acidic chromium compound type solution as specified by the solution manufacturer and then thoroughly rinsed. . Alodine or is acceptable .
c. Drying Material may be airdried or oven dried .
Metal shall not be handled between all cleaning and etching operations and the application of Reflective Sheeting except by devise or clean gloves .
There shall be no opportunity for metal to be exposed to grease oils or other contaminants before application of Reflective Sheeting .
d. Fabrication All fabrication shall be completed before metal degreasing. . Aluminum Sheets All blanks shall be made of H or T aluminum .
The Contractor shall guarantee the material to be free of buckles warp dents cockles burrs and defects resulting from fabrication .
a. Degreasing Required on sheet aluminum by either of the following methods .
Vapor Degreasing Sign blanks shall be totally immersed in a saturated vapor of trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene .
Trademark printing shall be removed with lacquer thinner or controlled alkaline cleaning system. . Alkaline Degreasing Sign blanks shall be totally immersed in a tank containing alkaline solutions controlled and titrated to the solution manufacturers specifications .
Immersion time shall depend upon the amount of soil present and the gauge of the metal .
b. Etching .
Alkaline Etch The precleaned aluminum surface shall be well etched in an alkaline etching material that is controlled by titration use time temperature and concentration specified by the solution manufacturer and rinsed thoroughly .
Smut shall be removed with an acidic chromium compound type solution as specified by the solution manufacturer and then thoroughly rinsed. . Alodine or is acceptable .
c. Drying Material may be airdried or oven dried .
Metal shall not be handled between all cleaning and etching operation and packaging except by device or clean gloves .
There shall be no opportunity for metal to come in contact with grease oils or other contaminants prior to application of the packaging and shipping .
d. Fabrication All fabrication including shearing cutting and punching of holes shall be completed before metal degreasing .
Fabrication of all metal parts shall be accomplished in a uniform and skillful manner .
The surface of all sign panels shall be flat .
The minimum sheet thickness shall be .
inches for signs of an area of ft or less and shall be .
inches for signs over ft unless otherwise specified .
e. Chromate Treatment Treatment shall be in accordance with ASTM B Class I. . Plywood The plywood shall conform to the following requirements a .
Face stock Face veneers shall be Grade A. b .
Core and Cross Veneers Core and crossband veneers shall be Grade B or better and shall be solid jointed .
c. Glue The entire area of each contacting veneer surface shall be bonded with a waterproof adhesive that meets the test requirements for exterior type .
d. Overlay The overlay shall be of the highdensity type .
It shall be a minimum of lb ft surface shall be at least .
inches thick and have a minimum resin content of percent based on the dry weight of the impregnated fiber .
It shall consist of at least sheets of resinimpregnated fiber of sufficient resin content to bond itself to the plywood .
Manufacturing precautions shall be taken to prevent overlay surfaces from coming into contact with any substance that would inhibit adhesion of paint or reflective sheeting .
The overlay shall be natural color .
e. Thickness The thickness of plywood shall be  inch .
f. Testing The plastic overlay shall not delaminate from the plywood after being subjected to the exterior boiling test for glue line durability. . Demountable Reflectorized Delineators Delineators shall be diamond reflectors approximately inch square or shall be rectangular adhesive coated reflective sheeting permanently adhered to a sheet aluminum backing .
All delineators on a project shall be the same type .
Single delineators shall be clear or silverwhite double and triple delineators shall be amber .
a .
Single delineators shall have one  inch square hole for center mounting .
Double and triple delineators shall have two  inch square mounting holes on the vertical centerline .
Single delineators shall be by inches diamonds with  inch radius corners and two  inch square mounting holes inches on center .
Double delineators shall be by inch rectangles with  inch radius corners and two  inch square mounting holes inches on center .
The aluminum shall be T ASTM B or T or T . inches thick sheet properly degreased and etched or treated with a light tight amorphous chromate type coating .
The reflective sheeting shall be applied to properly treated base panels with mechanical equipment in a manner specified by the sheeting manufacturer .
b .
General Requirements and Packaging .
The finished delineators shall show careful workmanship be free of burrs scratches or damaged reflective surface .
Delineators shall be packaged in such a manner as to insure their arrival at destination in undamaged condition .
Delineators shall not become wet in storage or shipment . .
Assembly and Mounting Hardware General The attachment of signs shall be in accordance with the contract documents and the appropriate hardware prescribed in this Section .
Requests for substitution for all specified material shall be submitted in writing with full documentation including but not limited to specifications and mill certification reports enabling the Department to evaluate the proposal promptly. . Aluminum Planking The bolt assembly required to fasten the extruded aluminum planks together shall conform to the designs used in standard commercial processes for the selected type of extruded aluminum panels .
Guidance for bolt hole punching and typical plank toplank attachment is provided in the contract documents . .
Overhead Signing Sign panels mounted to independent sign support structures and support structure components mounted to bridges passing over the highway are considered to be overhead signing .
Overhead signing shall be mounted on W by steel beams conforming to the requirements of ASTM A A M galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M or the same size aluminum beams conforming to ASTM B M alloys and tempers of T T or T. These components shall be horizontally spaced a maximum of  feet on center extending from the bottom of sign panel to the top .
If supplemental signs are included in the contract these beams will extend from the bottom of the main sign panel to the top of the supplemental sign panel .
The maximum distance from the edge of the sign to the center of the W by shall not exceed approximately  feet .
On independent sign support structures these W by beam components shall be fastened to chords with a pair of appropriately sized Ubolts on each side of the web at each fastening location .
A similar pair of Ubolt assemblies shall be used in attaching each chord of an overhead component to upright supports .
Ubolts for steel support structures shall conform to ASTM A Type or .
The Ubolt hardware which includes nuts flat washers and helical lock washers shall be galvanized in accordance to AASHTO M ASTM A or B Class Type .
Washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . The Ubolt material for aluminum support structures or a combination of steel and aluminum structural components shall be stainless steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM F alloy group with a minimum yield strength of ksi .
Steel support structures may also utilize stainless steel hardware assemblies as an alternative to galvanized steel .
Nuts shall be of the locking type with nylon inserts .
Washers shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A Type .
Flat washers without helical lock washers will be acceptable in this stainless steel assembly .
On bridge mounted structures the fastener configurations shall be depicted in the contract documents. . Post Clip Hardware For Overhead Signing Signs mounted steel or aluminum W shape beam components shall be attached using post clip hardware as described in this Section as well as the contract documents .
Overhead signing shall have post clip assemblies fastened in pairs one on each side of the web of the W shape beam at all locations on the backside of the extruded plank panels that provide a groove accommodating a post clip bolt and assembly .
Post clips shall be T aluminum conforming to the requirements of ASTM B .
The post clip bolt material for overhead signing shall be stainless steel conforming to the requirements of ASTM A A M AISI Type Grade B .
The post clip bolt nut shall be stainless steel material conforming to the requirements of ASTM A A M AISI Type Grade F and of the locknut type with nylon inserts .
Flat washers of these assemblies shall be stainless steel material conforming to the requirements of ASTM A Type . . Post Clip Hardware For Roadside Signing Signs mounted on other than overhead locations may be mounted using aluminum hardware .
The aluminum post clips shall be T aluminum conforming to the requirements of ASTM B .
The post clip bolts washers and nuts shall conform to the requirements of aluminum alloy T bolts and washers and alloy T or T lock nuts . .
Roadside Signing Aluminum signs mounted on Uchannel posts shall be fastened with by  inch stainless steel bolts washers and selflocking type nuts .
The bolts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . A washer either a white nylon or neoprene or stainless steel ASTM F shall be used between the head of the bolt and the face of the sign .
Plywood signs mounted on Uchannel posts shall be fastened with by  inch stainless steel cap screws and hex nuts conforming to ASTM F and a washer either white nylon or neoprene or stainless steel ASTM F shall be used between the head of the bolt and the face of the sign .
Delineator assembly hardware shall consist of  by  inch stainless steel bolts washers and selflocking type nuts .
The bolt assembly shall conform to the requirements of ASTM F . SECTION STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS FOR HIGHWAY SIGNS LUMINAIRES AND TRAFFIC SIGNALS .
Aluminum Supports Extrusions for aluminum supports shall conform to ASTM B or ASTM B Alloy T or T. Castings for use with aluminum supports shall conform to ASTM B or B Alloy .T except that castings for parts having a nonstructural application such as pole caps or bolt covers may be temper F. The T tempers specified for Alloys and .
shall be obtained by the proper heat treatment of the assemblies after all welding for the base and if required for the handhole reinforcement has been completed .
No welding will be allowed on the shaft other than as required for the attachment of the shoe base handhole reinforcement and bracket arm .
All welding for aluminum light standards shall conform to the current edition of AWS Structural Welding Code Aluminum D ..
The exterior of all parts shall have a satin brushed or satin etched finish .
The assemblies shall be free of bulges dents and cracks and on external surfaces discoloration and scratches .
The presence of any of these defects or any other imperfection detrimental to strength or appearance may be cause for rejection by the Resident .
All assemblies shall be tire wrapped for protection during shipment storage and handling .
All ends of shafts open to the weather shall be fitted with a castaluminum or formed aluminum cap secured in place with set screws .
All assemblies shall be permanently marked on the edge of the base plate or flange indicating alloy and temper of base plateflange and shaft as well as the diameter and wall thickness of the shaft .
a .
Light Standards Mast Arm Poles Strain Poles and Dual Purpose Poles Shafts shall be round tapered and seamless and shall be fabricated as a single continuous unit without splices except that shafts with a length of over feet may be fabricated with one splice at approximately midheight and dual purpose poles may be fabricated with a splice immediately above the mast arm attachment .
The minimum wall thickness of the shaft shall be .
inches .
A hand hole of approximately in in area reinforced to maintain the full design strength of the shaft shall be provided with the handhole center approximately inches above the base .
Provisions for internal grounding shall be incorporated in the handhole reinforcement .
A hole fitted with a rubber grommet shall be provided in the shaft to match the wireway of the bracket arm or mast arm except that strain poles shall be provided with a wire inlet as shown on the standard details .
Bases shall be shoe type and shall be supplied with suitable covers for the anchor bolts .
Anchor bolt covers shall be securely fastened to the base by means of one or more stainless steel Phillips or hex head screws with a minimum size of  inch .
Bases shall be welded to the shaft with both an internal and external continuous fillet weld .
The use of sleeve type bases or other bases not requiring welding of the shaft to the base and the use of reinforcing sleeves will not be allowed .
Dualpurpose poles shall be provided with a pull wire for the luminaire .
b. Colonial Light Standards Shafts shall be round tapered and seamless and shall be fabricated as a single continuous unit without splices .
The minimum wall thickness shall be .
inches and the minimum diameter at the base shall be inches .
The length of the shaft plus the base shall be  feet with a inch long by inch OD straight section at the top to accept the pole top luminaire .
The entire assembly of pole and base shall be black anodized .
Bases shall be handhole type with a handhole of approximately in in area and equipped with an approved locking device on the handhole cover .
The bases shall have internal flanges capable of accepting four  inch anchor bolts equally spaced on a inch diameter bolt circle .
The bases shall be welded to the shaft with both an internal and an external continuous fillet weld .
c. Pedestal Poles Shafts shall be round tapered and seamless and shall be fabricated as a single continuous unit without splices .
The minimum outside diameter at the base shall be inches and the minimum wall thickness shall be  inch .
The length of the pole plus the base shall be feet except that the length of poles supporting only pedestrian heads shall be feet .
Bases shall be transformer type with suitable covers for the anchor bolts .
The bases shall be welded to the shaft with an external and an internal fillet weld .
d. Bridge Cantilever and Butterfly Type Sign Support Structures The configuration of the foundations bases shafts and trusses shall be of the Contractors design as approved by the Engineer and shall use only material as specified above .
Sleeve type bases or other bases not requiring welding to the shaft and the use of reinforcing sleeves will not be allowed. . Aluminum Mast Arm and Bracket Arm Mast arms and bracket arms shall be of the same materials as the matching pole and have a similar finish .
Member cross sections shall be either round or elliptical and have a minimum wall thickness of  inch .
Internal diameters bends joints and attachments shall permit internal wiring in the upper member of the arms .
Fixtures for attaching the arms to the poles shall be either castings or extrusions sized to meet the design requirements and shall be designed to prevent rotation of the arms about the poles .
Any mechanical means used to prevent rotation shall completely penetrate both the fixture and the shaft and the use of set screws will not be allowed .
All welding for aluminum light standards shall conform to the current edition of AWS Structural Welding Code Aluminum D .. a. Mast Arms for Signals Mast arms shall be of the tapered tube truss type design consisting of an upper and a lower member with vertical struts welded to form an integral unit or single member tapered arm .
Mast arms shall be equipped with sturdy signal hangers andor appropriate tenons for mounting the signal heads and shall have weatherproof wire inlets located close to the suspended signal heads .
b .
Bracket Arms for Luminaires Bracket arms shall be of the single member or truss type .
Single member type bracket arms shall be of the tapered upsweep design .
Truss type bracket arms shall be of a tapered tube design consisting of an upper and a lower member and a single vertical strut welded to form an integral unit .
Arms shall be equipped with an appropriate tenon for the attachment of the luminaire. . Steel Supports Tapered shafts for steel supports shall conform to ASTM A Grade A or approved equal .
Straight shafts for steel supports shall conform to ASTM A Grade B ASTM A Grade A and B or an approved equal .
Base plates and flanges shall be fabricated of steel plate conforming to ASTM A Grade or and sized to transmit the full design load of the shaft .
Steel shapes shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A . Flange chord splice plates and base plates are considered main load carrying members and shall comply with the requirements of Section .
Structural Steel .
All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
The interior and exterior of all support structure components shall be hotdip galvanized in conformance with AASHTO M . Chord flange splice fastener assemblies shall conform to ASTM A Type and galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A or B Class Type .
Other fastener assemblies shall be as specified in Section .
or as approved by the Engineer .
All ends of shafts open to the weather shall be fitted with an appropriate cast aluminum or galvanized cast iron cap secured in place with stainless steel set screws conforming to the requirements of ASTM F . All assemblies of each structure shall be permanently marked on the edge of the base plate or flange indicating steel specification type and grade of base plateflange and shaft as well as the diameter and wall thickness of the shaft .
a .
Light Standards Mast Arm Poles Strain Poles and Dual Purpose Poles Shafts shall be round unless otherwise specified in the contract plans and either tapered or of uniform cross section and shall be fabricated as a single continuous unit without splices except that shafts with length over feet may be fabricated with one splice at approximately midheight and dual purpose poles may be fabricated with a splice immediately above the mast arm attachment .
The minimum wall thickness of the shafts shall be number gauge .
A hand hole of approximately in in area reinforced to maintain the full design strength of the shaft shall be provided with the hand hole center approximately inches above the base plate .
Provisions for internal grounding shall be provided in a location accessible through the hand hole .
A hole fitted with a rubber grommet shall be provided in the shaft to match the wireway of the bracket arm or mast arm except that strain poles shall be provided with a wire inlet as shown on the standard details .
On dualpurpose poles a pull wire shall be provided for the luminaire .
b. Pedestal Poles Shafts shall be inch nominal ID schedule pipe without splices .
The length of the pole plus the base shall be feet except that the length of poles supporting only pedestrian heads shall be feet .
c. Bridges Cantilever and Butterfly Type Sign Support Structures The configuration of the foundations bases shafts and trusses shall be of the Contractors design as approved by the Resident and shall use only material specified above. . Steel Mast Arm and Bracket Arm Material for mast arms and bracket arms shall be as specified in Section .. Internal diameters bents joints and attachments shall permit internal wiring in the upper member of the arms .
Arms shall be hot dipped galvanized both inside and outside in conformance with AASHTO M . All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
a. Mast Arms for Signals Mast arms may be of the single member or the truss type .
Single member type mast arms shall be a single straight or tapered round member and may incorporate a maximum of telescopic splices .
Truss type mast arms shall be of a tapered design consisting of an upper and a lower member connected by vertical struts welded to form an integral unit .
Mast arms shall be equipped with sturdy signal hangers andor appropriate tenons for mounting the signal heads and shall have weatherproof wire inlets located close to the suspended signal heads .
b .
Bracket Arms for Luminaires Bracket arms may be of the single member or the truss type .
Single member type bracket arms shall be of the tapered upsweep design .
Truss type bracket arms shall be of a tapered design consisting of an upper and lower member connected by a single vertical strut welded to form an integral unit .
Bracket arms shall be equipped with an appropriate tenon for the attachment of the luminaire. . High Mast Light Standard High mast light standards shall have a cross section that is either round or polygonal with not less than sides and shall have a uniform taper from the base to the top except that an expanded base section may be used if required to accommodate the electrical and mechanical equipment .
All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
For unpainted high mast structures material for the shaft base and attachments shall conform to the requirements ASTM A Grade W or ASTM A Grade C. The base plate and reinforcing components of high mast poles shall be considered main load carrying members and shall comply with the requirements of Table A Section .
Structural Steel .
If applicable the Contractor shall submit a proposed coating specification for approval by the Fabrication Engineer .
A Certificate of Compliance shall be provided for all material in accordance with the requirements of the General Statement of Division Materials. . Steel Hbeam Posts Steel Hbeam Posts shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A .
All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section Structural Steel .
Steel shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M . All steel hardware for use with Hbeam poles shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M ASTM A or B Class Type . . Anchor Bolts Anchor bolts and nuts supplied for aluminum andor steel supports shall conform to ASTM A Type or ASTM F Grade both with a minimum yield strength of ksi .
Anchor bolts shall be supplied with heavy hex nuts and hardened washers and unless otherwise specified the anchor bolts shall have a bend with a inch minimum leg length at the lower end .
The anchor bolts nuts and hardened washers shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M or AASHTO M Class Type .
The bolt shall be zinccoated inches from the exposed end unless otherwise specified .
If the anchor bolts are to be used with breakaway devices incorporating the function of a nut for example longitudinally grooved breakaway couplings nuts or washers will not be required .
Alternate materials grades and designs may be used for the anchor bolts subject to approval of the Engineer. . UChannel Posts Except as otherwise authorized Rib Back UChannel posts for signs of less than ft in area shall be fabricated of steel weighing .
lbft and shall not be doubledup .
Aluminum Uchannel posts having the same strength characteristics and shape as steel Uchannel posts may be used subject to the approval of the Resident .
The steel Uchannel posts shall be powder coat green in accordance with AASHTO M . . Wood Ornamental Light Standard Material for wood light standards shall be Western Red Cedar Rhuja Plicata or other species with equal or better decay resistance approved by the Resident .
The wood cross section shall be by inches minimum .
The mounting height and depth of burial shall be as shown on the plans .
The following items shall be supplied a inch slipfitter of corrosion resistant material of adequate length to support the luminaire a sideplowed wireway covered by a suitable flush filler strip to accommodate three number conductors a pair of twopiece plinths for conduit entrance and splice box .
All bolts shall be hotdip galvanized in accordance with AASHTO M or AASHTO M Class Type .
All parts of the wood light standard shall be prefitted and predrilled holes shall be counterbored to conceal bolts and filled with mastic compound .
The wood light standard surface finish shall be as indicated on the plans. . Wood Utility Pole Wood Utility poles shall be Douglas Fir or Southern Yellow Pine conforming to ANSI Standard Specification .
and of the class and length as indicated on the plans .
Poles shall not have more than twist in grain over the full length .
Sweep shall be no more than inches .
Tops of poles shall be beveled .
Wood Utility poles shall be pressure treated after fabrication with creosote pentachlorophenol oil borne pentachlorophenol liquefied petroleum gas solution or copper naphthenate oil borne in accordance with the latest AWPA Specification C for pressure treated wood poles. . Mast Arms for Wood Utility Poles All mast arms for wood Utility pole attachment shall be standard inch diameter pipe of specified length and shall include a mast arm head universal joint insulated wire inlet tie rods cross arm and mounting brackets .
The vertical distance between the mast arm and point of attachment of the cross arm shall not be less than percent of the mast arm length .
All attachments for mast arm assemblies shall be designed to withstand stresses due to the mast arm and signal weights and wind loads generated by a mph wind. . Wood Sign Posts Wood sign posts shall be rectangular straight and sound timber cut from live growing native spruce hemlock cedar or Douglas Fir trees free from loose knots or other structurally weakening defects of importance such as shake or holes and heart rot .
A tolerance of inch in length and  inch in width or thickness is permitted in the dimensions of rectangular posts .
They shall be sawn true and planed sides .
Nominal dimensions of rectangular posts shall be as given in the Contract documents .
Breakaway requirements by inch posts shall have two  inch diameter holes drilled perpendicular to traffic one hole centered at inches above ground level and one centered at inches above ground level posts shall be installed with the inch length parallel to the roadway by inch posts shall have two inch diameter holes drilled perpendicular to traffic one hole centered at inches above ground level and one centered at inches above ground level by inch posts need not be modified .
When pressure treated wood sign posts are called for on the plans the wood shall be Yellow Pine Number or better .
CCA D S. The pressure treated wood shall meet AWPA Standard P or Federal Standard TTW .
The treating process shall meet Federal Specification TTW or AWPA Commodity Standards as applicable .
SECTION BREAKAWAY DEVICES .
Breakaway Devices Breakaway devices shall be capable of supporting all design loads and shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the AASHTO Standard Specifications for Structural Supports for Highway Signs Luminaires and Traffic Signals and all applicable commentary .
Breakaway Support Certification of both breakaway and structural adequacy shall be provided by the Manufacturer .
Design calculations or test data of production samples to support certification shall be provided .
Breakaway support components shall provide the same or greater structural strength as the support post or pole utilizing the breakaway device .
SECTION GEOTEXTILES .
General Geotextile Property Requirements This is a materials specification covering geotextile fabrics for use in stabilizationreinforcement drainage erosion control and separation applications .
This specification sets forth a set of physical mechanical and endurance properties that must be met or exceeded by the geotextile being manufactured .
This specification is intended to assure both good quality and performance of geotextiles but is possibly not adequate for the complete specification in a specific situation .
Additional tests or more restrictive values for the tests indicated may be necessary under conditions of a particular application .
This specification is based on geotextile survivability from installation stresses .
This Section is intended for use in conjunction with Section Geotextiles .
Table provides strength properties for all three geotextile classes .
The geotextile shall conform to the properties in Table based on the geotextile class required in the application specific sections which follow .
All Table property values represent Minimum Average Roll Value MARV in the weakest principal direction and shall meet or exceed the values stated below .
The geotextile properties required for each class are dependent on geotextile elongation .
Table Geotextile Strength Property Requirements Test Methoda Class b Class b Class b Elongation Elongation Elongation c c c c c c Grab Strength lbs D Sewn Seam Strengthd lbs D Tear Strength lbs D e Puncture Strength lbs D Other Test Methoda Conformance D Sampling and Testing D Storage and Handling D aASTM test method .
bRequired geotextile class is designated in Tables or for the indicated application .
The severity of installation conditions for the application generally dictates the required geotextile class .
Class is specified for more severe or harsh installation conditions where there is a greater potential for geotextile damage and Classes and are specified for less severe conditions .
cAs determined in accordance with ASTM D . The strengths specified in the columns labeled and refer to the elongation at which the geotextile material was tested .
For example if a fabric is tested at elongation then it must meet or exceed the minimum strength shown in the column .
Submittals must include the percent elongation at which the material was tested .
dWhen sewn seams are required .
eThe required MARV tear strength for woven monofilament geotextiles is pounds. . StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile The StabilizationReinforcement geotextile shall meet the requirements of Table .
All property values with the exception of Apparent Opening Size AOS represent Minimum Average Roll Value MARV in the weakest principal direction and shall meet or exceed the values stated below .
Values for AOS represent maximum average roll values .
Both woven and nonwoven geotextiles are acceptable however no slitfilm woven fabrics will be permitted and woven geotextiles will not be permitted for subgrade stabilizationreinforcement under pavement structural sections Table StabilizationReinforcement Geotextile Property Values Other Properties Test Method Requirements Geotextile class Class from Table a Permittivity ASTM D .secb Apparent Opening Size AOS ASTM D .mm maximum Ultraviolet Stability Retained Strength ASTM D after hours of exposure aDefault geotextile selection .
Class or may be specified based on survivability or field testing .
bPermittivity of the geotextile should be greater than that of the soil .
The Resident may also require the permeability of the geotextile to be greater than that of the soil .
Both woven and nonwoven geotextiles are acceptable however no slit film woven fabrics will be permitted and woven geotextiles will not be permitted for subgrade stabilizationreinforcement under pavement structure sections. . Drainage Geotextile The geotextile shall have property values expressed as Minimum Average Roll Value MARV in the weakest principal direction which meet or exceed the values stated below .
Sampling and conformance testing shall be in accordance with ASTM D . Geotextile product acceptance shall be based on ASTM D . Geotextile Storage and Handling requirements shall be based on ASTM D . Both woven and nonwoven geotextiles are acceptable however no slitfilm woven fabrics will be permitted .
The geotextile must meet the following requirements Table Drainage Geotextile Property Values Other Properties Test Method Requirements Percent InSitu Soil Passing .
mma to Geotextile class Class from Table b Permittivityc d ASTM D .sec .sec .sec Apparent Opening Size AOS mm maximumc d ASTM D . . .e Ultraviolet Stability Retained Strength ASTM D after hours of exposure aBased on grain size analysis of in situ soil in accordance with AASHTO T . bDefault geotextile selection .
Class may be specified based on survivability field testing or specific drain construction requirements .
cThese default filtration property values are based on predominant particle sizes of the in situ soils .
In addition to the default permittivity value the Resident may require geotextile permeability andor performance testing based on engineering design for drainage systems in problematic soil environments .
dSite specific geotextile design should be performed especially if one or more of the following problematic soil environments are encountered unstable or highly erodable soils such as noncohesive silts gap graded soils alternating sandsilt laminated soils dispersive clays andor rock flour .
eFor cohesive soils with a plasticity index greater than geotextile maximum average roll value for apparent opening size is .mm . .
Erosion Control Geotextile The Erosion Control geotextile shall meet the requirements of Table .
All property values with the exception of Apparent Opening Size AOS represent Minimum Average Roll Value MARV in the weakest principal direction and shall meet or exceed the values stated below .
Values for AOS represent maximum average roll values .
Both woven and nonwoven geotextiles are acceptable however no slitfilm woven fabrics will be permitted .
Table Erosion Control Geotextile Property Values Other Properties Test Method Requirements Percent InSitu Soil Passing .
mma to Geotextile class Woven monofilament geotextiles All other geotextiles Class from Table see below Class from Table see below Permittivity a b ASTM D .sec .sec .sec Apparent Opening Size AOS mm maximuma b c d ASTM D . . .cd Ultraviolet Stability Retained Strength ASTM D after hours of exposure aBased on grain size analysis of in situ soil in accordance with AASHTO T . bThese default filtration property values are based on predominant particle sizes of the in situ soils .
In addition to the default permittivity value the Resident may require geotextile permeability andor performance testing based on engineering design for drainage systems in problematic soil environments .
cSite specific geotextile design should be performed especially if one or more of the following problematic soil environments are encountered unstable or highly erodable soils such as noncohesive silts gap graded soils alternating sandsilt laminated soils dispersive clays andor rock flour .
dFor cohesive soils with a plasticity index greater than geotextile maximum average roll value for apparent opening size is .mm .
Woven Monofilament Erosion Control Geotextiles require Class geotextile class designation .
All other Erosion Control Geotextiles require Class geotextile class designation .
The Erosion Control Geotextile class selection is appropriate for conditions of equal or less severity than either of the following a. Armor layer stone weights do not exceed pounds stone drop height is less than feet and no aggregate bedding layer is required .
b. Armor layer stone weighs more than pounds stone drop height is less than feet and the geotextile is protected by a inch thick aggregate bedding layer designed to be compatible with the armor layer .
More severe applications require an assessment of geotextile survivability based on a field trial section and may require a geotextile of higher strength properties .
The Resident may specify a Class geotextile based on one or more of the following a .
The Resident has found Class geotextiles to have sufficient survivability based on field performance of the geotextile .
b .
The Resident has found Class geotextiles to have sufficient survivability based on laboratory testing and visual inspection of a geotextile sample removed from a field test section constructed under anticipated field conditions .
c. Armor layer stone weighs less than pounds stone drop height is less than feet and the geotextile is protected by a inch thick aggregate bedding layer designed to be compatible with the armor layer .
d. Armor layer stone weights do not exceed pounds and stone is placed with a zero drop height .
Note .
Stone Fill has stones up to pounds .
Plain and Hand Laid Riprap has stones up to pounds .
Stone Blanket has stones up to pounds .
Heavy Riprap has stones up to pounds . .
Separation Geotextile The Separation geotextile shall meet the requirements of Tables and .
All property values with the exception of Apparent Opening Size AOS represent Minimum Average Roll Value MARV in the weakest principal direction and shall meet or exceed the values stated below .
Values for AOS represent maximum average roll values .
Both woven and nonwoven geotextiles are acceptable .
Table Separation Geotextile Property Values Other Properties Test Method Requirements Geotextile class See Table Permittivity ASTM D .seca Apparent Opening Size AOS ASTM D . mmmaximum Ultraviolet Stability Retained Strength ASTM D after hours of exposure aPermittivity of the geotextile should be greater than that of the soil .
The Resident may also require the permeability of the geotextile to be greater than that of the soil .
Table Required Degree of Survivability as Function of Subgrade Conditions Construction Equipment and Lift Thicknessa Required Degree of Survivability as Function of Subgrade Conditions Construction Equipment and Lift Thickness Low ground pressure equipment .
psi Medium ground pressure equipment .
to .
psi High ground pressure equipment .
psi Subgrade has been cleared of all obstacles except grass weeds leaves and fine wood debris .
Surface is smooth and level so that any shallow depressions and humps do not exceed inches in depth or height .
All larger depressions are filled .
Alternately a smooth working table may be placed .
Low Class Moderate Class High Class Subgrade has been cleared of obstacles larger than small to moderate sized tree limbs and rocks .
Tree trunks and stumps should be removed or covered with a partial working table .
Depressions and humps should not exceed inches in depth or height .
Larger depressions should be filled .
Moderate Class High Class Very High Class Minimal site preparation is required .
Trees may be felled delimbed and left in place .
Stumps should be cut to project not more than inches above subgrade .
Geotextile may be draped directly over the tree trunks stumps large depressions and humps holes stream channels and large boulders .
Items should be removed only if placing the geotextile and covering material over them will distort the finished roads surface .
High Class Very High Class Not Recommended aRecommendations are for to inch initial lift thickness .
For other initial lift thicknesses to inches reduce survivability requirement one level to inches reduce survivability requirement two levels inches reduce survivability requirement three levels .
For special construction techniques such as prerutting increase the geotextile survivability requirement one level .
Placement of excessive initial cover material thickness may cause bearing failure of the soft subgrade .
Class extra high strength geotextile properties are higher than Class and shall meet the requirements of Table .
Table Class Geotextile Strength Property Requirements Class Extra High Strength Geotextile Test Method Class Grab Strength lbs ASTM D Sewn Seam Strengthd lbs ASTM D Tear Strength lbs ASTM D Puncture Strength lbs ASTM D i INDEX A Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Abbreviations Abraded Surfaces Accelerated Curing of Concrete Optional Acceptable Work Acceptance ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA Acceptance Method A Acceptance Method A B C Acceptance Method B Acceptance Method C Acceptance Methods A and B Acceptance Test ACCEPTANCE TEST FREQUENCY Acceptance Testing ACRYLIC LATEX COLOR FINISH Actual Costs Adjusting Catch Basins and Manholes Adjustments for Delay AGGREGATE BASE AND SUBBASE COURSE Aggregate Aggregate Base Aggregate for Base and Subbase Aggregate for Concrete Aggregate for Crushed Stone Surface Aggregate for Sand Leveling Aggregate for Untreated Surface Course and Leveling Course Aggregate Subbase Aggregates AGGREGATES Aggregates for HMA Pavements Agreement Agricultural Ground Limestone AirEntraining Chemical Admixtures Alkali Silica Reactive Aggregates Allowable Work Times Altering Catch Basin Altering Adjusting and Rebuilding Catch Basins and Manholes Aluminum Alloy Structural Plate Pipe Pipe Arches Arches Aluminum Bridge Railing Aluminum Coated Type Corrugated Steel Pipe Aluminum Extrusions Aluminum Railings Aluminum Sheets Ambiguities Anchor Bolts with Breakaway Couplings Anchor Bolts without Breakaway Couplings Anchor Rods Ancillary Bridge Products Ancillary Bridge Products and Support Structures ii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Apparent Low Bidder Apparent Successful Bidder Appeal Appeal to Commissioner APPENDIX A A Application of Bituminous Material Application of Bonding Agent Applicator Qualification Approved Asphalt Binder Asphalt Cement Asphalt Filler for Structural Plate Arches Assembling Assembling Steel Authority and Responsibilities Authority of Residents and Inspectors Authority of the Resident Automatic Ticket Printer System Automation of Batching Automobile Liability Award AWARD AND CONTRACTING Award Conditions Award of Contract by Department B Backfill Class A Backfilling Backfilling Culverts and Storm Drains Base Metal Repairs Base Price BASES Basic Requirements Basis of Payment Batching Beam Mounted Signs Bearings Bearings and Anchorages Bent Plates Best Value Procurement Process Using a Request for Proposa Bid Bid Amendment Bid Bond Bid Contact Person Bid Defects Bid Documents Bid Escrow Bid Escrow Documentation Bid Guaranty Bid Opening Bid Responsiveness iii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Bidder BIDDING Bituminous Curb Bituminous Material BITUMINOUS MATERIAL BITUMINOUS SEALING BITUMINOUS TACK COAT BLAST VIBRATION CONTROL AND MONITORING Blasting Zone Signage and Flaggers Blue Book Bond for Use of Municipal Roads BONDING AND INSURANCE Bonding for Landscape Maintenance Period Bonding of CastInPlace Concrete Slabs Bonds Borrow Boundary Markers BREAKAWAY DEVICES Breakaway Supports Breakaway Supports for Sign Supports Brick for Paving Brick Sidewalk Bridge Bridge Drains Bridge Drains and Incidental Drainage Bridge Overpass Mounted Sign Supports Bridge Cantilever and Butterfly Support Structure Foundations Bridge Cantilever and Butterfly Type Sign Supports Bronze or CopperAlloy Bearing and Expansion Plates Builders Risk Burning Business Day C Cable Installation Calcium Chloride Calcium Nitrite Calculated Dimensions Calendar Day Camber and Curvature Career Centers Catch Basin and Manhole Frames Grates and Covers Catch Basin and Manhole Steps Cement or Lime Spreader Cement Spreader Certification of DBE attainment Certification of DBE attainment on Contracts Chain Link Fence CHANGES Changes in Quantities Changes Permitted iv Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Chipping Classification of Signs Clay or Shale Brick Clearing CLEARING RIGHTOFWAY Closeout Documentation Cofferdam Construction COFFERDAMS Cold inPlace Recycled Asphalt Pavement COLD WEATHER TEMPERATURE Coldfinished Carbon Steel Shafting Commencement of Contract Time and Work Commercial General Liability Commercially Useful Function Common Borrow Communication and Coordination Communication Before Bid Opening Compensable Delay Completion Completion Incentives and Disincentives Completion of Physical Work Composition of Mixture Compression Couplers Compression Seals Computation and Extension of Time Conceptual Review and Response Conceptual VECP CONCRETE BARRIER Concrete Fill Concrete Foundations Concrete Masonry Blocks Concrete Steps Concurrent Delays Conduit Conform or Conformity Connecting Pin for Temporary Concrete Barrier Connections Using High Strength Bolts Construction Easement Construction Limit Line Construction of False work Construction of Forms Construction Surveying Contract Contract Bonds Contract Completion Date Contract Completion Time Contract Documents Contract Execution Contract Modification Contract Time Contract Time and Contract Completion Date Contractor Contractors General Authority and Responsibilities v Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
CONTROLLED BLASTING METHODS Controller Cabinet Controllers Cooperation With Other Contractors Coordination of Road ClosureBridge ClosureBridge Width Restriction Notification Coordination with Marine Traffic Coordination with Railroads Copper Tubing Correcting Materials Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe and Pipe Arches Corrugated Aluminum Alloy Pipe for Underdrain Corrugated Polyethylene and Polypropylene Pipe for Option III Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe for Underdrain Option I and Option III Culvert Pipe Corrugated Polypropylene Pipe for Option I and Option III Culvert Pipe Corrugated Steel Metallic Coated Pipe Corrugated Steel Metallic Coated Pipe for Underdrain Critical Path Critical Rock Slopes Crushed Stone Inch Crushed Stone Inch Crusher Dust Cultivation Curable Bid Defects CURB Curb Type Curing CURING BOX FOR CONCRETE CYLINDERS Curing by Moisture Retention Curing Concrete Curing Materials Cushion blasting Cutting and Folding Mesh Cutting and Transporting D DavisBacon and Related Act Provisions A Daylight Work Times Debarment Default DEFAULT AND TERMINATION Defects or Defective Work Defense of Claims Delay Delay and Request for Adjustments Delays Deliver Delivery of Bids Delivery Slips Demountable High Intensity Demountable Reflectorized Delineators Demounting and Reinstalling Existing Signs and Poles vi Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Department Depositing Concrete under Water Detailed Notice of Dispute Detailed VECP Detectable Warnings Materials Detensioning Dewatering Forms Die Stamping Differing Site Conditions Directors Response Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Disadvantaged Business Enterprises Program Discharge of Subcontractors Dispute Resolution Methods A B C only Dispute Resolution Time Extensions Dispute Resolution Variance Limits Disputes DITCH AND INSLOPE EXCAVATION Ditch Excavation Drainage Drainage and Minor Structures Drainage Geotextile Drains or Weep Holes Drawings Dredge Material Dredge Spoils Dredge Spoils Dredge Materials Drilling and Blasting of Solid Rock Subgrade Drive System Components and Accessories Driven Pile Capacity Wave Equation Driven Pile Resistance Pile Testing and Acceptance Driving Procedures and Tolerances Dry Film Thickness DTI Verification Test DUST CONTROL Duties Regarding Inspection of Work Duty to Notify Department If Ambiguities Discovered Dynamic Load Tests Dynamic Pile Tests E Early Completion Date Delay Claims Early Negotiation Earth Embankment with Moisture and Density Control Earth EmbankmentLayer Method EARTHWORK Edge Hardness Edge Planing Elastomer for Seal Elements ELASTOMERIC BEARINGS Electronic Design Data and Digital Terrain Model DTM Elimination of Items vii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Embankment Construction Emergency Emulsified Asphalt Emulsified Asphalt Sealing Compound End of Winter Suspension ENERGY ABSORBING UNIT ENGINEERING FACILITIES Entitlement to Adjustments Entrained Air Environmental Noncompliance Environmental Requirements Epoxy Coating Epoxy Resin Equal Opportunity and Civil Rights Equipment Equipment for Driving Piles EQUIPMENT RENTAL Equitable Adjustment Equitable Adjustments to Compensation and Time Erosion Control Blankets EROSION CONTROL BLANKETS Erosion Control Geotextile Escalation Process Estimated Quantities Excusable Delay Execution of Contract Existing Shoulder EXPANSION DEVICES MODULAR EXPANSION DEVICES NONMODULAR Explosives Extra Work F Fabric Trough or Curtain Fabrication of Type I Guide Signs Fabrication of Type I Regulatory Warning and Route Marker Fabrication of Type II Guide Signs and Type II Plywood Regulatory Fabrication Tolerances Facilities for Fabrication Inspection Facility Requirements Failure to Fulfill Award Conditions Fastener Assemblies for Testing FENCE AND GUARDRAIL FENCES Fertilizer Fertilizer and Agricultural Ground Limestone Fertilizing Field Layout Specifications Field Offices Field Welding FIELDSTONE RETAINING WALL viii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Filling Filling of Hand Filled Gabions Final Acceptance Final Agency Action Final Cleanup and Finishing Final Quantity Voucher FINGER JOINT AND FABRIC TROUGHFABRIC CURTAIN Finishing Concrete and Repairing Defects Finishing Concrete Surfaces Flaggers Flashing Arrow Board Flashing Lights Fly Ash FLYROCK CONTROL Followers For Convenience Force Account Work Forest Protection and Laws Forfeiture of Award Forms and False work FOUNDATION PILES Foundations FOUNDATIONS CONDUIT AND JUNCTION BOXES FOR FRENCH DRAINS Full Compensation Full Depth Reclamation Procedure FULL DEPTH RECYCLED PAVEMENT Full Depth Recycling Procedure FULL DEPTH RECYCLING WITH CEMENT Furnishing of Other Property Rights Licenses and Permits FUSION BONDED EPOXY COATING G GABIONS AND MATTRESSES Galvanized Gabions without Polyvinylchloride Coating Geocell base material Geocell Confinement System GEOCELL SLOPE PROTECTION Geocell Strip Properties and Assembly Geometric and Approach Design Geometrics Geotechnical Information GEOTEXTILES Gland Type Seals GRANITE MASONRY Granular Borrow Granular Materials Ground Anchors Grounds for Default GUARDRAIL ix H Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Hammer Cushion Hammer Performance Hammers HAND LABOR Handling Handling and Storing Materials Handling Storage and Transportation Haul Roads Hauling of Materials and Equipment Hazardous Materials HBeam Piles Splices and Tips Health and Safety Health and Safety Plan Health and SafetyRighttoKnow Hearing Heat Cambering and Curving Heavy Riprap Helmet Herbicide Herbicides High Range Water Reducing High Strength Bolts Highway HIGHWAY LIGHTING HIGHWAY SIGNING Historic and Archaeological Considerations HMA Pavement Sidewalk Holes for Base Plates Holes for High Strength Bolts Holidays Hot Mix Asphalt Hot Mix Asphalt Curb Hot Mix Asphalt Documentation HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT Hot Mix Asphalt Plant HOTDIP GALVANIZING Humic Acid Soil Conditioner Humus Hydrated Lime I In Stream Work IncentiveDisincentive Payment Indemnification Independent Assurance IA Induced Trench Industry Standards Inexcusable Delay x Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Inslope Excavation Inslope Excavation Guardrail Inslope Rehabilitation Inspection Requirements Inspector Installation of Bearings Installation of Delineators Installation of Gabions Installation of Precast Units Installation of PrecastPrestressed Deck Panels Installation of Sign Mounted Beacon Array Installation of Slabs Beams and Girders Installation of Traffic Control Devices Installation of Type I Signs Installation of Type II Signs Insurance Certificates Intent of the Contract Interpretation and Interpolation Isolated Areas J Jetting Joining Culverts Joint Covenants of Good Faith and Fairness JOINT MATERIAL Joint Mortar Judicial Review L Landscape Establishment Period Obligations Landscape Subcontractor LANDSCAPING Lane Lapping Large Culvert Laying Culvert Laying Sod Leads Light Standard Light Standards LIGHTING MATERIAL Limits on Subcontracting Liquidated Damages Liquidated Damages Loading Structures and Opening to Traffic LOAM Location and Alignment Tolerance Location and Time Loop Detector and Loop Detector Wire Installation xi Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Lot Size Lowering System for High Mast Lighting Lubricant Adhesive Luminaire LED fixtures Luminaires Lump Sum or Each M Mail Box Post Maine Code of Fair Practices and Affirmative Action Maine Human Rights Act Mainline Cold Milling Machine Maintenance and Acceptance Maintenance During Suspension of Work Maintenance During Winter Construction MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC Maintenance of Traffic Control Devices Maintenance of Work Maintenance Period Major Item Major Structures Mandatory Notice MANHOLES INLETS AND CATCH BASINS Manufacture of Precast Units Marking and Delivery Mass Match marking Material Material Friction Test Material Identification and Control MATERIALS Measurement of Quantities for Payment Measurement Provisions Mechanical Couplers MECHANICALLY STABILIZED EARTH RETAINING WALL Metal Bin Type Retaining Wall Metallic Conduit Installation Metallic Pipe METALLIC PIPE Method A Method B Method C Method D Microwave Detector Installation Microwave Detectors Mill Test Reports MINIMUM QUALITY CONTROL FREQUENCIES Minor Item Minor Span Misfits Mixing and Delivery xii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
MOBILIZATION Mobilization Payments Modification Monitoring and Communications MULCH Mulch Mulch Binder Mulching Multiple Pay Items N Narrow Roads National Highway SystemNHS Neoprene Pads New Aggregate New Aggregate and Additional Recycled Material New Concrete Curb Ramps New Ditch Excavation Night Work No Separate Payment No Waiver of Legal Rights NonCompensable Items Nonconforming Work NonConforming Work Nondestructive Testing NonMetallic Conduit Nonmetallic Pipe Rigid NonResident Contractor Requirements Notice Inspection Punch List Notice and Information Gathering Notice of Award Notice of Beginning Work Notice of Default Notice of Determination Notice of Intent to Award Notice to Contractors Notices Final Inspections Physical Work Completion O Offer Offset Blocks ONTHEJOB TRAINING Option I Option III Order Ordering Piles Outside Project Limits Overlimit Loads Owner xiii P Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
PAINTS AND PRESERVATIVES Panels Partnering Patching of Epoxy Coating Patents and Copyrights Pavement Butt Joints Pavement Density PAVEMENT MARKINGS PAVEMENT SMOOTHNESS Pavement Structure PAVEMENTS Pay Adjustment Pay Adjustment for Air Content Methods A and B Pay Adjustment for Chloride Permeability Methods A and B Pay Adjustment for Compressive Strength Methods A and B Pay Adjustment Method A Pay Adjustment Method B Pay Adjustment Method C Pay Adjustment Method D Pay Adjustments for Compressive Strength Chloride Permeability Pay Factor Pay Item PAYMENT Payment Bond Payment for Materials Obtained and Stored Payment Provisions Payrolls and basic records Pedestrian Detectors Pedestrian Signal Indications Performance and Payment Bonds Performance Bond Performance Graded Asphalt Binder Period Price Permanent Concrete Barrier Type II Permanent Concrete Barrier Type IIIa Permanent Concrete Barrier Type IIIb Permanent Concrete Transition Barrier Permanent Texas Classic Rail Permit Requirements Permits Personal Liability Photo Electric Control Physical Work Pile Driving Equipment Pile Splices Pile Tips Piles Furnished Piles in Place PIPE CULVERTS AND STORM DRAINS xiv Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Pit or Quarry Requirements Placement Equipment Placing and Fastening Placing Concrete Placing Stones Plain and Hand Laid Riprap Plan Quantities Plans Plant MaterialAll Classes PLANT MIXED RECYCLED ASPHALT PAVEMENT Plant Pits and Beds Plant Size and Root Balls Planting Seasons Plates for Fabricated Members Plumb and Batter Plywood Poles Polymer Precoated Galvanized Corrugated Steel Pipe and Pipe Arches POLYSTYRENE PLASTIC INSULATION Polyvinylchloride PVC Coated Gabions Polyvinylchloride Conduit Installation Portable Changeable Message Sign Portable Power Unit for Lowering Luminaires Portland cement Portland Cement Portlandpozzolan cement PostBid Qualification Posted Roads or Bridges POT or DISC BEARINGS Potted and Container Grown Plants Preaugering PRECAST AGGREGATEFILLED CONCRETE BLOCK GRAVITY WALL PRECAST CONCRETE BLOCK GRAVITY WALL Precast Concrete Slab Precast Concrete Units PRECAST STRUCTURAL CONCRETE PRECAST PRESTRESSED CONCRETE SUPERSTRUCTURE Precastprestressed Deck Panels Preconstruction Conference Preexcavation PREFABRICATED CONCRETE MODULAR GRAVITY WALL Prefabricated Pile Tips Premises Preparation and Protection of the Subgrade Preparation of the Embankment Area Prequalification Application Prequalification Procedure Prestressing PreSuspension Work Prewired Conduit Price Adjustment for Hot Mix Asphalt Priority of Conflicting Contract Documents Process Control Test xv Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Process Control Test Cylinders Profile Grade Program Progress Meeting Progress Meetings Progress Payment Estimates Progress Payments Project Project Closeout Project Level Negotiation Project Limits Project Manager Project Records Project Specific Emergency Planning Projected Payment Schedule Prompt Payment of Subcontractors Promptly Proposal Proposer Protection of Material Protection of Plants PROTECTIVE COATING FOR CONCRETE SURFACES Protective Coatings Protective Liability Pruning Punch List PVC Polyvinylchloride Perforated Pipe PVC Polyvinylchloride Pipe Q QC Inspector Qualifications QCP NonCompliance QUALITY Quality Assurance Quality Assurance QA Quality Control Quality Control QC Quality Control Method A B C Quality Control Method D Quality Control Plan Quality Control Plan QCP Quality Control Plan Requirements Quality Control Method C Quality Level Analysis Quality Requirements Quality Standards Questions From Bidders R xvi Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Raceneutral Goals RAILINGS Railroad Protective Liability Rails RAP for Asphalt Pavement RAP Verification Limits Rapid Chloride Permeability Rebuilding Catch Basins and Manholes Receipted Bill Received or Receipt Recycled Asphalt Pavement Reference Stake Reflective Sheeting Reinforced Concrete Pipe REINFORCING STEEL Reinforcing Steel and Welded Steel Wire Fabric REINFORCING STEEL AND WELDED STEEL WIRE FABRIC Rejection by Resident Rejections Related Entities Relationship to Partnering Partnering Remedial Work Remedial Work Procedure and Requirements Removal of Forms and False work Removal of Unsound Concrete Removing Bituminous Concrete Pavement Removing Buildings Removing Existing Bituminous Pavement Removing Existing Superstructure Removing Light Standards Removing Lines and Markings Removing Manholes or Catch Basins Removing Pavement Surface Removing Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Repairing Defects and Filling Form Tie Holes in Concrete Surfaces Request for Proposal Requests for Information Required Pile Resistance Resetting Stone or Portland Cement Concrete Curb Residen Resident Work Order Resolution of Disputed Acceptance Test Results RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES Responsibility for Damage to Work Responsibility for Property of Others Retainage Reuse of Bolts Review Standards and Procedures Right to Inspect Work Right to Reject Bids Right to Suspend Work Right to Withhold Payments RightofWay xvii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES Riprap Risk of Other Conditions Road Roadbed Roadside Roadside Development ROADSIDE IMPROVEMENT MATERIAL Roadside Signing Roadway Roadway Excavation Rock Borrow Rock Embankments Roles Regarding Quality Rotational Capacity Test Rumble Strip Crossing S Safety Responsibility Salvage of Existing Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement Sampling and Testing Schedule of Items Schedule of Liquidated Damages Schedule of Work Schedule of Work Required Schedule Revisions Scheduling of Work Seal Coat and Top Coat Application Paint Seasonal Work Restrictions Secondary Wiring Seed SEEDING Seeding Method Number Seeding Method Number Seeding Method Number Selective Clearing and Thinning Separation Geotextile Service Connection Setretarding Chemical Admixtures SEWPCP REQUIREMENTS Sexual Harassment SHOP APPLIED PROTECTIVE COATING STEEL Shop Bolts Shop Drawings Shop Strutting Shoulder Shoulder Cold Milling Machine SHOULDER REHABILITATION Shoulder Widening Sidewalk Sidewalk Construction xviii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Sidewalk Materials SIDEWALKS Sieve Pay Adjustment Sign Layout Drawings Sign Type I guide signs Sign Type I regulatory Sign Type II guide signs Sign Type II regulatory warning and route marker Signal Mounting SIGNING MATERIAL Silica Fume Skew or Skew Angle Slag Sliding Surfaces SLOPE PROTECTION Sources Special Backfill Special Detour Construction Special Detours Special Provision Specifications Splicing Splicing Piles Spray Applied High Performance Membrane Spreading and Finishing Sprinkling Stainless Steel Standard Details Standard Specifications Start of Winter Suspension State State Wage Rates and Labor Laws Static Load Test Static Load Tests STEEL BEARINGS Steel Bridge Railing Steel Pipe Hand Railing Steel Pipe Piles and Steel Casings Steel Structural Plate Pipe Pipe Arches Arches Box Culverts STEPS Stone Ballast Stone Blanket Stone Bridge Curb Stone Curb Stone Curbing and Edging Stone Ditch Protection Stone Edging Stone Fill Stone Fill and Stone Blanket STONE FILL RIPRAP STONE BLANKET AND Stone for French Drains Stones for Gabions Storage xix Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Street STRUCTURAL ALUMINUM AND RELATED MATERIAL STRUCTURAL CONCRETE Structural Concrete Box Culverts Structural Concrete Culvert End walls Structural Concrete Curb and Sidewalks STRUCTURAL CONCRETE RELATED MATERIAL STRUCTURAL CONCRETE REPAIR Structural Concrete Rigid Frame Structures Structural Concrete Superstructure Slabs Structural Concrete Abutments and Retaining Structural Concrete Approach Slabs STRUCTURAL EXCAVATION Structural Plate Box Culverts Structural Plate Pipes and Pipe Arches STRUCTURAL PLATE PIPES PIPE ARCHES ARCHES AND METAL BOX CULVERTS Structural Steel STRUCTURAL STEEL STRUCTURAL STEEL AND RELATED MATERIAL STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS FOR HIGHWAY SIGNS Structures STRUCTURES Strut Stud Shear Connectors Anchors and Fasteners STUD WELDED SHEAR CONNECTORS ANCHORS FASTENERS Subcontracting Subcontractor Subcontractor Claims for Payment Subcontractor Quoted Work Subgrade Subgrade Treat Sublot size Substantial Changes to Major Items Substantially Conform or Substantial Conformity Substantially Conforming Work Substructure Successful Bidder Sundays and Holidays Superintendent Superstructure Supplemental Liquidated Damages Supplemental Standard Details Support Structures Surety Surface Roughness Requirements Surface Tolerance Surface Treatment of Forms Survey Quality Assurance Survey Quality Control and Construction Layout Survey Work Plan Suspension From Bidding Suspension of Work Suspensions Due To Uncontrollable Events xx Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Suspensions for Cause Suspensions for Convenience T Taxes Fees Allowances and Notices Temperature Requirements Temporary Concrete Barrier Type I TEMPORARY SOIL EROSION AND WATER POLLUTION CONTROL TEMPORARY STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS Tension Couplers Tensioning High Strength Bolts Termination Termination of VECP Process Test Strip Testing TESTING REQUIREMENTS Thermal Cutting THERMAL SPRAY COATING TIME Topcoating Galvanized Surfaces Traffic Control Traffic Control and Management TRAFFIC SIGNALS TRAFFIC SIGNALS MATERIAL TRANSPLANTING SHRUBS HEDGES AND TREES Traveled Way U Unacceptable Materials Unacceptable Work Unauthorized Work Unbalanced Bids Uncontrollable Events UnderBridge Lighting Underdrain Backfill Material Underdrain Construction Underdrain Outlets Underdrain Type C Underdrain Type B UNDERDRAINS Uninspected Work Unit Price Unpainted Steel Unsafe Conditions UNTREATED AGGREGATE SURFACE COURSE Utilities Within RightofWay Utility Companies Utility Coordination Utility Facilities xxi V Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Value Engineering Value Engineering Change Proposal Vehicular and Pedestrian Traffic Separated Vehicular Loop Detectors Vehicular Signal Indications Vertical Clearance Vertical Stone Curb Vibrating Vibratory Hammers Voids and Inserts Volume VOLUMETRIC DESIGN CRITERIA W Wage Rates and Labor Laws Warm Mix Technology Warning Lights Warranty Provisions Waste Areas Water Pollution Control Requirements Water Reducing Chemical Admixtures WATER SERVICE SUPPLY LINES WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE Waterstops Weather Limitations Welded Fabrication Welding Welding Requirements WET CAST SMALL LANDSCAPE BLOCK WALL Wetland and Waterbody Impacts Wetlands Winter Construction of Embankments Winter Suspensions Wiring Withdrawal of Bids Wooden Steps Work Work Order Work to Proceed Despite Issue or Dispute Workers Compensation Working Day Working Drawings Woven Wire or Barbed Wire Fencing Z Zinc Coated Galvanized Corrugated Steel Pipe xxii Index topics in all caps denotes the head of a section .
Zinc Coating ZINC RICH COATING SYSTEM
