SECTION 160 - CONSTRUCTION - GENERAL
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 167, 168, 176 (or 177), 714, 750 and 860. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent: ##Sections 167, 168 and 176 (or 177) must be included in the specification: ##The term Independent Reviewer should be amended to Superintendent or Independent Certifier as applicable to selected project delivery model.
 This section covers general items relating to construction contracts and should be read in conjunction with Sections 167, 168 and ##176(or 177):.
 PART A - MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS PART B - INDUSTRIAL PART C - SITE PART D - PROGRAM AND PROGRESS PART E - PROSECUTION OF WORK PART F - OFF-SITE PART G - INSURANCE AND INCIDENT REPORTING.
 
 PART A - MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
 
 160.A1 QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS STANDARDS
 
 The Works under this Contract shall be undertaken in accordance with a Quality Management System that meets the requirements of relevant AS/NZS ISO Standards. The Standards
 specified in this clause form part of this Specification. Copies are not included in this document.
 
 These Standards include:
 
 AS/NZS ISO 9001 Quality Management Systems - Requirements
 
 AS/NZS ISO 14001 Environmental Management Systems - Specification with guidance for use
 
 AS/NZS 4801
 
 OHS  Management Systems
 
 The Quality Systems shall demonstrate compliance with all relevant Acts and Regulations and the requirements of the Contract Specification and as a minimum must include:
  a Quality Plan which addresses the requirements in this Specification and demonstrates compliance with relevant AS/NZS ISO Standards;
  Templates for Inspection and Test Plans and templates for all Lot Records required by Inspection and Test Plans;
  Commissioning Plans required by the Contract;
  Construction Procedures required by relevant specifications;
  Procedures and systems for management of design and construction records.
 
 The contractor must exercise quality control of the Works, including works undertaken by
 sub-contractors, and must establish systems and procedures that will provide the information specified in this section to provide assurance of that control.
 
 160.A2 QUALITY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
 Quality terms and definitions shall be as defined by the Australian Standard AS/NZS ISO 9000 Quality management systems  Fundamentals and vocabulary.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 1 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Other definition and terms shall be as follows:
 `asset component' means a component part of a road, bridge or other asset forming part of the works.
 `accredited laboratory' or `accredited method' means -
 (i) for all inspections (other than for material which is supplied from outside Australia) a laboratory or method (as the case requires) accredited by the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) for those inspections or inspection methods;
 (ii) for all material which is supplied from outside Australia, a laboratory or method accredited by NATA for those inspections or inspection methods or by another laboratory or method accredited by a recognised certifying body approved in the Contract or, if the Contract does not provide such approval, then by a recognised certifying body approved by the Superintendent.
 `Independent Reviewer' means the independent reviewer appointed by the Superintendent to undertake audits of the Quality Management System.
 `inspection' means and incorporates measuring, testing or otherwise examining goods and services or works or materials (including, where appropriate, raw materials, components and intermediate assemblies) for determining conformity with the specified requirements.
 `lot' (or `work lot') means a discrete element of work which has been constructed in a continuous operation under essentially uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material properties, general appearance and construction process. A lot must only comprise a single layer, batch or area of like work and unless otherwise specified the extent of each lot must not exceed one day's production.
 `lot Diagram' means a diagram showing the location and bounds of each Work Lot within an Asset Component comprising multiple lots that are not identified separately on the design drawings or in the Work Breakdown Structure. (e.g. an earthworks embankment, a section of pavement, or a soil nail wall).
 `lot Records' means all test and inspection records and certificates required by the applicable Inspection and Test Plan.
 `lot Register' means a register or system that enables identification of each lot within the Work Breakdown Structure and the completion and conformance status of each lot.
 `measuring' includes checking for line, level, dimensional accuracy and quantity.
 `on-line access' means accessible via the internet as an electronic record.
 `test' includes taking of samples and specimens and preparation of materials and work for testing.
 `Hold Point' means those points beyond which the stated activity must not proceed without the Quality Assurance Verifier's approval to proceed. The Quality Assurance Verifier's approval to proceed beyond the Hold Point does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for satisfactory execution or performance of the work.
 Hold Points are identified in the specification by the letters HP in the left margin and by bold text print or arise from a nonconformity.
 Text which is bold typed but not identified by the letters HP in the left margin does not reflect a Hold Point. Such text reflects specified obligations on the Contractor requiring the review or approval of the Quality Assurance Verifier. They are bold typed for ease of identification.
 `Quality Assurance Verifier'  a person engaged by a contractor to undertake specified
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 2 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth quality assurance functions as identified in this specification, including release of Hold Points.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 3 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 `Review Point'  Verification check points identified in the Inspection and Test Plans requiring verification of requirements and collection of records.
 `Witness Point' - Verification check points identified in the Inspection and Test Plans that are not designated as Hold Points but require inspection by the Superintendent.
 `work package'  one or more lots of the same work kind covered by a single Inspection and Test Plan.
 160.A3 QUALITY REPRESENTATIVES
 The Contractor shall appoint persons to the following Quality Representative positions:  a Quality Management Representative to manage and administer the Contractor's Quality Management System in accordance with the appropriate Australian Standard(s) and the Contractor's Quality Plan; and,
  one or more Quality Assurance Verifiers to manage and administer the releasing of Hold Points, the closure of Work Packages and the closure of Notices of nonconformance relating to Work Lots. The Quality Assurance Verifiers, must: - be accountable to the Contractor, but required to act as independent verifiers of the quality assurance process; - not be involved in the day-to-day construction or supervision of construction; - have appropriate qualifications, experience and competence to undertake their role proficiently; - have a thorough understanding of relevant design documentation and specification requirements; - be the only persons authorised to release Hold Points and close Work Packages within their designated scope of authority;
 Any proposed changes to the nominated Quality Representatives must be notified promptly to the Principal and the Superintendent. Within 10 working days of receipt of the notice of nomination of Quality Representatives, the Superintendent shall advice of acceptance or rejection of the nominations.
 160.A4 QUALITY PLANS AND PROCEDURES
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall submit for consideration by the Superintendent a controlled copy of the quality plans and procedures relating to each stage of the work under the Contract not less than 10 business days prior to the commencement of that stage of the work unless specified otherwise.
 The quality plans and procedures required under the Contract shall cover but not be limited to the following management systems:  Quality  Traffic  Environmental  Occupational Health and Safety  Incident Management and Reporting.
 The Incident Management and Reporting System shall incorporate as a minimum the incident requirements of Part G of this section and Sections 168 and ##176(or 177):.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 4 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Quality Plan must:  Nominate and define the responsibility, authority and reporting function of personnel
 primarily responsible for ensuring the effectiveness of the Quality Management System, including:
 - a Quality Management Representative who has responsibility for ensuring that the requirements of the Quality Plan are implemented and maintained, and for authorising closure of Notices of non-conformance that are not related to Work Lots; and
 - one or more Quality Assurance Verifiers responsible for releasing Hold Points, authorising closure of Work Packages and authorising closure of Notices of nonconformance relating to Work Lots,
  Designate for each Quality Assurance Verifier the scope of construction activities that they are authorised to verify; and,
  Provide for all Quality Representatives sufficient information to demonstrate relevant qualifications, experience and required competencies to exercise the designated scope of their authority.
 A quality plan or procedure shall be changed if it: (i) does not adequately address the specification requirements; (ii) is causing non-conformity;
 (iii) has to be changed because of an audit; or (iv) no longer represents current or appropriate practice.
 The Contractor shall immediately notify the Superintendent of any change to the plans or procedures and the amended documentation shall be submitted to the Superintendent within 5 business days of such notice.
 (b) Management System Plans
 The quality plan for a stage of the contract shall require the preparation of the following management system plans and shall be forwarded to the Superintendent by the nominated time:  Traffic Management Plan [refer Section 167]  Environmental Management Plan [refer Section ##176(or 177):]  Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan [refer Section 168].
 (c) Work undertaken by subcontractors
 The Contractor must ensure that all works carried out by subcontractors complies with the requirements of this Specification.
 The Quality Plan must include:  procedures and criteria for the evaluation, selection, supervision and monitoring of
 performance of subcontractors;
  procedures that will ensure that subcontractors comply with the Quality Plan requirements relating to: - the Work Breakdown Structure; - Inspection and Test Plans; - Hold Points and Witness Points; - Product identification and traceability;
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 5 of 37)
 
 - Construction procedures; - Control of non-conformance; - Progressive closure of Work Packages; - Management of Defects - On-line access to records
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 160.A5 WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
 The Work Breakdown Structure:  Must be subdivided into discrete sections of the Works between readily identified points such as intersections, interchanges, cross roads, stream crossings, or other points established by the Contractor to manage staging of the Works;
  Within each discrete section, must be structured in successive layers of: - Assets, classified by standard Asset Types; - Asset Components within each Asset, classified by standard Component Types; and - Work Packages within each Asset Component, where each Work Package represents a group of Work Lots covered by an Inspection and Test Plan
  Must include a system of uniquely identifying each separate element within the structure
  Must be progressively defined and maintained in the contractor's record management system.
 Unless otherwise specified, the standard Asset Types and Asset Component Types must conform to the Austroads Guide for Road Construction Quality Assurance.
 The Quality Plan must include the following details for the Work Breakdown Structure:  A definition of the discrete sections of the Works.
  The standard Asset Types and Asset Component Types.
  A system that will be used to uniquely and consistently identify each element of the Work Breakdown Structure in the Design and Construction Program, Design Documentation, and Construction Records.
 
 160.A6 INSPECTION AND TEST PLANS
 The content of the Inspection and Test Plans and associated lot records must conform to the Austroads Guide for Road Construction Quality Assurance.
 The Contractor must:  ensure that Inspection and Test Plans include all verification check points required by relevant specifications;
  prepare a template for each of the Construction Records designated in each Inspection and Test Plan; and,
  submit each Inspection and Test Plan template and the associated Construction Record templates at least 10 Work Days prior to commencing any related construction activities.
 Verification check points identified in the content of the Inspection and Test Plans shall be designated as either a Review Point, Hold Point or Witness Point.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 6 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 7 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Construction Record templates must show the specified inspection and test requirements and acceptance criteria, and require entry of the actual inspections and tests performed and test results.
 The submitted templates must be amended to address any non-conformances notified by the Superintendent.
 Prior to commencing any Work Package, an Inspection and Test Plan and associated Construction Record must be prepared using the relevant template.
 160.A7 NOMINATED HOLD POINTS AND WITNESS POINTS
 The Contractor's quality plans and procedures shall identify all Hold Points and Witness Points including all Hold Points identified by the Specification.
 The Superintendent must be given reasonable notice of each Witness Points and the intended release of each Hold Point and may nominate persons to attend each Witness Point and the release of each Hold Point. Unless otherwise specified or agreed by the Superintendent, reasonable notice means at least 2 Business Day.
 A Hold Point must only be released by the nominated Quality Assurance Verifier, who must physically inspect the works and the completed Lot Records to verify compliance with the Inspection and Test Plan and the Design Documentation before releasing the Hold Point.
 160.A8 PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION AND TRACEABILITY
 The Contractor's procedures and systems for records management must ensure that:  every Work Lot required to construct the Works is uniquely identified;
  each Work Lot is recorded on the Inspection and Test Plan for the relevant Work Package within the Work Breakdown Structure;
  the Lot Records for each Work Lot are traceable to the Work Lot and to the relevant checkpoint within the applicable Inspection and Test Plan; and,
  all requisitions for testing and the corresponding test certificates are traceable to the relevant Lot Record.
 160.A9 COMMISSIONING PLANS
 Commissioning Plans:  must be prepared for any commissioning tests that are required under the Contract;
  must be identified in a schedule in the Quality Plan which shows the proposed date for submission;
  unless otherwise specified must be submitted to the Superintendent at least 20 Business days prior to the planned commencement of the respective commissioning tests; and,
  must be amended to address non-conformances notified by the Superintendent before the commissioning tests commence.
 Each Commissioning Plan must define the tests required for each specified performance requirement, when the tests will be undertaken, the test methods, the responsible testing authority, arrangements for witnessing of tests by the Superintendent, and the form and content of the test reports.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 8 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 160.A10 CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES
 The Contractor must ensure that documented construction procedures:  will achieve specified requirements;
  are understood and used by construction personnel;
  identify Hold Points and Witness Points that must be notified to the Superintendent; and,
  are reviewed for corrective action in the event of non-conformance. Construction procedures that are required under the Contract to be submitted for review:
  must be identified in a schedule in the Quality Plan which shows the proposed date for submission;
  must be submitted to the Superintendent at least 10 Business days prior to the planned commencement of the respective construction activities; and,
  must be amended to address non-conformances notified by the Superintendent before the construction activities commence.
 160.A11 CONTROL OF NON-CONFORMING PRODUCT
 The Contractor must;  notify the Principal and the Superintendent of any non-conformance with respect to the contract requirements within 2 Business Days of the non-conformance being identified by the Contractor or notified by the Principal or the Superintendent;
  maintain a register in which each Notice of Non-Conformance and the status of each Notice is recorded;
  review and analyse the cause of all non-conformances and develop a plan of corrective action to minimise the likelihood of re-occurrence.
 The Quality Plan must include a procedure for managing non-conformances and identify which of the following options is proposed:
  rectification to achieve full compliance, thereby extinguishing the non-conformance;
  a Design Change, to accommodate the non-conformance whilst still meeting all specified requirements;
  repairs permitted by the relevant Reference Documents, subject to the Principal accepting proposed repair procedures and Inspection and Test Plans;
  the Principal accepting the non-conformance as a Defect. A Work Lot non-conformance must be treated as a Hold Point which must not be released until:
  a procedure for managing non-conformances acceptable to the Principal is submitted to the Principal and the Superintendent;
  the Superintendent has been notified of the intended release of the Hold Point;
  the works and the lot records have been inspected to verify that the accepted procedure for managing non-conformances has been implemented; or
  any Work Lot non-conformance accepted by the Principal as a Defect has been recorded in the Defect register; and
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 9 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Each Notice of Non-Conformance must be recorded in the register as either a Work Lot nonconformance or a process non-conformance, and the status of each Notice of NonConformance must be recorded as `Open' in the register until;
  in the case of process non-conformances, closure has been authorised by the Quality Manager; or
  in the case of Work Lot non-conformances, the associated Hold Point has been released.
 The register must enable each Work Lot non-conformance to be traced to the affected Work Package in the Work Breakdown Structure.
 160.A12 PROGRESSIVE CLOSURE OF WORK LOTS
 The Quality Plan must include procedures that will ensure that Work Packages are closed as soon as practicable after completion of the Work Lots within the Work Package.
 Work Packages must not be closed until:  all related inspections have been completed;
  all tests have been completed and the results recorded;
  all non-conformances have been notified and recorded in the register of Notices of non-conformance;
  all non-conformances have either been closed or with the Superintendent's approval, transferred to the Defects List;
  all changes to design details have been recorded and cross referenced to the relevant Design Change Notice on a marked up and certified copy of the relevant drawings;
  the complete set of Construction Records are available for inspection by the Principal and the Superintendent via the on-line access service;
  the designated Quality Assurance Verifier authorises closure of the Inspection and Test Plan to which the Work Lots relate; and,
  closure of the Work Package is recorded in the Contractor's records management system.
 Work Packages must be closed before:  The Work Package is covered up, unless approved otherwise by the Superintendent;
  Manufactured components, including precast and fabricated components, are erected or installed into the Works;
  The Work Package can be recorded as completed on a Progress Certificate.
 160.A13 DEFECTS
 Prior to completion of the Works and for the duration of the Defects Liability Period the Contractor must maintain a register for monitoring the rectification of any Defects:
  recorded in the process of closure of Work Packages; or
  identified by the Contractor or notified by the Principal or Superintendent after closure of the respective Work Packages.
 Records of Defects must not be deleted from the Defects Register.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 10 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Defects Register must:  identify the Asset Component to which the Defect relates;
  include sufficient detail to enable the Defect to be readily located;
  identify any Defects proposed to be accepted by the Principal and include references to any correspondence between the parties in respect of such Defects;
  show details of the proposed rectification plan;
  record when the Defect is rectified and when the Defect is closed. A Defect must not be closed in the Defects Register unless:
  the rectification plan has been accepted in writing by the Principal;
  a nominated Quality Assurance Verifier has physically inspected the rectification works and verified compliance with the rectification plan; and
  a nominated Quality Assurance Verifier has authorised closure of the Defect; or
  the Defect has been accepted in writing by the Principal.
 160.A14 AUDITS BY THE CONTRACTOR
 The Contractor shall carry out audits in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS ISO 19011:2002 `Guidelines for quality and/or environmental management systems auditing'.
 The Contractor shall prepare an audit and surveillance schedule for each subcontractor, which shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review prior to the commencement of work by the subcontractor. The Contractor shall conduct regular surveillance and audits of all on-site and off-site subcontractors, sufficient to ensure that all work and materials comply with the Contract.
 The Contractor shall notify the Superintendent of the times when formal audits of a subcontractor are to occur.
 The Contractor shall carry out surveillance for precast concrete, structural steelwork and protective coatings of structural steelwork in accordance with the following references:
 VicRoads Technical Bulletin No 46 - Guide to Surveillance of Structural Steelwork VicRoads Technical Bulletin No 47 - Guide to Surveillance of Precast Concrete VicRoads Technical Bulletin No 48 - Guide to Surveillance of Protective Coatings of Structural Steelwork.
 The Contractor shall comply with all the requirements of these references including using companies accredited by NATA for surveillance of these respective activities and surveillance officers engaged by these companies having the qualifications and experience specified in these respective references.
 160.A15 RECORDS
 During the execution of work under the Contract, the Contractor shall maintain records pertaining to the Contract in accordance with the Contract and the Contractor's Quality System.
 The Contractor shall maintain the following records as a minimum:  all test records;
  all relevant survey information;
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 11 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
  all plant and labour records confirming daily usage and work activities throughout the Contract;
 
  all weather records; and,
 
  copies of all construction programs.
 The Contractor must establish records management procedures and systems that will ensure that:
  the design and construction records identified in the left column of table 160.A151 below, including records for works undertaken by subcontractors, are integrated within a system managed by the Contractor;
 
  the Principal and the Superintendent have convenient on-line access (electronic documents accessible via the internet) to the design and construction records; and.
 
  design and construction records are recorded progressively and promptly in the system to show, as far as reasonably practicable, the current status of the Works.
 
 Table 160.A151
 
 Design & Construction Records
 
 Reporting Variables
 
 The Work Breakdown Structure
 
 Project Section or Asset Type
 
 IFC Design Documentation
 
 Project Section
 
 Design Change Notices
 
 Work Breakdown Structure or Design Drawing Number
 
 Construction Procedures
 
 ITP & Work Lot Record Templates
 
 Work Lot register
 
 Work Breakdown Structure or Status
 
 Closed Work Lot Records
 
 Work Breakdown Structure
 
 Sampling and test results register
 
 Work Lot or Test Laboratory
 
 As-Built drawings
 
 Work Breakdown Structure
 
 Notice of non-conformance register
 
 Work Breakdown Structure
 
 Defects register
 
 Work Breakdown Structure
 
 The Contractor shall make all records pertaining to the Contract available to the Superintendent at all times and when requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall provide a copy of the requested records within 5 business days.
 The on-line access must:  present records in a format acceptable to the Principal and the Superintendent
  enable convenient searching and selection of records based on the reporting variables specified in the right column of table 160.A151
  enable printing of reports or downloading of reports in electronic (Microsoft Office or Adobe PDF) format.
 Further to definition of `Practical Completion' in the General Conditions of Contract, the supply of the following documents are deemed to be essential for the use, operation and maintenance of the Works:
  Completed Works Report
  Contract Records
  As-Constructed Drawings
  Service Installations and Relocations
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 12 of 37)
 
  Design Calculations.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 13 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The Contractor's records management system shall include the provision of these documents by the Contractor to the Superintendent for review and acceptance prior to issue of a
 Certificate of Practical Completion. Within 7 days of the submission of each document, the Superintendent shall advise whether the document is accepted.
 
 The Completed Works Report shall include completed copies of the relevant Forms listed below.
 
  G2.C.1
 
 Pavement Construction Record
 
  G2.C.2
 
 Misc. Pavement Construction and Road Layout Record
 
  G2.C.3
 
 Minor Culverts Record
 
  G2.C.4a
 
 Traffic Facilities Record
 
  G2.C.4b
 
 Signs
 
  G2.C.5
 
 Wearing Surface Record
 
  G2.C.6
 
 Surface Treatment  Water Blasting
 
  G2.C.6
 
 Pavement Marking Record
 
  G2.C.7
 
 Bridge Completion Report.
 
 Electronic copies of the above form in the required Microsoft Excel format are available for download at: http://www.transport.tas.gov.au/road/specifications/specification_listings
 The Completed Works Report shall also contain the following information:  records on the condition of the completed works (e.g. roughness surveys, deflection surveys, baselines for corrosion or other protection systems); and,
  records relevant to assessing the structural capacity of the works, including, where applicable, sub-surface conditions, foundations and sub-structures.
 The Contractor must provide an electronic copy of the design and construction records to the Principal prior to Final Completion in a format that will enable the records to be archived in the Principal's Asset management System
 
 160.A16 AS-CONSTRUCTED DRAWINGS
 An electronic version of the design drawings will be supplied to the Contractor by the Superintendent prior of giving possession of site. Changes made by the Contractor to the supplied AutoCAD dwg or dxf drawings shall be in accordance with Standard Specification T13 CADD Manual.
 A set of as-constructed drawings in both AutoCAD (dwg or dxf) format and Adobe Acrobat PDF format shall be produced from these AutoCAD files at a resolution suitable for effective interpretation. Drawings should be marked with the latest revision number and titled "As Constructed" on each drawing. Any changed information is to be enclosed in a "cloud bubble" on the plan for easy identification.
 "As Constructed" information for installed and relocated services shall be included on the drawings and shall also be provided to each Service Authority with the relevant details and in the required formats to meet their individual requirements for this documentation. Copies of this information with confirmation of receipt and acceptance by the Service Authority shall be supplied by the Contractor to the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 14 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 For works requiring the design and construction or renewal of structures, the design calculations pertaining to the Issued For Construction design drawings will be supplied to the Superintendent. This shall be completed by the Contractor prior to the Superintendent issuing the certificate for practical completion
 160.A17 SURVEILLANCE AND AUDITS BY THE SUPERINTENDENT The Superintendent will arrange surveillance and audits to ensure that the Contractor is complying with the Quality Management System. The Contractor shall, upon being given reasonable notice by the Superintendent, make or arrange to be available all facilities, documentation, records and personnel, including those of any sub-contractors, that are reasonably required for audits to be undertaken. Notwithstanding that the Principal may have previously undertaken audits of a sub-contractor's quality management system in connection with other work, the Contractor shall include the operations of all such sub-contractors in the Contract quality plan and shall fulfil all the quality obligations of the Contract. The Principal will carry out audit and surveillance of the work of all sub-contractors as it sees fit, in the same way that it may carry out audit and surveillance of all work done and materials supplied by the Contractor. The Superintendent may for this purpose have recourse to audit and surveillance carried out for other contracts with the Principal. Copies of any such audit and surveillance reports used by the Superintendent will be provided to the Contractor.
 The Superintendent must be granted access to inspect and audit the contractor's design and construction records and if requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor must arrange for personnel to explain the design and construction records.
 The Superintendent must notify the Contractor at least 2 Business Day prior to an inspection specifying the scope of the records to be made available for audit.
 160.A18 ROAD SAFETY AUDITS The Contractor shall carry out road safety audits at the stages of the works as set out below. Road safety audits shall be carried out in accordance with the Austroads Guide to Road Safety - Part 6: Road Safety Audit. The audit team shall be lead by a Senior Road Safety Auditor who has undertaken appropriate training in road safety audits. Other team members shall also have undertaken appropriate training in road safety audits. Road safety auditors shall be independent of any other commitment or obligation to the Contractor or Consultant carrying out the design for the Contract. Audits shall be conducted at the stages nominated in Table 160.A181. Road safety audits shall be completed and all issues raised in the audit responded to prior to commencement of the next stage of work. The Contractor shall ensure that road safety audits are incorporated into its Design Management Plan, its Construction Management Plan and the Contractor's Program.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 15 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** Table 160.A181 ## (strikethrough inapplicable rows):
 
 Stage of Work
 
 Timeframe for Road Safety Audit to be Undertaken
 
 Timeframe for Submission of Road Safety Audit Report
 
 (a) preliminary design
 
 within 7 days of completion
 
 within 14 days of completion of the audit
 
 (b detailed design )
 
 within 7 days of completion
 
 within 14 days of completion of the audit
 
 (c) during construction,
 
 as specified in Traffic
 
 where traffic management Management clauses
 
 measures are proposed
 
 as specified in Traffic Management clauses
 
 (d pre-opening )
 
 4-7 days prior to opening road to no later than 3 days prior to
 
 traffic
 
 opening road to traffic
 
 (e) post-opening
 
 24 hours after opening road to traffic
 
 within 7 days of completion of the audit
 
 The Superintendent may request comment by the Senior Road Safety Auditor on road safety issues associated with the Contract.
 
 The pre-opening road safety audit report shall identify issues that require rectification prior to opening the road to traffic.
 
 ##strikethrough this paragraph if it is inappropriate: The Principal has undertaken a road
 safety audit of the tender design / drawings provided in Volume ##: of tender documents. The resulting report has been included as Appendix ##: of the specification and for the
 purpose of this clause shall be deemed to be the necessary Road Safety Audit of the draft (functional) design.
 
 The Contractor shall promptly address all issues raised in road safety audits, and shall prepare a written response to the audit that:
  details action taken/to be taken to address each issue raised
  provides justification for proposals not to undertake action on particular issues raised
  highlights issues raised not considered to be the responsibility of the Contractor.
 
 Where the Contractor proposes not to undertake action in response to identified issues, the approval of the Superintendent shall be obtained.
 
 The Contractor shall provide to the Superintendent a copy of the road safety audit
 report together with the Contractor's written response to the report within the timeframes specified in Table 160.A181.
 
 The Contractor shall prepare and maintain a register of all road safety audits. shall include:
  Audit stage and date  Summary of each issue  Status of action to address each issue  Verification of completed action.
 
 The register
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 16 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth PART B - INDUSTRIAL 160.B1 RATES OF PAY AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT The Contractor shall at its own cost, inform and keep itself informed of, and comply with, all state and federal industrial legislation, regulations and industrial awards to which the Contractor is bound and any certified agreements and industrial agreements to which the Contractor is party. The Contract Sum will be deemed to include the cost of all wages, conditions and other costs arising from compliance with legislation, regulations, award(s), certified agreement(s) and industrial agreements applicable to the Contractor, and no adjustment will be made to the Contract on account of such requirements or any new matter introduced into an award, or any certified agreement or industrial agreement. Persons who are required under Part 2 of the Education Act 1994 to be enrolled at a school or be provided with home education must not be employed on works under the Contract. 160.B2 WORK BANS AND LIMITATIONS The Contractor shall keep the Superintendent informed concerning any industrial or occupational health and safety matter which affects or may affect work under the Contract, and shall also inform the Superintendent of action being taken by the Contractor to resolve such matters. The Contractor shall make no claim against the Department of State Growth for any costs, loss, expense or damage arising from any industrial action, resulting in a strike, work stoppage, work ban or work limitations of any kind. The Superintendent may grant an extension of time for completion pursuant to the General Conditions of Contract for lost time arising from industrial action outside the control of the Contractor.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 17 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 PART C - SITE
 160.C1 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
 HP The Contractor shall not commence work on site before the following documents have been submitted to the Superintendent and the Superintendent has authorised release of the Hold Point:
 (a) evidence of public liability and Workers Compensation insurance conforming with the requirements of the General Conditions of Contract
 (b) third party property damage insurance in accordance with Clause 160.G1
 (c) Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan
 (d) Environmental Management Plan for initial works
 (e) Traffic Management Strategy and Traffic Management Plans for the initial works
 (f) any other relevant requirement of the Contract.
 Any delays in the commencement of work due to the Contractor's failure to comply with these requirements will not be grounds for an extension of time for completion of the Works or any Separable Part, nor shall it form the basis of any claim for additional payment.
 160.C2 CONTRACTOR'S SITE COMPOUND
 The Contractor shall erect, maintain, secure and subsequently remove such buildings, compounds, sanitary accommodation, explosive magazines and associated services as required by the Contractor for the supervision and construction of the Works. Workplace amenities, facilities and environment shall be in accordance with WorkSafe Code of Practice Managing the Work Environment and Facilities.. The Contractor shall obtain all necessary local municipal permits and approvals associated with the site establishment and access arrangements associated with its site compound.
 The location and form of such buildings and compounds shall:
 (a) minimise noise, disturbance and inconvenience to all abutting properties
 (b) maintain a minimum clearance of 30 m to the closest boundary of all abutting properties
 (c) be consistent with, and complement the Environmental Management Plan and Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan
 (d) provide suitable hard-stand areas for storage of materials and equipment and parking vehicles
 (e) allow for all pedestrian traffic.
 The Contractor, subject to the agreement of the Superintendent and the local municipal authority, may be permitted to use portions of the Site, for establishment of buildings and compounds.
 The buildings, compounds, associated services, sanitary accommodation and explosive magazines erected by the Contractor shall be regarded as Materials or Constructional Plant and as such shall be considered as constructional plant under the General Conditions of Contract.
 At the completion of the Works, these facilities will remain the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the Site and the area reinstated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 
 160.C3 SANITARY ACCOMMODATION
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 18 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth The Contractor shall allow its toilets and washing facilities to be used by the Superintendent's representatives.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 19 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 160.C4 SUPERINTENDENT REPRESENTATIVE'S SITE OFFICE ##(strikethrough if not required):
 The Contractor shall provide an office at the site for the exclusive use of the Superintendent's Representatives within 10 business days of taking possession of the site.
 The office amenities, facilities and working environment shall be in accordance with WorkSafe Code of Practice Managing the Work Environment and Facilities.
 *** The office shall also be fitted to provide the following requirements: ##(strikethrough items below if not required):  suitable desk accommodation for ##: persons, with ergonomic furniture in good condition including desks, desk chairs, shelving and a minimum of ##: visitors' chairs  a drained sink with running hot and cold water with adjacent minimum bench area of 1.5 m x 0.6 m  two telecommunication connections (one of which shall be a high speed data port) for each desk, connected to the nearest exchange  ##(insert any further requirements  restrict entries to one typed line):
 In addition, the Contractor shall provide suitable hard-stand parking for ##: vehicle/s adjacent to the office for the exclusive use of Superintendent's Representatives.
 The Department of State Growth will pay monthly telephone and electricity usage charges where a separate account dedicated to the office is presented.
 Maintenance, cleaning and servicing of this accommodation shall be the responsibility of the Contractor.
 Upon completion of the Contract, the Contractor shall arrange for the disconnection of any services and remove the building from the Site.
 160.C5 HIGH VISIBILITY JACKETS
 All personnel, including supervisors, surveyors, labourers and plant operators, shall at all times wear high visibility clothing.
 160.C6 CONTRACTOR'S REPRESENTATIVES
 On commencement of work, the Contractor shall advise the Superintendent in writing of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of employees who can be contacted in an emergency and out of hours. Any proposed changes shall be notified promptly to the Superintendent and confirmed in writing.
 160.C7 PROCUREMENT OF WATER FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES
 The Contractor shall make its own arrangements for water supply to provide the quantity and quality required to complete the work. For any chosen source of water supply, the Contractor shall obtain the necessary approvals from the appropriate authorities and shall act in accordance with any conditions stipulated.
 160.C8 MAJOR TRAFFIC CONTROL ITEMS
 Details of the times and dates of erection and removal of major control items and of any changes to such items shall be forwarded to the Superintendent for a direction as to suitability at least 4 business days prior to the erection and removal of or changes to the major traffic control items.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 20 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 160.C9 PROJECT INFORMATION SIGNS ##(strikethrough if not required):
 Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 168, the Contractor shall supply, install, maintain and later remove project information signs as specified below:
 (a) Supply
 The Contractor shall supply information signs in accordance with the requirements of Section 860 - Manufacture of Road Signs. Information signs shall be regarded as a Category B Sign for the purposes of Section 860. The letter size and style of the sign legend shall comply with the requirements of the Drawings specified in the Project Information Sign Schedule in Clause 160.C9(e).
 (b) Mounting and Location
 The Contractor shall mount the information signs on timber frangible posts in accordance with Section 714 - Erection of Signs.
 (c) Not used
 (d) Not used
 (e) Project Information Sign Schedule
 The Contractor shall provide information signs in accordance with the following schedule: ## (the sign types/drawing numbers in the schedule below are applicable to State Government funded works only - in the case of Federal Government funded works contact State Roads Project Manager for information on project information signing requirements, and insert details in the schedule below:
 
 Project Information Sign Schedule ##(type in the appropriate requirements below):
 
 Serial
 
 Sign Type
 
 Drawing No.
 
 Number Required
 
 Location
 
 (a) Type 1
 
 658003B
 
 ##: ##:
 
 (b) Type 2
 
 658004B
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 (f) Removal
 The project information signs shall remain in place for the defect liability period and be removed within 7 days of the issuing of Final Certificate.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 21 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 PART D - PROGRAM AND PROGRESS
 160.D1 CONSTRUCTION PROGRAM
 (a) Interpretation
 For the purposes of this sub-clause, `construction program' means a program in the format of an activity orientated, critical path network which shows how the Contractor proposes to complete the Works or any separable part of the Works within the period or by the respective dates for Practical Completion.
 (b) Construction Program Requirements
 (i) No Requirement ##(strikethrough this requirement if inapplicable):
 A construction program is not required to be submitted by the Contractor. Items (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of this clause do not apply.
 (ii) Minor Construction Contracts ##(strikethrough this requirement if inapplicable):
 Before commencing work under the Contract the Contractor shall supply to the Superintendent for review a construction program illustrating the planned sequence of work. The program shall be in bar chart form, including the principal activities to be undertaken and restraints clearly identified with a time scale shown in weeks and months. The program shall identify critical path activities, include dates for starting and completion of the principal activities and planned dates for practical completion of the Works or separable parts. Items (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of this clause shall apply as far as they are applicable.
 (iii) Major Construction Contracts ##(strikethrough this requirement if inapplicable):
 Where a program has been provided as part of the tender, it shall be incorporated into the Contract until the Construction Program has been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 Within 20 business days after the date of acceptance of tender, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review a construction program which takes into account the requirements of the Contract. The program shall be submitted in both electronic format and hard copy.
 The program shall be computer based using `Microsoft Project 2007' or an alternative computer program approved by the Superintendent. It shall be in sufficient detail to demonstrate any entitlement that the Contractor may from time to time claim to have pursuant to the General Conditions of Contract and be capable of providing reports which are able to identify the following features in acceptable formats:
 1. detailed activities for all work elements including design activities, construction activities, service relocations and work by statutory authorities;
 2. procurement periods and delivery dates for major items of goods, plant and materials;
 3. activity dependencies;
 4. critical path activities identified for the Works and any Separable Portion of the Works;
 5. duration, earliest and latest start and finish dates and total and free floats for each activity;
 6. dates by which decisions or materials are required from the Superintendent or the Principal;
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 22 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 7. milestones which identify significant events including completion of Separable Portions;
 8. allowance for adverse weather and other time risk allowances;
 9. non-work periods;
 10. dates by which design work or drawings to be produced by the Contractor or samples will be submitted to the Superintendent including allowance for reviews and re-submittals;
 11. the estimated value of work to be done each month throughout the Contract.
 The Contractor shall submit with the construction program the estimated contract value of work to be done each month throughout the Contract and detailed reasons for any divergence from the program and cash flow submitted with the tender.
 Items (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) of this clause shall apply.
 (iv) Utility Service Relocation
 In developing the construction program, the Contractor shall consider all issues associated with the relocation of public utility services. The Contractor shall fully inform itself of the impact of the works under the Contract on existing services and make allowance in its construction program for the lead times required by each service authority for design, liaison, supply of materials, notification to residents and construction periods, including making allowance for any periods of the year when services cannot be relocated.
 The Contractor shall consider the impacts of its Service Relocation Strategy in the development of its Construction Program.
 (c) Review of Submitted Program
 (i) If the Superintendent considers that the submitted construction program or any subsequent revision thereto does not show sufficient details, or is impractical, or does not comply with the requirements of the Contract, or will not result in completion of the Works or any separable part of the Works by the relevant Date for Practical Completion, the Superintendent may direct the Contractor to resubmit to the Superintendent an amended construction program within 5 business days for further review.
 (ii) Should the submitted construction program provide for completion of the Works or a separable part of the Works in advance of the relevant times for Practical Completion and the Superintendent does not direct the Contractor to supply an amended construction program, the Contractor may proceed to prosecute the work in accordance with the submitted construction program at the Contractor's own risk. The dates for particular activities or Practical Completion shown on a construction program will not be accepted as a substitute for any corresponding specified dates in the Contract which shall continue to be the basis for assessment of progress of work and any claims made under the Contract for extensions of time and additional costs.
 (d) Review of Progress
 At generally monthly intervals unless otherwise agreed, the Contractor and the Superintendent shall together review the progress of the work under the Contract in comparison with the current construction program. Prior to the meeting, the Contractor shall update the current construction program to show the status and progress of work on each activity. Progress shall be recorded by means of actual start and actual finish dates for activities, together with percentage completion and/or remaining duration of incomplete activities.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 23 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The review of progress will be conducted as a site meeting between representatives of the Department of State Growth and the Contractor held generally monthly, or at shorter intervals as decided by the Superintendent. Reviews held as site meetings shall be chaired by the Superintendent or the Superintendent's representative and minutes shall be prepared by the Superintendent and distributed to the Contractor within 10 business days of the meeting.
 (e) Updating and Reporting on Construction Program
 The Contractor shall maintain a complete record of the construction program and its changes on CD/DVD and in hardcopy, throughout the contract.
 (i) The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent updated construction programs: 1. at intervals not exceeding 3 months during the Contract; or 2. within 10 business days of any change to the critical path for the Works or any separable part of the Works. 3. within 5 business days of a request to do so from the Superintendent including, if applicable, an explanation in writing of delays in execution of the work under the Contract in comparison with the construction program.
 (ii) Updated construction programs shall provide the same level of detail as the original Construction Program and shall: 1. show the `as-constructed' program in respect of all work carried out to the time of updating; 2. be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for any changes from the previously submitted Construction Program; 3. incorporate all extensions of time which have previously been granted or allowed up to that time by the Superintendent pursuant to sub-clause 35.45 of the General Conditions of Contract; 4. be accompanied by a statement of any claims for extensions of time which have previously been notified by the Contractor in accordance with sub-clause 35.45 of the General Conditions of Contract in respect of which the Superintendent is yet to determine.
 (iii) Any updated construction program submitted in accordance with (i) above shall be reviewed by the Superintendent on the basis set out in item (c) above.
 (f) Rate of Progress Where the Superintendent at any time considers that the rate of progress is insufficient to ensure completion of the Works or any separable part of the Works by the relevant Date for Practical Completion, the Superintendent may direct the Contractor to submit within 10 business days written details of the intended procedure for the execution of the remainder of the work under the Contract.
 (g) Failure to Submit Construction Program Where the Contract requires the Contractor to provide to the Superintendent a Construction Program, no payment will be made to the Contractor until the Contractor has furnished to the Superintendent a Construction Program that accords with the requirements of the Contract.
 160.D2 ADVERSE WEATHER CONDITIONS
 NOT USED
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 24 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth 160.D3 WORKING HOURS Before commencing work under the Contract, the Contractor shall advise the Superintendent, in writing, the working hours proposed for the execution of the work under the Contract. Further to the provisions of Clause 32 of the General Conditions of Contract: (a) no work shall be carried out between Good Friday and Easter Monday inclusive, on any
 Sunday, public holiday, or during the Christmas to New Year periods (b) no work shall be carried out on the site outside the period between 7am or sunrise,
 whichever is the later, and 6pm or sunset, whichever is the earlier unless otherwise specified or approved by the Superintendent. Work outside the proposed working hours without written approval of the Superintendent may proceed only in the following situations:  in cases of emergency;  where situations would create significant traffic disruption and/or hazardous conditions
 unless rectified; or  when plant breakdown or extenuating circumstances have delayed an activity that cannot
 be stopped.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 25 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 PART E - SITE AND EXECUTION OF WORK
 160.E1 SITE MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION ##(strikethrough inapplicable requirements below):
 (a) Site Supervision
 The Contractor's site management, programming and program control, quality assurance and methods of work shall be supervised daily by an experienced and qualified engineer. This engineer shall possess the experience and qualifications which would be acceptable to the Institution of Engineers Australia as satisfying the requirements for Corporate Membership, including at least 5 years experience in the relevant construction field.
 (b) Site Survey
 For the purposes of setting out the Works in conformity with the specification and drawings, the Contractor shall engage an experienced and qualified surveyor. This surveyor shall possess the experience and qualifications which would be acceptable to the Institution of Surveyors, Australia as satisfying the requirements for Corporate or Associate Membership or alternatively, possess the experience and qualifications which would be acceptable for Membership to the Institution of Engineering and Mining Surveyors, Australia.
 The surfaces and quantities measured by the Contractor under this Contract shall be made available to the Superintendent in an electronic format or other format approved by the Superintendent.
 (c) Landscape Supervisor
 The Contractor shall nominate a Landscape Supervisor to be on site for the duration of all landscape work. This person shall have a Landscape Trade Certificate (TAFE), equivalent qualification or at least 2 years horticultural expertise on work of a similar size and scope.
 Should the Contractor's site supervisory staff prove unsatisfactory with respect to progress, quality of work and methods of work, the Superintendent may direct the Contractor to provide such additional competent and experienced staff as may be necessary to ensure satisfactory progress of the Works and that the quality and the methods of work are acceptable.
 160.E2 PROVISIONAL ITEMS
 (a) General
 Prior to commencement of any works to be undertaken on provisional items, the Contractor shall obtain approval of the Superintendent for the works to proceed.
 (b) Establishment of Daywork Rates
 (i) Labour and Plant
 Within 10 business days of a request by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for acceptance daywork rates for labour and plant not included in the Schedule of Daywork Rates and which are proposed to be employed for work included under this clause.
 Where no Schedule of Daywork Rates was included in the tender documents, the daywork rates submitted for acceptance by the Superintendent shall apply to all labour and plant proposed to be used for the work.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 26 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The rates shall be submitted as hourly rates, or where daily rates are used, the hourly rate shall be taken to be one-tenth of the daily rate. These rates shall also cover all overhead administrative costs, all operator costs including site allowances, mobilisation costs, fuel, servicing and profits, and if accepted shall be taken into account by the Superintendent in making a determination pursuant to Clause 41of the General Conditions of Contract.
 (ii) Materials
 The maximum allowance for management, supervision, administrative costs, overheads and profit for the supply of materials directed by the Superintendent to be incorporated into the Works as part of directed Daywork shall be 15% and shall be applied to the actual costs of the material supplied.
 If the rates submitted by the Contractor for labour and plant are considered to be unacceptable, the Superintendent will advise the Contractor accordingly within 10 business days after which the Contractor shall resubmit within 10 business days amended rates for acceptance. If such rates are still unacceptable, the Superintendent will set rates within 15 business days of the submission of the amended rates.
 In setting the rates for labour and plant the Superintendent will consider current market rates, other contract rates for similar labour or items of plant doing similar work on other contracts, the model, age and condition of items of plant proposed for use on the Works by the Contractor and other relevant information and factors.
 Daywork rates submitted with the tender will be subject to the relevant price adjustments provided for in the Contract. Daywork rates submitted and accepted or set by the Superintendent during the Contract will not be subject to price adjustment but may be reviewed at periods not less than 6 months.
 Dayworks shall not proceed using labour, plant and materials which do not have daywork rates accepted or set by the Superintendent.
 Labour, plant and materials used for urgent repairs in accordance with Clause 39 of the General Conditions of Contract, and for which no daywork rates have been accepted or set by the Superintendent, will be paid for in accordance with the provision of Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract.
 160.E3 CO-OPERATION
 The Department of State Growth reserves the right to perform work or award other contracts for work on or adjacent to the site. The Contractor shall co-operate with all other contractors and other work forces so as to avoid delay or hindrance to their work and to ensure that all work is performed expeditiously.
 160.E4 MAINTENANCE OF SITE
 The Contractor shall, in accordance with the requirements of Section 700.1 of Contract Specific Clauses, maintain the roads and all other road reservation areas within the Limits of Works for the period between the date of possession of site and Practical Completion of the whole of the Works including periods of suspension.
 The Contractor shall respond to an emergency with an `Initial Emergency Response Unit' consisting of the following: - a minimum of 2 personnel with appropriate traffic management qualifications and vehicle - an emergency kit of temporary warning signs, flashing lights, barriers, safety clothing, shovels,
 brooms, chainsaw and a mobile telephone.
 In addition the Contractor shall maintain on site 1 m of sand or other absorptive product and 0.5 m of premix asphalt exclusively for use in the event of an emergency.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 27 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Immediately following achievement of Practical Completion of the Contract the Contractor and the Superintendent's Representative shall conduct a Routine Maintenance Condition Survey of the whole of the maintenance area to record those maintenance elements outside the specified intervention standard. Where a maintenance feature is identified outside the specified intervention standard the Superintendent may: (a) direct the Contractor to bring the deficient asset feature elements to within the specified
 intervention standard within a period to be determined by the Superintendent; or (b) arrange for the rectification of those features by others and in this event a deduction will be
 made to the Contract Sum for the full cost of such works.
 The Superintendent will provide a written record of the Contract Completion Condition Survey to the Contractor within 10 business days of the completion of the survey. The Superintendent's ruling on the condition of any asset feature element will be final.
 160.E5 EXAMINATION AND TESTING OF MATERIALS AND WORK
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall be responsible for carrying out all examination and testing of materials and work under the Contract in accordance with the requirements of the specification.
 Unless otherwise specified, materials and workmanship shall comply with the relevant standard as defined in Section 175.
 (b) Allowance for Testing in Construction Program
 The Contractor shall make allowance in the construction program for the time necessary to arrange for and to carry out examination and testing of materials and work.
 (c) Notification
 Where inspection of materials or work by the Superintendent or his representative is specified as a hold point, or where a hold point is created by a nonconformance, at least 24 hours notice of testing and/or inspection shall be given to the Superintendent.
 (d) Tests
 Unless otherwise specified, all tests and sampling shall be undertaken in accordance with the appropriate VicRoads codes of practice and applicable test methods as current at the time of performance of the tests. Unless otherwise specified, all tests shall be conducted by experienced testing officers in a laboratory accredited by the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) for the test methods used under the Contract and all tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA registration for that laboratory.
 Lists of current VicRoads codes of practice are available online at the VicRoads website www.vicroads.vic.gov.au.
 All construction materials sampling shall be undertaken by either:
 (i) personnel from a NATA laboratory accredited for the appropriate sampling methods; or
 (ii) personnel who have successfully completed an accredited TAFE course in sampling of construction materials delivered by a registered training organisation, and have taken a refresher course in sampling of construction materials every three years.
 The sampler shall be identified on the test report.
 (e) Test Results
 The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent a monthly summary, or if requested by the Superintendent a weekly summary, of testing undertaken. The summary shall
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 28 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth include details of all tests undertaken, the result of each test and sufficient additional information to demonstrate that the specified minimum frequency of testing is being complied with.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 29 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The summary of test results shall be submitted to the Superintendent by the second day of the week following the relevant period.
 (f) Calibration All test equipment used for tests, carried out in accordance with Clause 160.E5(d) above, shall be calibrated by a laboratory accredited by NATA for the particular calibration method.
 160.E6 BLASTING ##(strikethrough (a) or (b) below as appropriate): (a) Blasting shall not be undertaken in the execution of the work under the Contract.
 (b) Blasting may be permitted in the execution of the work under the Contract. Unless otherwise consented to by the Superintendent, no explosives shall be manufactured or charges loaded before 7am or after 3pm or on any day other than an ordinary working day and no charge shall be primed and no shot fired before 9am or after 3.30pm. The Contractor shall give occupants of nearby buildings and structures, and owners of underground services adequate notice of intended blasting. Prior to blasting the Contractor shall arrange with occupants and the owners of underground services for any necessary protection of persons, property or livestock.
 160.E7 DRAINAGE OF WORK SITE The Contractor shall at all times provide for the safe discharge of seepage, drainage and stormwater during the execution of the works under the Contract. The Contractor shall be responsible to obtain all approvals from the local authorities and accept all costs associated with the discharge of any water into an existing outfall on a temporary or permanent basis.
 160.E8 CLEAN UP OF SITE Unless otherwise specified, the Contractor shall remove from site, before the cessation of work each day, all temporary or surplus material not forming part of the specified works. The Contractor shall be responsible for the proper disposal of the temporary or surplus material and no additional payment will be made for this work.
 160.E9 INSTRUCTIONS BY OTHER GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND AUTHORITIES
 Other government departments and authorities and their representatives, whether federal, state or local, often have responsibilities that impact on Department of State Growth's works.
 The Contractor shall report any instruction (orders or directions) given by an authorised representative of these government departments and authorities to the Superintendent immediately by mobile phone or as soon as practicably possible. The Contractor shall co-operate with an authorised representative who is requesting access to the site under powers conferred by legislation and follow any instructions given by the authorised representative in the format nominated by the legislation.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 30 of 37)
 
 PART F - OFF-SITE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 160.F1 INSPECTION OF PROPERTY
 Prior to commencing operations, the Contractor shall engage a suitably qualified and experienced architectural consultant to undertake inspections on all buildings and structures (including heritage structures) within a minimum distance of ##e.g. 100 m: of the site. Two copies of the written existing conditions report for each property, including any photographs, shall be prepared and signed by the property owner and the architectural consultant.
 The condition of the buildings, structures and the property shall be detailed in the existing conditions reports which shall form the basis of assessment of any structural damage to buildings and structures arising out of the Contractor's operations in the event of a claim by the owner/occupier. The Contractor shall be responsible for the repair of any damage caused to property due to the Contractor's operations.
 The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent a copy of all existing condition reports of property and buildings prior to commencing work adjacent to such property or building. The copy of this report will be returned to the Contractor within 10 business days of submission.
 For the purposes of this clause the Site is defined as the nearest point of the work adjacent to any building or structure.
 The Contractor shall bear all costs associated with any claim for damages resulting from the effects of the Contractor's operations, including ground vibration, directly caused by the Contractor's construction methods. The cost of such damage shall be in addition to damage caused by other action attributed to the Contractor's work.
 Before final payment is made, the Contractor shall obtain written clearance from all landowners and occupiers affected by the provision of this clause, to certify that the landowner and occupier have no claim for any loss or damage due to the Contractor's operation. A copy of all written clearances shall be forwarded to the Superintendent prior to the Contractor's Final Claim.
 
 160.F2 WORK IN PRIVATE PROPERTY
 Where the Contractor is authorised by the Superintendent to enter private property to carry out work under the Contract, the Contractor shall give the occupier of the land a minimum of 5 business days notice of intention to enter or to remove any fence and shall also erect any temporary fencing that may be necessary.
 Entry shall be by a gate, or gates to be erected by the Contractor which shall be kept securely locked when not in use. Where fences are rabbit proof, the gates erected shall also be made and kept rabbit proof, and the Contractor shall be responsible and liable for the trespass of vermin.
 
 160.F3 CLEARANCES FROM LANDOWNERS AND OCCUPIERS
 Before final payment is made, the Contractor shall produce written clearances from all landowners and occupiers whose properties have been entered by the Contractor or the Contractor's employees or agents, for the purpose of carrying out work under the Contract, to certify that the landowner and occupier have no claim against the Department of State Growth for any loss or damage due to the Contractor's operations and that the land and improvements have been left in a satisfactory condition.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 31 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 160.F4 COMMUNITY LIAISON ##(strikethrough if not required):
 Where the work under the Contract may cause disruption, annoyance or inconvenience to stakeholders (including residents, businesses and travelling public), the Contractor shall be responsible for all aspects of stakeholder consultation and advice to the public.
 Such advice shall include reasonable notice to support a high level of community awareness prior to particular events/activities that will affect stakeholders, responding to any queries and resolution of issues during particular events/activities, and post-implementation advice to respond to any queries and resolve difficulties.
 The Contractor must identify how they will communicate with stakeholders and include consideration of:  protocols for liaising with all stakeholders, including emergency services and the media  who should be consulted/informed (stakeholder categories)  why they should be consulted/informed (stakeholder interest and/or influence)  what should be communicated (key messages)  when it should be communicated (timing)  how it should be communicated (communication tools and pathways)  protocols for dealing with public complaints and feedback.
 The Contractor shall not issue any public information concerning the project, including publications, documents and/or social media content, in any media without prior approval of the Superintendent, which shall not unreasonably be withheld.
 The Contractor shall provide to the Superintendent a copy of any material intended for public distribution about the project with at least 10 days' notice prior to the intended distribution date.
 The Contractor shall immediately refer to the Superintendent all enquiries concerning the project from any media.
 The Contractor shall provide the Superintendent with a minimum 10 days' notice of any request to work outside approved normal working hours.
 The Contractor shall maintain and submit to the Superintendent on a monthly basis a Communications Register of all public, media and other stakeholder complaints and enquiries made directly to the Contractor in relation to the contract.
 The Contractor shall maintain a customer (public) point of contact name and phone number and submit this to the Superintendent at least 10 days prior to any works commencing.
 The Contractor shall not be required to answer questions/issues/concerns that relate to the rationale for the project, the Scope of Work provided for under the Contract, or other project issues not within the Contractor's control. Such matters shall be recorded and advised to the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall immediately advise the Superintendent of any media enquiries or unannounced site visits by media, councilors or politicians. The Contractor shall direct all media enquiries to the Superintendent.
 160.F5 USE AND CARE OF ROADS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for repair of damage caused to any roads, bridges or other structures by transporting material under the Contract. The Contractor is advised that the Department of State Growth and municipal councils have power under their respective Acts to recover the cost of repair of damage to roads. If requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall submit clearances from municipal and other authorities concerned before the Final Certificate is issued. In respect of repair of damage to roads, the Contractor will be deemed when tendering:
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 32 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 33 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (a) to have inspected the roads used for transport; (b) to have acquired, by consultation with the municipal or other authorities concerned,
 knowledge of the roads and any existing or likely restrictions upon their use which could affect the transport proposals; (c) to have assessed the possibility and extent of any damage to the roads which may be caused by transport under the Contract; (d) to have made due allowance for the effects of such restrictions and for the cost of rectification of such damage in accordance with the requirements of the authorities concerned.
 160.F6 FAILURE TO LODGE SECURITY DEPOSIT AND RETURN OF EXECUTED CONTRACT DOCUMENTS
 No contract payments will be made until the Contract security has been lodged with the Principal. Payment will also be withheld where signed Contract documents have not been returned within 10 business days of being issued by the Principal.
 160.F7 SECURITY
 Further to Clause 5 of the General Conditions of Contract, the Contractor shall provide performance security as detailed in Annexure Part A of the General Conditions of Contract.
 160.F8 GOODS AND SERVICES TAX
 (a) Any Contract lump sum amounts or rates in Contract Schedules of Rates are exclusive of any GST but are inclusive of all the Contractor's expenses, insurance, duties, imposts, charges and taxes payable by the Contractor.
 (b) All invoices shall be in the form of a `tax invoice' as defined in the relevant legislation, including supplying the Contractor's Australian Business Number. The GST component of the invoice shall be separately identified. The Contractor shall provide any other requisite information to enable the Department of State Growth to claim any related input tax credits. The Department of State Growth will pay to the Contractor on any supply in accordance with this Contract an amount equivalent to the GST payable by the Contractor under GST Law.
 (c) In this clause GST Law means A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 as amended and includes any Act of the Australian Parliament that imposes or deals with GST.
 160.F9 PAYMENT OF SUBCONTRACTORS
 NOT USED
 160.F10 DEFECTS LIABILITY
 Further to Clause 37 of the General Conditions of Contract any omissions and defects which existed at the commencement date of the Defects Liability Period shall be corrected by the Contractor within the time nominated by the Superintendent in writing. Where the Superintendent has not nominated the time for correction of omissions and defects the Contractor shall undertake any required work within 20 business days of the commencement date of the Defects Liability Period.
 160.F11 FINAL STATEMENT BY CONTRACTOR
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 34 of 37)
 
 NOT USED
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 35 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 PART G - INSURANCE AND INCIDENT REPORTING
 The Contractor shall comply with all insurance requirements contained in the General Conditions of Contract including any Annexures.
 
 160.G1
 
 INCIDENT REPORTING
 
 The Contractor shall implement and maintain an Incident Reporting System for the duration of the Contract. The Contractor shall enter, into the Incident Reporting System, details of all
 incidents (including `near incidents') arising from or relating to the work under the Contract, or on or adjacent to the site, during the Contract term, which may, or could, have resulted in
 claims for personal injury or property damage to third parties.
 
 The Incident Reporting System shall record all incidents in respect of which any third party
 may claim. This shall include any possible claim for personal injury and all damage to property in excess of $10,000.
 
 The Incident Reporting System shall also record details of notes, records and photographs or any other evidence relating to any incident.
 
 The Incident Reporting System shall also record details of any injury or damage caused by registered motor vehicles.
 
 160.G2 REPORTABLE INCIDENTS
 Upon the happening of any Incident likely to give rise to a claim under any insurance policy effected by the Principal, the Contractor shall give notice thereof the Superintendent, as soon as possible. Without prejudice to the generality of the obligation to report Incidents, the Contractor shall notify in accordance with this cause all Incidents that involve:
 (a) personal injury (unless trivial)
 (b) minors (< 18 years old)
 (c) serious near misses
 (d) triggering a `sixth sense' of a dangerous situation
 (e) damage to a third party's property which is likely to exceed $10,000
 (f) OH&S claims, where the actions of one worker could be said to have caused injury.
 
 160.G3 ACTIONS IN RESPECT OF INCIDENTS
 The Contractor shall take immediate steps to minimise the extent of personal injury or property damage arising from an Incident. The Contractor shall take careful note of the evidence surrounding the Incident, including notes or reports of the facts relating thereto and photographs.
 The Contractor shall, as soon as practicable, inform the Principal in writing of any Incident that may give rise to a claim under an insurance policy effected as required by any of the insurance clauses under the General Conditions of Contract and shall ensure that the Superintendent is kept fully informed of the Incident, the subsequent action and developments concerning the claim.
 The Contractor shall take such steps as are necessary or appropriate to ensure that a subcontractor shall, in respect to an event or claim of a like nature arising out of or relating to the operations or responsibilities of the sub-contractor, take in relation to the Superintendent the like action to that which the Contractor is required to take under this clause.
 Where the Incident is reportable to the Principal's Insurer under its Policy, the Contractor shall, at its own expense, in accordance with Policy conditions:
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 36 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth (a) notify the Principal's Insurer immediately -
 (1) by telephone if the matter is sufficiently serious to alert the Principal's Insurer and seek advice
 (2) in writing, with a copy to the Superintendent and preserve any evidence, such as notes or photographs; (b) send to the Principal's Insurer immediately upon receipt any letter of demand, writ, claim, summons or proceedings or other like documentation; (c) co-operate at its own cost with the Principal's Insurer in the investigation and defence of claims, including attendance at court if required. 160.G4 MONTHLY REPORTING The Contractor shall report monthly to the Superintendent on all incidents included in the Incident Reporting System, including details of which matters have been reported to the Principal's Insurer (together with the date of such report) and the status of resolution of each Incident. 160.G5 AUDITING OF INCIDENT REPORTING SYSTEM The Contractor shall permit the Superintendent, staff of the Principal's Insurer, its auditors or any other auditors approved by the Superintendent to access and audit the Incident Reporting System and any documentation associated with claims or relating to Incidents or near Incidents and to take copies of any documents associated with claims or relating to the Incidents. 160.G6 GENERAL The effecting of insurance as required by the insurance clauses in this contract shall not in any way limit or derogate from the liabilities or obligations of the Contractor in performing its work under the Contract.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 160 (Page 37 of 37)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 161 -
 
 BITUMINOUS SURFACING AND COLD PLANING -
 
 GENERAL
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 167 and 168.
 
 If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification.
 
 If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those
 
 sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 PART A - QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
 PART B - INDUSTRIAL PART C - SITE
 PART D - ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PART E - PROGRAM AND PROGRESS
 PART F - SITE AND EXECUTION OF WORK PART G - OFF-SITE
 PART H - INSURANCE AND INCIDENT REPORTING
 
 PART A - QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
 161. A1 THE QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
 The Contractor shall plan, develop and maintain a documented quality management system in accordance with this Specification and with Australian Standard AS/NZS ISO 9001 `Quality management systems  Requirements' except for requirements of Clause 7.3 Design and Development.
 The quality management system shall cover all work under the Contract.
 161. A2 HOLD POINTS
 Definition: Those points beyond which the work may not proceed without review by the Superintendent.
 Hold points are identified in the specification by the letters HP in the left margin and by bold text print or arise from non-conformances.
 The review by the Superintendent of a hold point will not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for satisfactory execution or performance of the work.
 The Superintendent must be given reasonable notice of intended release of each Hold Point and may nominate persons to attend the release of each Hold Point. Unless otherwise specified or agreed by the Superintendent, reasonable notice means at least 2 Business days.
 Text which is bolded but not identified by the letters HP in the left margin is not a Hold Point. These are specified obligations on the Contractor requiring the review or approval of the Superintendent. They are bolded for ease of identification.
 161. A3 QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DOCUMENTS
 Further to the General Conditions of Contract, the Contractor shall submit for consideration by the Superintendent the following: *** (a) a controlled copy of the contract specific quality plan within ##: weeks of the date of acceptance of the tender, i.e. a document setting out the specific quality practices, resources, activities and responsibilities relevant to the Contract; (b) specific quality procedures/descriptions relating to the work not less than 14 days prior to the commencement of that work. However for works proposed at the commencement of the Contract for which 14 days is not possible, a period of 4 working days will be accepted.
 Unless otherwise specified quality plans are not required for annual supply contracts.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 1 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 161. A4 ADDITIONAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
 
 The Contractor shall comply with the specified Australian Standard for quality management systems. In addition the following requirements shall be satisfied:
 
 (a) For AS/NZS ISO 9001
 (i) Identification: the Contractor shall identify all test results with the precise locations to which they relate.
 (ii) Traceability: traceability is not required unless otherwise specified. (iii) Testing: the frequency of testing shall be adequate to demonstrate
 compliance with the Specification. In some instances the minimum frequency of testing is covered in the Specification.
 (iv) Special Processes: notwithstanding any special processes which may be identified by the Contractor, special processes shall include the processes in Table 161.A41.
 
 *** Table 161.A41 Special Processes
 
 ##:
 
 SPECIAL PROCESSES
 
 (b) Non-conformance All non-conformances, where the disposition of the non-conformance violates the
 contractual requirements, are to be promptly reported to the Superintendent for agreement via non-conformance reports. Such non-conformances automatically create hold points.
 Further, all non-conformance reports shall include: (i) the cause of the non-conformance; (ii) the proposed method of rectifying the non-conformance; and (iii) the proposed changes made to the work procedures to prevent a
 recurrence.
 (c) Audits Audits carried out by the Contractor to comply with the requirements of the relevant
 quality management system standard shall be conducted by a qualified auditor in accordance with AS/NZS ISO 19011 `Guidelines for auditing management systems'.
 (d) Defects Prior to completion of the Works and for the duration of the Defects Liability Period the
 Contractor must maintain a register for monitoring the rectification of any Defects:  recorded in the process of closure of Work Packages; or  identified by the Contractor or notified by the Principal or Superintendent after closure of the respective Work Packages.
 Records of Defects must not be deleted from the Defects Register.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 2 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The Defects Register must:
 
 
 
 identify the Asset Component to which the Defect relates;
 
 
 
 include sufficient detail to enable the Defect to be readily located;
 
 
 
 identify any Defects proposed to be accepted by the Principal and include
 
 references to any correspondence between the parties in respect of such
 
 Defects;
 
 
 
 show details of the proposed rectification plan;
 
 
 
 record when the Defect is rectified and when the Defect is closed.
 
 A Defect must not be closed in the Defects Register unless:
 
 
 
 the rectification plan has been accepted in writing by the Principal;
 
 
 
 a nominated Quality Assurance Verifier has physically inspected the rectification
 
 works and verified compliance with the rectification plan; and
 
 
 
 a nominated Quality Assurance Verifier has authorised closure of the Defect; or
 
 
 
 the Defect has been accepted in writing by the Principal.
 
 161. A5 RECORDS
 
 The Contractor must establish records management procedures and systems that will ensure that:
 
 
 
 the design and construction records, including records for works undertaken by
 
 subcontractors, are integrated within a system managed by the Contractor;
 
 
 
 the Principal and the Superintendent have convenient on-line access (electronic
 
 documents accessible via the internet) to the design and construction records;
 
 and.
 
 
 
 design and construction records are recorded progressively and promptly in the
 
 system to show, as far as reasonably practicable, the current status of the
 
 Works.
 
 The Contractor shall make all records pertaining to the Contract available to the
 Superintendent at all times. Where requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall provide the Superintendent with a copy of records.
 
 Within 4 weeks of the Date of Practical Completion, and before issue of the Final Certificate whichever is earlier, the Contractor shall make available a register of all records held. The Contractor shall provide the Superintendent with a copy of such records, or part thereof, as requested.
 Within 12 weeks of the Date of Practical Completion, and before issue of the Final Certificate whichever is earlier, the Contractor shall provide as-constructed drawings, in accordance with the following requirements:
 *** (a) ##: as-constructed drawings with departures clearly marked, shall show the Works as constructed;
 *** (b) ##:the location of services within the limits of the work shall be clearly marked. ## (this is not practical for sprayed sealing and asphalt resurfacing contracts - it really applies to new pavement constructions, and bridge works):
 161. A6 SURVEILLANCE AND AUDITS BY SUPERINTENDENT
 The Superintendent will arrange surveillance and audits to ensure that the Contractor is complying with the Quality and Environmental Management System/Plan. The Contractor shall, upon being given reasonable notice by the Superintendent, make or arrange to be available all facilities, documentation, records and personnel, including those of any sub-contractors, that are reasonably required for the audit or surveillance to be undertaken.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 3 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth Notwithstanding that The Principal may have previously undertaken audits of a sub-contractor's quality management system in connection with other work, the Contractor shall include the operations of all such sub-contractors in the Contract quality plan and shall fulfil all the quality obligations of the Contract. The Superintendent will carry out audit and surveillance of the work of all sub-contractors as it sees fit, in the same way that it may carry out audit and surveillance of all work done and materials supplied by the Contractor. The Superintendent may for this purpose have recourse to audit and surveillance carried out for other contracts. Copies of any such audit and surveillance reports used by the Superintendent will be provided to the Contractor.
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 4 of 17)
 
 PART B - INDUSTRIAL
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 161. B1 RATES OF PAY AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
 The Contractor shall comply with all relevant industrial legislation including industrial awards to which the Contractor is bound, any certified agreements and/or enterprise flexibility agreements to which the Contractor is party. The contract sum will be deemed to include the cost of all wages and other costs arising from the requirements of the awards, certified agreements and enterprise flexibility agreements to which it is bound, and no adjustment will be made to the contract on account of such requirements or any new matter introduced into an award, or any certified agreement or enterprise flexibility agreement except if otherwise provided for in the contract. Persons below the Victorian statutory minimum school leaving age shall not be employed on works under the Contract.
 
 161. B2 WORK BANS AND LIMITATIONS
 The Contractor shall keep the Superintendent informed concerning any industrial matter which could affect the progress of the work under the Contract. The Contractor shall inform the Superintendent immediately if bans are applied to the work under the Contract or if work under the Contract ceases due to industrial action and shall also inform the Superintendent of measures being taken to resolve such action. The Contractor shall make no claim against VicRoads for any costs, loss, expense or damage arising from any industrial action resulting in a strike, work stoppage, work ban or work limitations of any kind. The Superintendent may grant an extension of time for completion pursuant to the General Conditions of Contract for lost time arising from industrial action outside the control of the Contractor.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 5 of 17)
 
 PART C - SITE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 161. C1 POSSESSION OF SITE AND COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
 (a) Commencement and Completion of Work
 The Contractor shall not commence work on site before objective evidence to the existence of public liability and WorkSafe insurance conforming with the requirements of the General Conditions of Contract has been provided to the Superintendent, and the Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan as required by Section 168 has been submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 Any delays in commencement of work caused by this requirement will not be grounds for an extension of time for completion of the Works or any part thereof, nor shall it form the basis of any claim for additional payment.
 The Superintendent will consult with the Contractor to establish the date of commencement of the work, or separable part of the work, and will confirm in writing the date so agreed. If agreement as to the date of commencement cannot be reached, the Superintendent will fix the date and notify the Contractor in writing.
 Separable parts of the Works, if any, specified in sub-Clause 161.C5 (a) shall be completed within the number of weeks or consecutive working days specified in sub-Clause 161.C5 (a) from the respective dates of commencement notified in writing to the Contractor.
 (b) Possession of Site Under Traffic When work is to be undertaken on a road open to traffic, the Contractor will be given
 possession of all or part of the carriageway during such portions of the day as are specified in sub-Clause 161.C5 (b). The remainder of the carriageway shall remain clear of obstruction to traffic.
 Where a width of possession is shown in sub-Clause 161.C5 (b) such width shall be measured between the traffic faces of barriers or between the pavement edge and the traffic face of any barriers placed.
 Where the Contractor is given possession of the full width of the carriageway, traffic may be diverted only between the hours indicated in sub-Clause 161.C5 (b) in accordance with the requirements of Section 166.
 161. C2 HIGH VISIBILITY JACKETS
 All personnel, including supervisors, surveyors, labourers and plant operators, shall wear high visibility clothing in accordance with the requirements of the Worksite Safety  Traffic Management Code of Practice at all times.
 161. C3 CONTRACTOR'S REPRESENTATIVES
 On commencement of work, the Contractor shall advise the Superintendent in writing of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of employees who can be contacted in an emergency and out of hours under the Contract. Any proposed changes of representatives, addresses or telephone numbers shall be notified promptly to the Superintendent and confirmed in writing to the Superintendent.
 161. C4 SITE CLEANUP
 Environmental control measures shall be maintained in working order for the duration of the works. At the completion of the Contract, any environmental controls installed will remain the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the Site.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 6 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 161. C5 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 (a) Commencement and completion of separable parts of the Works ***
 
 Separable Part
 
 Location
 
 A
 
 ##:
 
 B
 
 C
 
 D
 
 No. of weeks/days for
 completion
 
 (b) Possession of site ***
 ##:
 
 Location
 
 Width
 
 Hours
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 7 of 17)
 
 PART D - ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 161.D1 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLANS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the preparation, implementation and other arrangements associated with the Environmental Management Plan (EMP).
 The EMP shall include, as a minimum, the following:
 (a) Environmental Aspects - an assessment of all environmental aspects that could be impacted on the environment, including but not limited to matters covered in this specification, including 161.D1 (e), with reference to EPA Publication 880 - Guideline for Environmental Management: Spraying Bituminous Materials.
 (b) Legal and other requirements - details of approvals, licences and permits necessary to meet statutory requirements.
 (c) Resources, roles, responsibility and authority - details of staff involved in the approval, implementation and review of the EMP.
 (d) Competence, training and awareness - an induction and training plan to ensure that all site personnel (including subcontractors) understand the EMP and are aware how the EMP is to be implemented in relation to the works, including any possible emergency response procedures.
 (e) Operational Control - EMP shall document environmental procedures to manage all identified impacts and environmental protection requirements, including any permits. These procedures may include but are not limited to:  water quality and monitoring (including loss of bitumen or runoff during or after rain leading to water pollution, aggregate entering stormwater pits, kerb and channel);  air quality (including odour and other emissions from bitumen);  bitumen overspray and drift especially in marked areas of roadside significance;  materials and resource use (including use and care of stacksites, treatment of hazardous chemicals and petroleum spills);  preservation of habitat and parking vehicles or plant in roadway reserves;  waste management (including raised reflective pavement markers, petroleum wastes); and  weed management and plant hygiene.
 These procedures may include inspection and test plans and checklists. The location of environmental controls should be documented on a site plan. The procedures should consider the environmental risk, objectives, targets, control measures, maintenance (if appropriate), monitoring and measurement (if required) and contact information.
 (f) Emergency preparedness and response - an emergency response procedure shall include, but is not limited to, processes for managing any environmental emergency on-site, including spillage of bitumen and fuels and shall include responses such as contacting emergency services, relevant stakeholders and clean-up of the site. The Contractor shall also detail its program for training its staff in its `Emergency Preparedness and Response' procedures.
 (g) Nonconformity, environmental incidents and corrective and preventative action procedures.
 (h) Audit - a documented process for audit of the EMP including the on-site environmental protection measures.
 (i) Review and continual improvement - a procedure for review and continual improvement of the Environmental Management Plan.
 HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review an Environmental Management Plan not less than 2 weeks prior to the commencement. Work shall not commence until:
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 8 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth  the Superintendent is satisfied that the Plan meets the requirements of this
 specification; and  the controls detailed in the Plan are implemented; and  the Superintendent has authorised release of the Hold Point.
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 9 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 PART E - PROGRAM AND PROGRESS
 
 161. E1 REVIEW OF PROGRESS
 
 If at any time the Superintendent considers that the rate of progress is insufficient to ensure completion of the whole or any separable part of the Works by the relevant Date for Practical
 Completion, the Superintendent may direct the Contractor to submit within 7 days written details of the intended procedure for the execution of the remainder of the work under the
 Contract.
 
 (a) Updating and Reporting on Construction Program
 
 The Contractor shall maintain a complete record of the construction program and its
 
 changes on CD/DVD and in hardcopy, throughout the contract.
 
 (i) The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent updated construction
 
 programs:
 
 1.
 
 at intervals not exceeding 3 months during the Contract; or
 
 2.
 
 within 10 business days of any change to the critical path for the Works
 
 or any separable part of the Works.
 
 3.
 
 within 5 business days of a request to do so from the Superintendent
 
 including, if applicable, an explanation in writing of delays in execution of
 
 the work under the Contract in comparison with the construction
 
 program.
 
 (ii) Updated construction programs shall provide the same level of detail as the
 
 original Construction Program and shall:
 
 1.
 
 show the `as-constructed' program in respect of all work carried out to
 
 the time of updating;
 
 2.
 
 be accompanied by a statement of the reasons for any changes from the
 
 previously submitted Construction Program;
 
 3.
 
 incorporate all extensions of time which have previously been granted or
 
 allowed up to that time by the Superintendent pursuant to
 
 sub-clause 35.45 of the General Conditions of Contract;
 
 4.
 
 be accompanied by a statement of any claims for extensions of time
 
 which have previously been notified by the Contractor in accordance with
 
 sub-clause 35.45 of the General Conditions of Contract in respect of
 
 which the Superintendent is yet to determine.
 
 (iii) Any updated construction program submitted in accordance with (i) above shall
 
 be reviewed by the Superintendent on the basis set out in item (c) above.
 
 (b) Rate of Progress
 
 Where the Superintendent at any time considers that the rate of progress is insufficient to ensure completion of the Works or any separable part of the Works by the relevant
 Date for Practical Completion, the Superintendent may direct the Contractor to submit within 10 business days written details of the intended procedure for the execution of
 the remainder of the work under the Contract.
 
 (c) Failure to Submit Construction Program
 
 Where the Contract requires the Contractor to provide to the Superintendent a Construction Program, no payment will be made to the Contractor until the Contractor
 has furnished to the Superintendent a Construction Program that accords with the requirements of the Contract.
 
 161. E2 ADVERSE WEATHER CONDITIONS
 Time lost due to adverse weather conditions is defined for the purpose of this Contract as time lost due to wet weather, fog, excessively hot, excessively cold and/or dangerously windy
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 10 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 conditions and to the effects of these adverse weather conditions, e.g. wet site conditions following rain.
 
 The Contract period includes the following allowance for time lost due to adverse weather
 
 conditions:
 
 ##(insert number of working days where applicable and strikethrough inapplicable
 
 alternatives):
 
 *** Whole of Works
 
 - ##: `working' days
 
 *** Separable part A
 
 - ##: `working' days
 
 *** Separable part B
 
 - ##: `working' days
 
 *** Separable part C
 
 - ##: `working' days
 
 *** Separable part D
 
 - ##: `working' days
 
 *** This allowance is based on an 8 hour working day, 5 day working week and ##:includes / does not include allowance for periods when works are suspended due to adverse weather. This
 allowance is for administrative purposes only and is not to be construed as the actual time lost due to adverse weather conditions likely to be encountered during the Contract. The
 Contractor is deemed to have made all necessary inquiries as to adverse weather in accordance with the General Conditions of Contract.
 
 The Contractor's site representative shall notify the Superintendent immediately of any time
 lost due to adverse weather conditions and shall confirm such notification in writing within 7 days. This confirmation shall provide details of the nature and extent of delays and the
 construction activities affected. The Superintendent, if satisfied that the Contractor has taken reasonable steps to minimize the period of delay, will certify at the end of each month an
 appropriate period of time lost and will issue to the Contractor a monthly summary of certified time lost. The maximum period of time which will be certified on any working day will be
 8 hours.
 
 Where the Contractor is required to provide a construction program, only delays affecting critical activities will be considered as time lost due to adverse weather conditions.
 
 If the total period of time certified exceeds the total allowance for the Whole of Works or
 applicable Separable Part of Works specified above, the Superintendent will, in accordance with the General Conditions of Contract, grant an extension of time for completion of the Whole of
 Works or applicable Separable Part of Works on the basis of 1 working day for each 8 hours of certified time in excess of the allowance. No extension of time will be granted until the total
 excess period equals 8 hours or a multiple thereof. Periods of less than 8 hours duration shall accrue to form part of any subsequent extension of time.
 
 No additional costs arising from extensions of time granted due to excess adverse weather will be made.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 11 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth 161. E3 WORKING HOURS Before commencing work under the Contract, the Contractor shall advise the Superintendent, in writing, the working hours proposed for the execution of the work under the Contract. Further to the provisions of the General Conditions of Contract: (a) no work shall be carried out between Good Friday and Easter Monday inclusive, on any
 Sunday, public holiday, or during the Christmas to New Year periods; (b) no work shall be carried out on the site outside the period between 7am or sunrise,
 whichever is the later, and 6pm or sunset, whichever is the earlier; unless otherwise specified or approved by the Superintendent. Notwithstanding the provisions of the General Conditions of Contract and the provisions of this clause, work may be carried out on Saturdays and/or Sundays if specified or approved by the Superintendent or, if directed by the Superintendent and the tender includes surcharge rates for Saturday and Sunday work. If no item for a surcharge has been provided in the Schedule of Rates and the Superintendent has directed Saturday or Sunday work the Superintendent will value the work in accordance with the provisions of the General Conditions of Contract.
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 12 of 17)
 
 PART F - SITE AND EXECUTION OF WORK
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 161. F1 CO-OPERATION
 Department of State Growth reserves the right to perform work or award other contracts for work on or adjacent to the site. The Contractor shall co-operate with all other contractors and other work forces so as to avoid delay or hindrance to their work and to ensure that all work is performed expeditiously.
 161. F2 EXAMINATION AND TESTING OF MATERIALS AND WORK
 (a) General The Contractor shall be responsible for carrying out all examination and testing of
 materials and work under the Contract in accordance with the requirements of the specification.
 Unless otherwise specified, materials and workmanship shall comply with the relevant standard of the Standards Association of Australia.
 (b) Allowance for Testing in Construction Program The Contractor shall make allowance in the construction program for the time necessary
 to arrange for and to carry out examination and testing of materials and work.
 (c) Notification Where inspection of materials or work by the Superintendent or his representative is
 specified as a hold point, or where a hold point is created by a nonconformance, at least 24 hours notice of testing and/or inspection shall be given to the Superintendent.
 (d) Tests Unless otherwise specified, all tests and sampling shall be undertaken in accordance
 with the appropriate VicRoads codes of practice and applicable test methods as current at the time of performance of the tests. Unless otherwise specified, all tests shall be conducted by experienced testing officers in a laboratory accredited by the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) for the test methods used under the Contract and all tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA registration for that laboratory.
 Lists of current VicRoads codes of practice are available online at the VicRoads website www.vicroads.vic.gov.au.
 All construction materials sampling shall be undertaken by personnel from a NATA laboratory accredited for the appropriate sampling methods.
 (e) Test Results The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent a monthly summary, or if requested
 by the Superintendent a weekly summary, of testing undertaken. The summary shall include details of all tests undertaken, the result of each test and sufficient additional information to demonstrate that the specified minimum frequency of testing is being complied with.
 The summary of test results shall be submitted to the Superintendent by the second day of the week following the relevant period.
 (f) Calibration All test equipment used for tests, carried out in accordance with Clause 161.F2(d)
 above, shall be calibrated by a laboratory accredited by NATA for the particular calibration method.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 13 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 PART G - OFF-SITE
 161. G1 COMMUNITY LIAISON ##(strikethrough if not required):
 Where the work under the Contract may cause disruption, annoyance or inconvenience to stakeholders (including residents, businesses and travelling public), the Contractor shall be responsible for all aspects of stakeholder consultation and advice to the public. Such advice shall include reasonable notice to support a high level of community awareness prior to particular events/activities that will affect stakeholders, responding to any queries and resolution of issues during particular events/activities, and post-implementation advice to respond to any queries and resolve difficulties.
 The Contractor must identify how they will communicate with stakeholders and include consideration of: protocols for liaising with all stakeholders, including emergency services and the media who should be consulted/informed (stakeholder categories) why they should be consulted/informed (stakeholder interest and/or influence) what should be communicated (key messages) when it should be communicated (timing) how it should be communicated (communication tools and pathways) protocols for dealing with public complaints and feedback.
 The Contractor shall not issue any public information concerning the project, including publications, documents and/or social media content, in any media without prior approval of the Superintendent, which shall not unreasonably be withheld.
 The Contractor shall provide to the Superintendent a copy of any material intended for public distribution about the project with at least 10 days' notice prior to the intended distribution date.
 The Contractor shall immediately refer to the Superintendent all enquiries concerning the project from any media.
 The Contractor shall provide the Superintendent with a minimum 10 days' notice of any request to work outside approved normal working hours.
 The Contractor shall maintain and submit to the Superintendent on a monthly basis a Communications Register of all public, media and other stakeholder complaints and enquiries made directly to the Contractor in relation to the contract.
 The Contractor shall maintain a customer (public) point of contact name and phone number and submit this to the Superintendent at least 10 days prior to any works commencing. The Contractor shall not be required to answer questions/issues/concerns that relate to the rationale for the project, the Scope of Work provided for under the Contract, or other project issues not within the Contractor's control. Such matters shall be recorded and advised to the Superintendent. The Contractor shall immediately advise the Superintendent of any media enquiries or unannounced site visits by media, councilors or politicians. The Contractor shall direct all media enquiries to the Superintendent.
 161. G2 USE AND CARE OF ROADS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for repair of damage caused to any roads, bridges or other structures by transporting material under the Contract. The Contractor is advised that VicRoads and municipal councils have power under their respective Acts to recover the cost of repair of damage to roads. If requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall submit clearances from municipal and other authorities concerned before the Final Certificate is issued. In respect of repair of damage to roads, the Contractor will be deemed when tendering:
 (a) to have inspected the roads used for transport;
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 14 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth (b) to have acquired, by consultation with the municipal or other authorities concerned,
 knowledge of the roads and any existing or likely restrictions upon their use which could affect the transport proposals; (c) to have assessed the possibility and extent of any damage to the roads which may be caused by transport under the Contract; (d) to have made due allowance for the effects of such restrictions and for the cost of rectification of such damage in accordance with the requirements of the authorities concerned. 161. G2 FAILURE TO LODGE SECURITY DEPOSIT AND RETURN OF EXECUTED
 CONTRACT DOCUMENTS No contract payments will be made until the Contract security (if any) has been lodged with the Corporation. Payment will also be withheld where signed Contract documents have not been returned within 10 business days of being issued by the Corporation.
 161. G3 SECURITY ##(for shells for Minor works strikethrough the entire text of this clause):
 Further to Clause 5 of the General Conditions of Contract, the Contractor shall provide performance security as either: (a) 5% of Contract Sum; or (b) 2.5% of Contract Sum plus retention of 5% of each progress payment up to a maximum of 2.5% of the Contract Sum; as indicated in Schedule 1. Where Schedule 1 does not indicate which option is to apply then (a) shall apply to this Contract.
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 15 of 17)
 
 PART H - INSURANCE AND INCIDENT REPORTING
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 PART H - INSURANCE AND INCIDENT REPORTING The Contractor shall comply with all insurance requirements contained in the General Conditions of Contract including any Annexures.
 161. H1 INCIDENT REPORTING The Contractor shall implement and maintain an Incident Reporting System for the duration of the Contract. The Contractor shall enter, into the Incident Reporting System, details of all incidents (including `near incidents') arising from or relating to the work under the Contract, or on or adjacent to the site, during the Contract term, which may, or could, have resulted in claims for personal injury or property damage to third parties. The Incident Reporting System shall record all incidents in respect of which any third party may claim. This shall include any possible claim for personal injury and all damage to property in excess of $10,000. The Incident Reporting System shall also record details of notes, records and photographs or any other evidence relating to any incident. The Incident Reporting System shall also record details of any injury or damage caused by registered motor vehicles.
 161. H2 REPORTABLE INCIDENTS Upon the happening of any Incident likely to give rise to a claim under any insurance policy effected by the Principal, the Contractor shall give notice thereof the Superintendent, as soon as possible. Without prejudice to the generality of the obligation to report Incidents, the Contractor shall notify in accordance with this cause all Incidents that involve: (a) personal injury (unless trivial) (b) minors (< 18 years old) (c) serious near misses (d) triggering a `sixth sense' of a dangerous situation (e) damage to a third party's property which is likely to exceed $10,000 (f) OH&S claims, where the actions of one worker could be said to have caused injury.
 161. H3 ACTIONS IN RESPECT OF INCIDENTS The Contractor shall take immediate steps to minimise the extent of personal injury or property damage arising from an Incident. The Contractor shall take careful note of the evidence surrounding the Incident, including notes or reports of the facts relating thereto and photographs. The Contractor shall, as soon as practicable, inform the Principal in writing of any Incident that may give rise to a claim under an insurance policy effected as required by any of the insurance clauses under the General Conditions of Contract and shall ensure that the Superintendent is kept fully informed of the Incident, the subsequent action and developments concerning the claim. The Contractor shall take such steps as are necessary or appropriate to ensure that a subcontractor shall, in respect to an event or claim of a like nature arising out of or relating to the operations or responsibilities of the sub-contractor, take in relation to the Superintendent the like action to that which the Contractor is required to take under this clause. Where the Incident is reportable to the Principal's Insurer under its Policy, the Contractor shall, at its own expense, in accordance with Policy conditions:(a) notify the Principal's Insurer immediately -
 (1) by telephone if the matter is sufficiently serious to alert the Principal's Insurer and seek advice
 (2) in writing, with a copy to the Superintendent and preserve any evidence, such as notes or photographs; (b) send to the Principal's Insurer immediately upon receipt any letter of demand, writ, claim, summons or proceedings or other like documentation; (c) co-operate at its own cost with the Principal's Insurer in the investigation and defence of claims, including attendance at court if required.
 
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 16 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth 161. H4 MONTHLY REPORTING The Contractor shall report monthly to the Superintendent on all incidents included in the Incident Reporting System, including details of which matters have been reported to the Principal's Insurer (together with the date of such report) and the status of resolution of each Incident. 161. H5 AUDITING OF INCIDENT REPORTING SYSTEM The Contractor shall permit the Superintendent, staff of the Principal's Insurer, its auditors or any other auditors approved by the Superintendent to access and audit the Incident Reporting System and any documentation associated with claims or relating to Incidents or near Incidents and to take copies of any documents associated with claims or relating to the Incidents. 161. H6 GENERAL The effecting of insurance as required by the insurance clauses in this contract shall not in any way limit or derogate from the liabilities or obligations of the Contractor in performing its work under the Contract.
 Department of State Growth  March 2018 Section 161 (Page 17 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 167 - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT (TASMANIA)
 ##This section cross-references Sections 167, 168, 176 (or 177), 714, 750 and 860. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent: ##Sections 167, 168 and 176 (or 177) must be included in the specification:
 This section covers general items relating to construction contracts and should be read in conjunction with Sections 167, 168 and ##176(or 177):.
 PART A - MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS PART B - WORKSITE RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS FOR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PART C - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLANNING PART D - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT OPERATION PART E - TEMPORARY ROAD SAFETY BARRIER SYSTEMS PART F - TEMPORARY BARRIER END TREATMENTS PART G - TEMPORARY ROAD LIGHTING PART H - PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS PART I - RECORDS
 PART A - MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
 167.A1 OUTLINE This specification sets out the requirements for the management of all traffic including pedestrians and construction site traffic. The objectives of this specification are to:
  ensure that traffic management is appropriately planned, implemented and maintained;
  ensure traffic management is included in the Contractor's Worksite Risk Management process in accordance with clause 160.C1;
  ensure the safety of road users and construction personnel during all operations.
 167.A2 GENERAL
 The Contractor shall manage traffic in accordance with:  The Tasmanian Traffic Act;  The Tasmanian Traffic (Road Rules) Regulations;  Traffic Control for Works on Roads, Tasmanian Guide 2011  The performance requirements of this Specification;  AS 1742 Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices in particular Part 3 Traffic control for works in Roads.
 The order of precedence of the documents shall be in the order as listed above. Other Relevant Standards and Guides:
  AS/NZS 3845 Road Safety Barrier Systems and;  AS4852.2 Variable Message Signs Part 2 Portable Signs;  Austroads Guide to Traffic Management.  AS/NZS ISO 31000 Risk Management, Principles and Guidelines  HB 327 Communication and Consulting  ISO Guide 73 Risk Management, Vocabulary
 167.A3 DEFINITION OF TERMS
 Further to AS1742 Clause 1.4 the terms used in this specification shall be as defined in Table 167.1  Definition of Terms below.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 1 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 167.1  Definition of Terms
 
 Term
 
 Definition
 
 PCB
 
 Traffic Plan
 
 Management
 
 Nominated Officer
 Traffic Scheme
 
 Traffic Guidance
 
 Accreditation
 
 Slow moving mobile work sites
 
 An abbreviation for Portable Concrete Barrier that is to comply with AS/NZS 3845.
 The Traffic Management Plan prepared by the Contractor in accordance with the requirements of the Contract.
 The Nominated Traffic Officer shall be responsible for preparation and implementation of Traffic Guidance Schemes. A Traffic Guidance Scheme prepared by the Contractor in accordance with the requirements of the Contract as a means of planning, depicting and communicating individual traffic changes.
 All personnel involved in traffic control shall have current accreditation having attended a recognised Traffic Management course for the relevant level of traffic control in accordance with Section 3 Training Requirements of the State Growth Traffic Control for Works on Roads, Tasmanian Guide 2011. Works travelling at 40km/h or less.
 
 167.A4 CONTRACTOR'S RESPONSIBILITES
 The Contractor shall:  provide a safe worksite for the public, its workers and subcontractors at all times and in all conditions; and  manage traffic flow through a site ensuring delays and inconveniences are contained within the performance limits of this Specification.
 
 167.A5 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED AT TENDER
 The Contractor shall provide evidence to demonstrate compliance with this Specification and to demonstrate an understanding of site specific traffic management requirements, including the type and length of temporary work site protection and delineation, and how disruptions to traffic are to be minimised.
 Further to the requirements listed in the Form of Tender, details to be submitted with the tender shall cover:
  Worksite Risk Assessment for Traffic Management in accordance with Clause 167.8;  Methods to be used to meet traffic management requirements including detours and
 work staging plans;  Details of passage for emergency vehicles;  Name, qualifications and experience of the Nominated Traffic Officer (Refer Clause
 167.C1) demonstrating extent of traffic management experience in road construction works and associated activities.
 
 167.A7 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT STRATEGY AND TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLAN
 The Contractor shall detail the requirements of this specification in the Traffic Management Strategy and Traffic Management Plan.
 
 PART B - WORKSITE RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS FOR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
 167.B1 General
 The Contractor shall undertake a traffic management related risk assessment for both construction and public traffic.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 2 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The Contractor shall ensure that all Sub Contractors adhere to the traffic management risk assessment.
 
 Risk Management shall be in accordance with AS1742.3 Clause 2.2.3 Risk Management and AS/NZS ISO 31000. Risk assessments shall include the identification and analysis of all
 safety risks likely to arise during the works in the Planning, Setting up, Operating, Changing and Dismantling phases of a traffic management plan.
 
 167.B2 Risk Control Measures
 
 Further to AS1742.3 Section 4, the following Table 167.2 Guidelines for Risk Control Selection provides guidelines on controls to be considered during the risk assessment process. These guidelines will be used in the assessment of the worksite risk assessment as part of the tender assessment process.
 
 The Contractor shall incorporate into the Traffic Management Plan the actions identified in the risk assessment.
 
 Table 167.2  Guidelines for Risk Control Selection
 
 SAFETY HAZARD/RISK FACTORS
 Clearances to Traffic (Lateral clearance between the nearest edge of a lane carrying traffic and the entire worksite, including all roadworks vehicles or equipment, and pedestrian workers) High Speed Traffic through Worksites
 Poor Advance Sight Distance to Worksite (<200m)
 Poor Observance by Motorists of Directions/Instructions
 Narrow Pavement Width with no Escape Route (<2.9m width) Presence of Workers at Worksite
 
 HIERARCHY OF CONTROL
 
  Consider the practicability of controls, from left to right.
 
  Select the most practical given the circumstances and level of risk.
 
  Record the reason if a higher-level control is not
 
 considered practicable.
 
 ELIMINATION/ ENGINEERING/ ADMINISTRATIVE/
 
 SUBSTITUTION
 
 ISOLATION
 
 BEVAVOURIAL
 
  Road Closure  Safety
 
  Speed Reduction
 
  Detour  Side Track
 
 Barriers
  Lane Closure  Vehicle Crash
 
  Warning Signs/VMS
  Delineation of
 
 Attenuators
 
 Travel Path
 
  Road Closure  Detour  Side Track
  Road Closure  Traffic
 Diversion
  Road Closure  Traffic
 Diversion
  Road Closure  Traffic
 Diversion  Road Closure  Traffic
 Diversion
 
  Safety Barriers
  Lane Closure  Portable
 Traffic Signals  Vehicle Crash
 Attenuators  Vehicle Crash
 Attenuators  Lead and/or
 Tail Vehicle(s)
  Lane Closure  Portable
 Traffic Signals
  Safety Barriers
  Safety Barriers
  Increased Separation from Vehicular
 
  Speed Reduction  Warning
 Signs/VMS  Traffic Controller
  Extra Advanced Warning Signs/VMS
  Speed Reduction  Delineation of
 Travel Path  Speed Reduction  Police Presence on
 Site  Extra Signs/VMS  Re-assessment of
 Information Provided  Speed Reduction  Delineation of Travel Path  Speed Reduction  Warning Signs  Delineation of Travel Path and Worksite
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 3 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SAFETY HAZARD/RISK FACTORS
 Excavation Adjacent to Traffic (>300mm deep within 1.2m of traffic)
 Presence of Unprotected Hazards within Clear Zone Rough or Unsealed Road Surface due to Roadworks High Volume of Traffic Through Worksites (>10,000 Vehicles per day)
 High Volume of Heavy Vehicles through Worksite
 Works Vehicles Entering/Leaving Worksite
 Cyclists/Pedestrians Through Worksites
 
 HIERARCHY OF CONTROL
 
  Consider the practicability of controls, from left to right.
 
  Select the most practical given the circumstances and
 
 level of risk.
 
  Record the reason if a higher-level control is not
 
 considered practicable.
 
 ELIMINATION/ ENGINEERING/ ADMINISTRATIVE/
 
 SUBSTITUTION
 
 ISOLATION
 
 BEVAVOURIAL
 
 Traffic
 
  Road Closure  Different
 
  Speed Reduction
 
  Traffic Diversion
 
 Construction Method
 
  Delineation of Travel Path
 
  Safety
 
 Barriers
 
  Road Closure  Safety
 
  Speed Reduction
 
  Traffic
 
 Barriers
 
  Delineation of
 
 Diversion
 
 Travel Path
 
  Road Closure
 
  Speed Reduction
 
  Traffic
 
  Warning
 
 Diversion
 
 Signs/VMS
 
  Road Closure  Safety
 
  Speed Reduction
 
  Detour  Side Track
 
 Barriers  Lane Closure
 
  Portable
 
 Traffic Signals
 
  Road Closure  Safety
 
  Speed Reduction
 
  Detour  Side Track
 
 Barriers
  Lane Closure  Portable
 
 Traffic Signals
 
  Safety
 
  Speed Reduction
 
 Barriers  Lane Closure
 
  Warning Signs/VMS
 
  Portable
 
  Delineation/Control
 
 Traffic Signals
 
 of Access Points
 
  Alternative
 
  Adequate
 
  Speed Reduction
 
 Pathway
 
 Separated or Shared Road
 
  Warning Signs/VMS
 
 Space
 
  Delineation from
 
 other Traffic
 
 167.B3 Traffic Separation Requirements
 Temporary road safety barrier systems shall be used for separation of traffic from roadworks and hazards as specified. Barriers should be used when 
  Workers or pedestrians in vulnerable situations need protection.  There is a need to separate opposing traffic.  There are hazardous objects or deep excavations near traffic.
 
 Further to AS1742.3 Appendix D the minimum traffic separation requirements are listed in the following Table 167.3  Traffic Separation Requirements.
 
 Table 167.3  Traffic Separation Requirements
 
 Posted speed during
 roadworks (see notes 1 and 2
 below)
 > 80 km/h
 70 & 80 km/h
 
 Distance from Travelled Path to Road Workers and Hazards
 
 0  1.2 metres
 Safety Barrier Safety Barrier
 
 1.2  3 metres
 
 3  6 metres
 
 6  9 metres
 
 Safety Barrier Safety Barrier
 
 Risk Assessment Risk Assessment
 
 Risk Assessment Risk Assessment
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 4 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 50 & 60 km/h
 
 Safety Barrier
 
 Containment Fence Risk Assessment Risk Assessment
 
 < 50 km/h
 
 Risk Assessment
 
 Risk Assessment
 
 Risk Assessment Risk Assessment
 
 NOTES:
 
 1. The posted speed during roadworks shall be the highest speed which will allow the passage
 
 of vehicles in safety, but, in no instance, shall it exceed the original posted speed prior to
 
 roadworks.
 
 2. 40 km/h speed zones shall be no longer than 500 metres with the minimum length of 200
 
 metres.
 
 3. For excavations and/or embankments > 500mm depth and < 3m from the travelled path a
 
 safety barrier is required.
 
 4. For the purposes of this table, excavations and embankments shall be regarded as a
 
 longitudinal depression or batter with the slope of the side adjacent to traffic 1.5 to 1 or
 
 steeper.
 
 5. For safety barrier types refer to Clause 167.E2
 
 6. This table shall apply once ground has been disturbed by the Contractor's works.
 
 However, if a site is identified in the Risk Assessment as a high risk site, the use of temporary
 road safety barriers and energy absorbing devices including truck-mounted attenuators for physical separation as a means of providing protection from traffic shall be used.
 
 The Contractor shall not use road closures as a means of controlling traffic during the works,
 unless there are no other alternative control measures possible and then only when approved by the Superintendent. This does not apply to road closures necessary during emergency
 work where the Contractor will be directed to close roads and detour traffic, by the Superintendent or Tasmania Police.
 
 167.B4 Speed Restrictions
 
 Speed restriction zones shall only be imposed over the localised work area as required.
 Whenever practicable, any restrictions on traffic should be removed, if not required to apply over night. Some restrictions on traffic can remain where the worksite is located on a multi-
 lane road and there is sufficient capacity available to carry the expected overnight traffic volumes.
 
 Single lane operation without any traffic control should not normally operate at night unless the traffic volume is less than 200 vehicles per day and the length of road involved is not greater than 60 metres. In other situations, traffic signals should be used to control traffic on the single lane section.
 
 167.B5 Site Classification for Traffic Management
 
 Work sites, or each part of a work site where a different traffic management regime is employed, shall be classified as either High Profile or Low Profile.
 
 Where the specification includes such a classification, it shall apply.
 
 Where no classification is specified, the Contractor shall classify the site, or part of the site
 based on a High Profile site being one at which Annual Average Daily Traffic is equal to or greater than 3,500 vpd (sum of two directions) with a Low Profile site less than 3,500 vpd.
 
 However the requirements of Clause 167.B6 may require that the site be classed as High Profile.
 
 167.B6 High Profile Sites
 
 For these sites the Traffic Management Plan shall also include the following:  Identification by name and mobile telephone number the person who shall be on site at all times during work, in continuous mobile telephone contact with responsibility for implementing the traffic management, monitoring performance achievement and having full authority to cease work or take other emergency action when the procedures do not achieve the performance requirements.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 5 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
  In areas outside mobile phone range other communication systems such as radio or satellite phone shall be provided to communicate back to the Contractor's Operations Management base.
  Special provision for local landowners and businesses and the nature and timing of personal contact to advise of the effects and how and to what extent special needs will be addressed.
  Information on how any adjacent work by other contractors or Government Authorities is to be coordinated. The Contractor is responsible for obtaining this information.
  The nature of actions to cover the contingency where procedures do not achieve the requirements of this Specification.
 PART C - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLANNING
 167.C1 Nominated Traffic Officer
 The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent the name of its Nominated Traffic Officer. The Nominated Traffic Officer shall be responsible for ensuring that the traffic control at the worksite has been prepared and implemented by individuals with the correct level of training for the type of work being undertaken.
 Training requirements for those involved in providing traffic control at worksites are set out in Section 3 of the State Growth Traffic Control for Works on Roads, Tasmanian Guide 2011.
 167.C2 Traffic Management Plan
 167.C2.1 General
 Traffic Management for all worksites required in the performance of the works shall include preparation of a Traffic Management Plan.
 The Traffic Management Plan shall cover:  All work associated with the preparation, submission and revision (where necessary) of the Traffic Management Plan and Traffic Guidance Schemes;  Implementation and monitoring of the Traffic Management Plan and Schemes when such is specified;  Details in accordance with AS1742.3 (Section 2);  Methods of communication;  How the Contractor intends to provide advance warning to the public on delays/diversions;  Where any staging of the work is necessary, the staging of work shall be marked up on plan overlays for each stage of the work;  How the Contractor proposes to open the site to clear traffic backup;  The names and qualification level of all personnel responsible for traffic control; and  Drawings of each Traffic Guidance Scheme, e.g Fig. 4.9 in AS 1742.3.
 Generic Traffic Management Plans may be used provided they are checked at each worksite in accordance with this specification. Where the risk assessment deems it necessary, the Contractor shall prepare site-specific traffic guidance schemes.
 167.C2.2 Specific Requirements
 The Traffic Management Plan shall:  Describe traffic arrangements which provide for any necessary sequencing of the work under the Contract while minimising disruption and confusion to road users, local traffic, emergency vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists;  Where required, describe how the construction work zone shall be physically and visually isolated from road users;
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 6 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
  Provide details of arrangements to be made for detouring traffic;  Provide details of all road closures and/or restrictions required to undertake the work
 under the Contract;
  Detail provisions to maintain the specified number of traffic lanes in each direction;  Include the names and contact details of the nominated out-of-hours
 representatives;  Include a schedule of Traffic Guidance Schemes giving a general description of the
 relevant traffic arrangements and the date when the Traffic Guidance Scheme will be submitted;
  Provide details of the Contractor's organisational structure for traffic management issues including a list of the duties and responsibilities of each position nominated in
 that structure; and  Take into account any project specific requirements stated in the Project
 Specification.
 
 167.C3
 
 Public Contact Plan
 
 The Traffic Management Plan shall:  Provide details of the consultative process proposed to ensure consultation with and notification to the community, business, road users, bus operators, schools and other stakeholders in advance of alterations to existing traffic conditions. The Contractor's
 proposed inputs into the communication process shall ensure the timely notification of the Superintendent, Principal, travelling public, emergency services, adjacent
 landowners and businesses of impending changes to traffic conditions. This process shall take cognisance of any Principal's requirements with respect to public
 notifications;  Provide details of how local access to communities and adjacent private properties
 and businesses will be maintained;  Provide for participation of a senior member of the Contractor's site personnel on any
 traffic coordination committee convened by the Principal;  Provide details of the methods, including plant such as electronic variable message
 signs, for providing advance notice to the public;  Advance warning shall be in the form of adequate signage stating "expect delays for
 the next .... km from (month/year) to (month/year)". The sign should also advise on alternative routes in association with the signs and devices specified at Section 3 of
 AS1742.3. These shall be installed at least 7 days prior to work commencing. The signs shall be at each end of the worksite.
  Ensure emergency services such as Police, Ambulance and Fire Brigades are advised in writing at least 7 days prior to any planned event likely to cause significant delays.
 Contact details for advice to emergency services are listed in Annexure 167.A.
 
 All messages on electronic portable variable message signs and the location of these signs shall be approved by the Superintendent.
 
 All media advertisements for traffic delays/diversions will be arranged by the Superintendent on the advice of the Contractor. The Contractor shall provide all details at least 7 days prior to the delay/diversion, together with evidence of all the relevant owner/authority approvals. This also applies to all other communications including letters to stakeholders.
 
 167.C4
 
 Electronic Portable Variable Message Signs
 
 Electronic Portable Variable Message Signs shall:  Be capable of displaying messages that are readable;  Be mounted on a trailer suitable for registration in accordance with statutory requirements for the State of Tasmania;
  Comply with AS 4852.2 Variable Message Signs, Part 2: Portable Sign;  Be suitable for use on roads with speed limits greater than 90km/h;
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 7 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
  May include the option of a radar (or similar) vehicle speed detection unit with vehicle speed triggered messages (configurable) and configurable trigger speeds;
  Display dimensional requirements as described in AS4852.2;  Have full matrix configuration that is capable of displaying alpha-numeric characters,
 graphics and moving messages;
  Have a high strength, graffiti resistant display face;  Have automatic brightness control that increases visibility during the day and dims
 display to eliminate flaring/glare during overcast/night time operation;  Have amber or yellow pixels on a matt black background;  Have all enclosures rated to IP54;  Have a control system which will enable local and remote monitoring of status, sign
 control, message changing and diagnostic reporting;  Have a control system which will include a self test and status reporting facility;  Have a control system which will be designed to include security features such as
 equipment tamper and alarm reporting and password protection;
  Be mounted on a trailer with extendable stabilisers for levelling and stabilising in high winds and have a lockable tow bar and wheels
 
 167.C5
 
 Traffic Guidance Schemes
 
 Where any change to existing traffic arrangements is proposed or where construction conflicts with normal traffic movements, the Contractor shall prepare a Traffic Guidance Scheme in accordance with AS1742.3 Clause 2.2.1 which clearly details the revised traffic arrangements at all locations affected by the change or conflict. Traffic Guidance Schemes shall include layout sketches for individual construction stages.
 HP The Contractor shall, not less than 4 working days prior to implementation of the proposed traffic rearrangement, submit to the Superintendent the Traffic Guidance Schemes.
 HP The Superintendent shall agree to the Traffic Guidance Scheme prior to implementing the proposed traffic rearrangement.
 
 In submitting the proposed traffic guidance scheme to the Superindentent. Sufficient time for public notification shall be allowed for as per Clause 167.C3.
 
 The Traffic Guidance Scheme shall show proposed temporary signing and other traffic control device layouts (including temporary barriers, temporary pavement marking and temporary islands) to a suitable scale and be fully dimensioned and shall generally agree with the construction sequence and other requirements shown elsewhere in the Contract.
 
 The Traffic Guidance Scheme shall also state the period for which these are to be in place (time and date) and the person who is responsible for installing, maintaining and removing
 them.
 
 Where the Traffic Guidance Scheme includes changes to regulatory signs or devices, the Contractor shall include details certified by the Nominated Traffic Officer with the Traffic
 Guidance Scheme.
 
 The Contractor shall allow 2 days for the Superintendent's direction with respect to suitability of the proposed traffic rearrangement.
 
 167.C6
 
 Side Tracks
 
 Further to AS1742.3 all sidetracks shall:  Be designed in accordance with Austroads Guides;  Be sealed and line marked with temporary pavement markings when in use for more than one week;
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 8 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
  Have a lateral clearance of at least 1.2 m from any obstruction. In difficult situations, however, the Superintendent may authorise a reduced clearance with an absolute minimum of 600 mm.
  Have a maximum grade of 6 percent.  Be not less than 7 m wide if intended for two lanes of traffic and not less than 3.5m
 wide if intended for single lane, one way traffic.  Be completely removed and the area reinstated when the works are completed.
 
 HP At least 10 days prior to the construction of the sidetracks the Contractor
 shall submit to the Superintendent detailed drawings of the proposed sidetracks including all signs and linemarking.
 
 The linemarking details shall cover existing and temporary linemarking including the removal of conflicting and temporary linemarking.
 
 The submitted drawings shall have been certified by an Engineer experienced in road design, who has qualifications admitting to Corporate Membership of the Institution of Engineers,
 Australia.
 
 The submission of the drawings of the sidetracks to the Superintendent does not constitute approval of the design and shall not in any way relieve the Contractor of the responsibility for
 the satisfactory performance and adequacy of the sidetracks.
 
 The design shall provide for a minimum drainage opening as specified elsewhere, or if not specified, a minimum of a one year flood capacity including any necessary rock pitching.
 
 167.C7
 
 Implementation of Traffic Management Plan
 
 The Contractor shall implement the Traffic Management Plan in accordance with the schedule included in the Plan.
 
 Should the Superintendent so direct, the Contractor shall provide details of the Traffic Management Plan or any changes to that Plan to any bodies nominated by the
 Superintendent.
 
 The Contractor shall monitor the continued effectiveness of the Traffic Management Plan during the Contract and shall revise and update the Plan where necessary.
 
 167.C8
 
 Implementation of Traffic Guidance Schemes
 
 The Contractor shall implement only those traffic guidance arrangements that have been deemed suitable by the Superintendent.
 
 Prior to any change to existing traffic arrangements, the Contractor shall ensure that the traffic management arrangements conform with the Traffic Guidance Scheme. Should the Contractor wish to depart from such arrangements an amended Traffic Guidance Scheme shall be prepared.
 HP An amended Traffic Guidance Scheme shall be submitted to the Superintendent in accordance with 167.C5 above.
 
 On a daily basis, the Contractor shall ensure that all applicable traffic redirection and/or
 warning measures and safety requirements are implemented prior to proceeding with any relevant work under the Contract.
 
 The Contractor shall monitor the effectiveness of the Traffic Guidance Scheme and revise it in response to incidents and/or traffic disruptions.
 
 Details of a Traffic Guidance Scheme shall be provided on request to any other body
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 9 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 nominated by the Superintendent.
 
 PART D - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT OPERATION
 
 167.D1
 
 General
 
 Traffic Management shall:
 
  Include provision and placement of the prescribed traffic control devices for the
 
 warning, guidance and protection of the traffic and protection of workers,
 
 construction plant and other property on or adjacent to the works;
 
  Ensure that any delays to the passage of traffic are not greater than that specified in
 
 Clause 167.H2;
 
  Ensure that construction, maintenance and removal of temporary access along or
 
 across the site for pedestrians, cyclists and agricultural machinery is provided as
 
 necessary;
 
  Relocate any bus stops affected by changes in traffic arrangements;
 
  Include the covering and uncovering of new signs, as necessary;
 
  Provide for the maintenance of emergency vehicle access at all times;
 
  Include relocation of all existing signage and any modifications required thereto to
 
 ensure that the standard of signage is consistent with that existing prior to the
 
 Contractor commencing work and that it is consistent with the requirements of the
 
 Traffic Guidance Schemes;
 
  Supply and installation of Site access signs and all other traffic control signs as
 
 detailed in the Traffic Guidance Schemes;
 
  Supply and operation of traffic control devices;
 
  Supply and installation of temporary delineation of trafficked corridors;
 
  Supply, installation and operation of temporary traffic signals;
 
  Place electronic portable variable message signs at least 2m from edge lines;
 
  Supply and installation of temporary delineation where access to streets and side
 
 roads has been altered;
 
  Provide dust control;
 
  Maintain entrances and construction of alternative entrances (as necessary) to
 
 private properties;
 
  Provide Traffic Guidance Schemes;
 
  Provide any information required for public notices;
 
  Provide out-of-hours representatives;
 
  Include the design and construction of side-tracks where no separate item is provided
 
 for this work in the Schedule;
 
  Provide maintenance of trafficable surfaces, where specified;
 
  Supply and installation of temporary barriers;
 
  Supply and installation of temporary barrier end treatments;
 
  Provide maintenance and repair of barrier;
 
  Provide all other facilities for the safe passage of vehicular traffic through and around
 
 the Works; and
 
  Remove all temporary works and control devices used in the provisions for traffic;
 
  Ensure that all signs are erected on posts sunk in ground with 1.5m to underside of
 
 sign from ground level in accordance with AS1742.3 Clause 4.7.5.
 
 167.D2
 
 Supply and installation of temporary road lighting including connection to the Electricity Supply Authority's network (if ordered)
 
 Where required temporary road lighting shall include:
  Supply of all materials, plant and equipment  Installation and maintenance of temporary road lighting equipment; and  Removal of temporary equipment after permanent road lighting is installed or as
 directed by the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 10 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 167.D3
 
 Pedestrian Movements
 
 Where it is necessary to provide for pedestrian and/or cyclist access along or across portions
 of the work under the Contract, the Contractor shall provide such temporary pathways as necessary.
 
 The pathways shall be clearly delineated, signed and fenced to prevent easy access to the remainder of the work under the Contract.
 
 Signs shall be provided adjacent to the pathway to clearly indicate that access to the remainder of the work under the Contract is absolutely prohibited.
 
 Adequate illumination shall be provided during all periods of darkness.
 
 Where a large volume of pedestrian traffic has to cross the Site, consideration shall be given to directing pedestrians to suitably constructed and protected crossings.
 
 Special provision for pedestrians may be required where the direction of traffic flow is opposite to that normally expected.
 
 167.D4
 
 Rotating Yellow Lamps
 
 All construction vehicles being used on the work site shall have activated cab-mounted yellow rotating lamps fitted with a minimum 50W Halogen bulb.
 
 167.D5
 
 Fixed Multi Message Signs
 
 Fixed multi message signs (not electronic portable variable message signs) may be used in accordance with all other requirements of this Specification, Section 860, The Tasmanian
 Traffic Code of Practice and the following:  They shall only be used as a temporary sign during daylight working hours.  Colours and Legends shall be in accordance with AS 1742. A road safety message may be white on a blue panel using Class 2 sign material.
  Signs may be double sided.
 
 167.D6
 
 Delineation of the Traffic Path
 
 Delineation of the traffic path shall be in accordance with AS1742.3. Star pickets shall not be used as delineator posts.
 
 PART E - TEMPORARY ROAD SAFETY BARRIER SYSTEMS
 
 167.E1
 
 General
 
 Temporary road safety barrier systems shall be in accordance with Standard Specification R61
 Road Safety Barrier Systems and shall have recesses at their base to allow drainage at ground surface level to pass through.
 
 167.E2
 
 Types of Safety Barriers
 
 When a need for temporary barriers is identified, the barrier type shall be determined on the
 basis of the following considerations:  The type, shape, deflection performance and test characteristics of the barrier;  The speed of traffic travelling through the work site; and  The clearance between the traffic and the work area.
 
 The minimum clearance behind safety barriers to the work area shall be the greater of either the dynamic deflection of the product in accordance with AS1742.3 Clause 3.10 or as shown in Table 167.4  Minimum Safety Barrier Deflections to Work Areas, however when the work
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 11 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 is below the adjacent road surface the clearance is to be increased to that identified in the Risk Assessment.
 
 Where the use of Precast Concrete Barriers (PCBs) at intersections will create visibility problems for motorists to safely negotiate the intersection, the Contractor shall be permitted
 to use other approved barriers or devices as determined by the risk assessment.
 
 Steel Beam Safety Barrier (SBSB) may be used instead of PCBs in some locations subject to the approval of the Superintendent. SBSB will not be approved for temporary erection where
 posts have to be installed through pavements which remain part of the permanent works.
 
 Where identified as High Risk in the Risk Assessment opposing traffic shall be separated by an appropriate barrier except that the distance shall be measured from the edge lines of the
 opposing traffic flows.
 
 Safety barriers may be manufactured from either concrete or steel. Water filled plastic barriers shall not be used as safety barriers.
 
 Table 167.4  Minimum Safety Barrier Deflections to Work Areas
 
 Safety Barrier Type
 Precast Concrete or Steel Barrier  with Units connected by steel pin or equivalent2 and a 30 metre minimum length W Beam Guard Fence  with 2.5 metre post spacing
 
 Maximum intended posted speed limit during Roadworks
 (km/h)
 100 80 60
 100 80 60
 
 Minimum Clearance or No-Go Zone1 (metres)
 Refer Figure 167.E1.
 1.6 1.0 0.6
 1.5 1.0 0.5
 
 167.E3
 
 Safety Barrier Clearance
 
 The minimum clearance between the edge of traffic lanes and barriers shall be in accordance with AS1742.3 Clause 4.13.4 as indicated in Figure 167.1  Safety Barrier Clearances.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 12 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Figure 167.1  Safety Barrier Clearances
 
 Where possible, safety barriers should not be located behind kerb and channel so as to avoid
 the possibility of a speeding vehicle being launched into the air by the kerb and striking the top of the safety barrier and then rolling into the work area. Where the location of a safety
 barrier behind kerb and channel cannot be avoided, then the safety barrier should be located such that its front face is either:
  less than 0.5 metres behind the kerb; or  greater than 3 metres behind the kerb, but not more than 4 metres to avoid high
 angle impacts.
 
 The following lengths of safety barrier should generally apply:  Minimum - greater of 30 metres or minimum length specified by the safety barrier manufacturer.  Maximum  1000 metres (desirable), but may be more depending on a traffic management plan.
 
 In determining the location and length of safety barrier to be used, consideration should be given to the manufacturer's stated performance characteristics of individual safety barrier
 systems.
 
 167.E4
 
 Working Behind Barriers
 
 When barriers are in place, workers shall not work within the barrier deflection zone. Containment fences in accordance with AS1742.3 Clause 3.10 shall be placed behind the
 barrier to constrain the work areas beyond the likely deflection limits of the barrier if struck by a vehicle.
 
 167.E5
 
 On Site Storage
 
 Where temporary barriers are required, plant and materials shall be treated as a hazard and be protected.
 
 Where temporary barriers are not required, plant or materials shall not be stored less than 3 metres from the nearest edge of any traffic lane and any plant or materials stored overnight
 within 9 metres of the nearest edge of any traffic lane shall be delineated with warning lights adjacent to the traffic lanes.
 
 PART F - TEMPORARY BARRIER END TREATMENTS
 
 The ends of temporary barriers must be protected with a suitable approved end treatment.
 
 Temporary road safety barrier systems shall be in accordance with the requirements and principles of AS3845 and the State Growth design guide shall be adhered to for leading and trailing terminals, both gating and non-gating, whether redirective of non-redirective, for all road safety barrier systems.
 
 All proprietary and public domain terminal systems shall not extrude components towards the traffic lanes when impacted by a vehicle.
 
 PART G - TEMPORARY ROAD LIGHTING
 
 167.G1
 
 Provision of Temporary Lighting
 
 Where existing roadway lighting is provided, roadway lighting shall be provided at all times.
 Existing lighting shall not be removed until alternative temporary lighting is provided to at least the same standard as the existing lighting.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 13 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 167.G2
 
 Installation
 
 Where directed by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall install, operate and maintain temporary road lighting installations for the full period during which the relevant temporary roadway is in use and/or until the permanent road lighting is installed and becomes operational. Temporary road lighting shall be installed in the locations identified in the Risk Assessment or as otherwise directed by the Superintendent.
 
 PART H - PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
 
 167.H1
 
 General
 
 All worksites and types of work undertaken in the performance of the works shall be undertaken in accordance with this specification.
 
 167.H2
 
 Long Term and Bituminous Surfacing Work Sites
 
 The following requirements shall apply to "long term" worksites and bituminous surfacing
 operations only:  A delay shall be defined as the actual stoppage time measured from the time at which the first vehicle is stationary;  The duration of stopping for any vehicle shall not exceed 15 minutes where there has been advance warning to the public;  Where there has been no advance warning, the Contractor shall ensure that a stoppage time of 8 minutes is not exceeded.
 
 167.H3.
 
 Non-conformances
 
 A non-conformance shall be determined by the Superintendent and/or Contractor and shall include but not be limited to the following instances:
  Failure to maintain delineation as detailed in a Traffic Guidance Scheme;  Failure to maintain all signs as detailed in a Traffic Guidance Scheme;  Failure to maintain any other traffic control device detailed in a Traffic Guidance
 Scheme.
  Failure to maintain minimum travelled path dimensions;  Traffic delay periods exceeding any maximum period nominated in the Contract'  Failure to cover/remove unused signs and traffic control devices within two hours of
 completion of any revised traffic arrangement;
  Failure to provide the required notification to the community or local businesses of changes to traffic movement;
  Failure to use other than designated construction workplace entries or exits;  Failure to maintain a defect and obstruction free travelled path through areas subject
 to Traffic Guidance Schemes; and  Undertaking traffic rearrangement without a Traffic Guidance Scheme approved by
 the Superintendent.
 
 All non-conformances shall be remedied by the Contractor within two hours of receipt of written notice of the non-conformance. Failure to remedy any non-conformance within the two hour period shall entitle the Principal to carry out remedial work deemed necessary pursuant to The General Conditions of Contract.
 PART I - RECORDS
 The Contractor shall comply with the guidelines and procedures set out in Appendix A of AS1742.3.
 The Contractor shall develop ITP's, checklists and procedures as part of the Traffic
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 14 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth Management Plan which shall include the requirements of Appendix A of AS1742.3. All records are to be made available upon request and shall be included in the contract records.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 15 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 100.6 - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT DETAILS
 
 CONTRACT NO. CONTRACT NAME:
 TENDERER:
 
 1234 Main Road Intersection Upgrade
 The Civil Contractor Pty Ltd
 
 .1.1 (i)
 
 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT DETAILS REQUIRED AT TENDER
 
 None
 
 
 
 - How delays of less than 8 minutes, without Advance Warning will be
 
 achieved
 
 
 
 - Specification 167.H2 - For all sites.
 
 .1.2 (ii)
 
 
 
 -
 
 PEAK TIMES Length of turn pockets as part of temporary traffic management plans
 
 .1.3 (iii)
 
 EMERGENCY CONTACTS for advice (and record) to all Emergency
 
 Services of any planned event likely to cause delays with at least seven (7)
 
 days notice.
 
 Fire Services Tasmania
 
 Ph: (03) 6230 8420
 
 Ambulance
 
 Ph: 1800 008 008
 
 Police - Officer in Charge Ph: (03) 6336 3933 (North)
 
 (03) 6230 2260 (South)
 
 (03) 6230 2837 (East)
 
 (03) 6434 5215 (West)
 
 Fax: Fax:
 Fax: Fax:
 Fax: Fax:
 
 (03) 6234 1465 (03) 6230 8515
 (03) 6336 3887 (03) 6230 2261
 (03) 6230 2760 (03) 6434 5250
 
 The Contractor is responsible for establishing boundaries between districts.
 
 .1.4 (iv)
 
 EMERGENCIES ONLY  000
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 167 (Page 16 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 168 - OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGEMENT
 168.01 OUTLINE
 The management of Occupational Health and Safety (OH&S) by the Contractor is a key requirement of the Contract. The objectives are to:  provide and maintain a safe work environment;
  provide and maintain safe plant, systems of work, safe access and egress;
  provide for safety and health in the use, handling, storage or transport of plant or substances;
  provide suitable instruction, training and supervision; and
  provide and maintain adequate facilities.
 168.02 GENERAL
 Where work under the Contract is a `construction project' as defined in the Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 then, for the purposes of Chapter 6 of those Regulations, the Principal:
 (a) appoints the Contractor as the 'principal contractor' for the construction work performed on its behalf;
 (b) authorises the Contractor to manage or control the workplace to the extent necessary to discharge the duties imposed on a 'principal contractor' under the Regulations.
 The Contractor shall ensure compliance with its duties as a 'principal contractor' under the Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012. The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary approvals and for the co-ordination, implementation and other arrangements associated with site safety.
 ## (the following paragraph applies where the work under this Contract is Federally funded to the extent that the National Building Code applies and the contract value is $4 million or more strikethrough for all other projects) :The Contractor must maintain accreditation under the Australian Building and Construction WHS Accreditation Scheme (the Scheme) established by the Fair Work (Building Industry) Act 2012 (FWBI Act) while building work (as defined in Section 5 of the FWBI Act) is carried out. The Contractor must comply with all conditions of Scheme accreditation.
 168.03 THE HEALTH AND SAFETY CO-ORDINATION PLAN
 The Quality Plan for the works shall include the Contractor's requirements for the management of work health and safety during the various stages of the work under the Contract.
 The Quality Plan shall incorporate these requirements as a WHS Management Plan (WHSMP) in accordance with Part 6.4 of the Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 that must demonstrate for each stage of the work under the Contract, as a minimum, compliance with the requirements of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012, , its Regulations and the requirements of this Specification and the safety management plan checklist located in the appendices of this Specification and shall include but not be limited to:
 (a) procedures and responsibilities for the preparation, implementation and verification of the HSCP and thereafter for its monitoring and amendment, including requirements to ensure appropriate consultation in accordance with Part 5 of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012;
 (b) procedures and responsibilities to ensure that all personnel involved with the preparation and implementation of the HSCP are approprDiaetDpeealyprtatmrratemineet dno,tf eoSxftpaSetteraiteGenrcGoewrdotwhanthdAsuuAgpuegsrtuvsi2st0e21d06;16 SeScteioctnio1n6186(8Pa(gPaeg2e o1f o5f) 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) procedures to ensure that the public is not exposed to any health or safety risks/hazards as a result of the Contractor's operations;
 d) a procedure for securing and arrangements for managing the site and immediately reporting to the Superintendent and WorkSafe any (i) accident or incident affecting health and safety of any person, including, but not limited to incidents prescribed under the Work Health and Safety Act 2012, (ii) Provisional Improvement Notice (PIN) issued by an OH&S Representative;
 (e) a procedure for immediately reporting to the Superintendent any statutory notices, directions or recommendations from WorkSafe, including but not limited to Field Reports, Improvement Notices, Infringement Notices and Prohibition Notices;
 (f) a procedure relating to work in the vicinity of services (both overhead and underground). The procedure shall include the following elements  (i) underground services to be proved by appropriate methods which may include excavation, (ii) a request for the appropriate service authority/owner to attend the site, (iii) formats for the identification of the location of underground services;
 (g) a list of names, positions and responsibilities of all persons who will have specific responsibilities for health and safety including the name of a person, directly responsible to the Contractor's senior management, who has the defined responsibility for ensuring implementation of the HSCP;
 (h) emergency contacts including emergency services and other relevant authorities, and procedures to ensure after hours attendance at the site in the event of an emergency;
 (i) any site safety rules, with the arrangements for ensuring that all persons at the workplace are appropriately supervised and informed of the site safety rules including a site induction and training plan to ensure that all site personnel, including subcontractors, are aware of how the HSCP is to be implemented, including any possible emergency response procedures. The plan shall include personnel to be trained, training objectives, induction procedures and instruction on safe work method statements;
 (j) the arrangements for ensuring that all persons at the worksite are appropriately trained and supervised;
 (k) the arrangements for the co-ordination of the health and safety of persons engaged or employed in connection of the Works;
 (l) the arrangements to ensure that subcontractors comply with the requirements of the HSCP;
 (m) checklists to verify compliance with relevant standards and statutory requirements;
 (n) the requirement for all personnel to wear fluorescent high visibility jackets and other appropriate safety equipment at all times on the site;
 (o) procedures for trenching and excavation work when required.
 168.04 RISK / HAZARD ASSESSMENTS
 The Contractor shall undertake a risk/hazard assessment of each site/ work activity to determine the risks and treatments required to eliminate, or significantly reduce so far as is rbceoeansrseotcrnuoacrbdtlieyodnparwasocSrtkiac'faeabnlWed,ocrtokhpoMiseeestrhaiorsekdstS/ohtaabtzeeamsrduesbn.mtsiT,tthheedigDdhweeliitgtpahhailrttstihnmoegefHnStSthtaeCotPfermSitsotkea/nStthheteasecGzttaSirhooruandwptet1aahr6srisn8eete(sfAoPsnuramdgg`eeuhennsigt2tt.h2so0Trhfi1has4ek6l)l Safe Work Method Statements and Health and Safety Co-ordination Plans shall be available
 
 Department of State Growth
 on site for the duration of the works to enable audit and surveillance to be conducted.
 168.05 HEALTH AND SAFETY CO-ORDINATION PLAN AND DECLARATION
 (a) HSCP Preparation The Contractor shall be responsible for the preparation, implementation and other arrangements associated with the Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan (HSCP). The HSCP shall include, as a minimum, the requirements of the HSCP Checklist as included in the appendices of this Specification. The HSCP shall consider any other Contract specific requirements identified elsewhere in the Specification.
 HP The Contractor shall, not less than 10 working days prior to commencing work, submit to the Superintendent: (i) the Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan; and (ii) a completed VicRoads HSCP Checklist with Contractor's responses for each checklist item requirement.
 168.06 SURVEILLANCE AND AUDITS BY THE SUPERINTENDENT
 The Superintendent will arrange surveillance and audits to ensure that the Contractor is complying with the Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan.
 The Contractor shall, upon being given reasonable notice by the Superintendent, make or arrange to be available all facilities, documentation, records and personnel, including those of any sub-contractors, that are reasonably required for surveillance and audits to be undertaken.
 Notwithstanding that the Department of State Growth may have previously undertaken audits and/or surveillance of a sub-contractor's HSCP/Safe Work Method Statement in connection with other work, the Contractor shall include the operations of all such sub-contractors in the Contractors' Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan.
 The Department of State Growth will carry out audit and surveillance of the work of all sub-contractors as it sees fit, in the same way that it may carry out audit and surveillance of all work done and materials supplied by the Contractor. The Superintendent may for this purpose have recourse to audit and surveillance carried out for other Department of State Growth contracts. Copies of any such audit and surveillance reports used by the Superintendent will be provided to the Contractor.
 168.07 CONTRACTOR SIGNAGE AT WORKSITES
 (a) General
 In accordance with Section 308 of the Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012, the Principal contractor for a construction project must ensure that signs are installed, that
 (i) show the principal contractor's name and telephone contact numbers (including an after hours telephone number);
 (ii) show the location of the site office for the project, if any, and;
 (iii) are clearly visible from outside the workplace, or the work area of the workplace, where the construction project is being undertaken. Department of State Growth  August 2016
 No separate payment will be made for the provision, erection, mSaeicnttioena1n6c8e (aPnadgere3moofv4a)l of Principal Contractor signs.
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Sign Design and Materials The design and materials for Principal Contractor signs shall conform to and include the following:  black text on a white background;  background to be non-reflective or, at most, Class 2;  lettering in a series C font and complying with AS 1744 - Standard alphabets for road signs;
  text size to be 80 to 140 mm high for freeways and 40 to 100 mm high for all other roads;
  the company name or trading name;  the company phone number preceded by a pictorial representation of a phone or `Tel.';  the display of a company logo which is optional; and  the sign size should be appropriate for the text size and Contractor details. (c) Sign Placement Principal Contractor signs shall be placed clear of traffic management devices and shall not interfere with other signage. If there is a clear entry point to the work area these signs shall be located adjacent to said entry point; if there is no clear entry point these signs shall be located at the start of the work area. (d) Sign Display Principal Contractor signs shall be clearly visible and displayed for the duration of the works and maintained in good condition. For works consisting of maintenance activities and/or where work areas may be constantly moving, Principal Contractor signs must be clearly displayed on work vehicles. Signs displayed on work vehicles need not comply with the sign design and materials specified above but should be clearly legible from a distance of 40 metres.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 168 (Page 4 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 173 - EXAMINATION AND TESTING OF MATERIALS AND WORK (ROADWORKS
 173.01 GENERAL
 This section covers some of the requirements for examination and testing of materials and work associated with road construction. Particular examination and testing requirements are separately specified in the relevant sections of the specification. Unless otherwise specified, the cost of all testing shall be borne by the Contractor.
 173.02 LOT TESTING
 Unless otherwise specified, acceptance of material and work will be based on testing of the material or work in lots. A lot will consist of a single layer, batch or area of like work which has been constructed or produced under essentially uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance. Unless otherwise specified, the extent of each lot shall not exceed one day's production. Discrete portions of a lot which are non-homogeneous with respect to material and appearance shall be excluded from the lot and shall be either treated as separate lots, or reworked. Where the areas excluded from a lot as non-homogeneous exceed 10% of the total lot area or at other specified percentages of the total lot area, the whole of the lot shall be rejected.
 173.03 TEST ROLLING
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall submit a test rolling procedure to the Superintendent including the method of preparing an area for test rolling, the extent of test rolling and a requirement to provide not less than 24 hours notice of the location and commencement time for the test rolling to the Superintendent.
 Plant which is nominated for use in test rolling procedures shall comply with the following requirements:
 (i) Static smooth steel wheeled rollers shall have a mass of not less than 12 tonnes and a load intensity under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 6 tonnes per metre width of wheel.
 (ii) Pneumatic tyred plant shall have a mass of not less than 20 tonne and shall have a ground contact pressure under either the front or rear wheels of not less than 450 kPa per tyre. The area over which this ground contact pressure shall be applied shall not be less than 0.035 m2 per tyre. Each layer should be test rolled immediately following completion of compaction but if test rolling is carried out at a later time the surface of the layer shall be watered and given a minimum of three passes with the test roller prior to commencement of test rolling.
 (b) Compliance
 Compliance with the test rolling requirements shall be when an area withstands test rolling without visible deformation or springing.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 173 (Page 1 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 173.04 COMPACTION AND MOISTURE CONTENT TESTING
 
 (a) General
 
 For the purpose of control of moisture content of material and for determination of compaction procedure the following definitions shall apply:
 
 (i) material of nominal size 40 mm or less: material which has 20%
 (by wet mass) retained on a AS sieve.
 
 or less 37.5 mm
 
 (ii) material of nominal size greater than 40 mm: material which has more than 20%
 
 (by wet mass) retained on a
 
 37.5 mm
 
 AS sieve.
 
 (b) Definition of Density Ratio for Asphalt and Concrete Pavement
 Density ratio is defined as follows:
 (i) Asphalt Pavement The percentage ratio of the field bulk density to the bulk density of the job design mix when compacted in the laboratory.
 (ii) Concrete Pavement The percentage ratio of the field bulk density to the mean bulk density of cylinder specimens taken from the same lot.
 
 (c) Characteristic Value of Density Ratio or Moisture Ratio
 The characteristic value of density ratio or moisture ratio of the lot shall be calculated as x - 0.92S for six tests per lot wherex and S are respectively the mean and the standard deviation of the individual density ratio or moisture ratio test values respectively for the lot.
 The mean of density ratio or moisture ratio is defined by:
 
 The standard deviation of density ratio or moisture ratio test values is defined by:
 
 where xi, i=1, 2, 3, .....n, is the individual density ratio or moisture ratio test value and n is the number of tests per lot.
 (d) Testing Small Areas
 For earthworks and pavement construction any lot which has a surface area less than 500 m2 may be treated as a small area. When testing a small area as a lot and where test requirements are based on characteristic values of density ratio and/or moisture ratio, acceptance of the lot shall be based on the mean values of 3 individual tests. In this case the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean value of the individual tests exceeds by 2.0% or more the appropriate compaction scale requirement for the characteristic value of density ratio for a lot of six tests.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 173 (Page 2 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (e) Samples Containing Oversize Material with a Nominal Size Greater than 40 mm
 (i) Assessment Based on Characteristic Density Ratio
 If the set of six samples includes no more than two samples having more than the permitted amount of 40 mm nominal size material, the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean value of the individual tests exceeds the specified characteristic value of density ratio by 2.0% or more. If there are less than 4 valid samples, acceptance shall be based on the adoption of an acceptable compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with the requirement of this Specification.
 (ii) Assessment Based on Mean Density Ratio
 If the set of three samples includes one or more samples having more than the permitted amount of material exceeding 40 mm in nominal size, assessment shall be based on the adoption of an acceptable compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with the requirement of this Specification.
 (f) Refilling Test Holes
 The Contractor shall backfill test holes with material of similar quality to that removed from test holes during testing. The backfill material shall be compacted in the holes in layers with a suitable compaction device.
 (g) Moisture Ratio Determination
 For material of nominal size greater than 40 mm, moisture ratio shall be determined on that fraction of the material which passes the 19.0 mm AS sieve.
 For material of nominal size 40 mm or less, moisture ratio shall be determined on the whole material, taking into account any adjustment for oversize material as detailed in the relevant test method.
 (h) Acceptance Testing
 All compaction testing of work carried out under this Contract shall be deemed to be testing for acceptance unless written advice is provided to the Superintendent prior to the commencement of the test, that such testing is for in-process monitoring only. Where the Contractor provides prior written advice to this effect, the results of such testing will not be allowable as testing for acceptance.
 173.05 TESTING OF SURFACE LEVEL OF EARTHWORKS AND PAVEMENT COURSES (RANDOM LEVEL MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE)
 (a) General
 The requirements of this clause apply to:  the top of Type B material in fills;  the Cut Floor Level in cuts where Type A material is specified;  the finished surface of the subgrade; and  pavement courses where Scale A and Scale B surface level is specified by the random
 level measurement procedure in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 173 (Page 3 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Measurement of Surface Level Measurement of surface level will be made using a level accurate to 3 mm per 50 m of reading distance, with levels being recorded to the nearest 1 mm. Within each lot, level measurements shall be compared with the corresponding design levels and individual departures from design, xi shall be calculated as follows: the mean of the departures from design levelx , of n measurements will be determined to the nearest 0.1 mm as follows 
 the standard deviation, S, will be determined as follows -
 where xi = measured level - design level (mm).
 173.06 TESTING OF SURFACE LEVEL OF EARTHWORKS AND PAVEMENT COURSES (NON-RANDOM LEVEL MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE)
 (a) General The requirements of this clause apply to:  the finished surface of the top of Type B material in fills;  the Cut Floor Level in cuts where Type A material is specified;  the subgrade;  pavement courses where a non-random method of level assessment is permitted or where Scale C level assessment is specified.
 (b) Earthwork Formation The surface level of the finished earthwork formation including:  table drains;  verges;  the top of Type B material in fills;  the Cut Floor Level in cuts where Type A material is specified; and  the prepared subgrade; shall be checked longitudinally for conformity with the specified requirements at intervals not exceeding 20 m. Level measurements shall be taken and recorded at all changes in gradient, at the edges of prepared earthworks surfaces, designated lane lines and at intervals not exceeding 2 m transversely across the prepared surfaces prior to placing Type A material or pavement material.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 173 (Page 4 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth (c) Pavement Courses
 The surface level of each completed pavement course shall be checked longitudinally and transversely for conformity with the specified requirements at intervals not exceeding 20 m in the longitudinal direction. At each location checked for longitudinal level conformity, the surface level shall be checked in the transverse direction at all of the following locations:
 (i) at the edges of the pavement; (ii) at all changes of gradient across the pavement; (iii) at intervals not exceeding 2 m across the pavement. (d) Pavement Layer Thickness In cases where drawings showing the finished surface level are not provided but the thickness of pavement courses or resheet is specified, the Contractor shall determine the thickness of pavement courses or resheet by taking the difference between the surface level measurements recorded in accordance with the requirements of Clause 173.06(c).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 173 (Page 5 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 175 - REFERENCED DOCUMENTS FOR STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROADWORKS AND BRIDGEWORKS
 175.01 GENERAL
 This section provides a list of current companion documents referenced in the VicRoads Standard Specifications for Roadworks and Bridgeworks.
 The referenced documents in this section take precedent over any other referenced documents in other Standard Sections.
 175.02 DEPARTMENT OF STATE GROWTH STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR ROADWORKS AND BRIDGEWORKS SECTIONS
 The Department of State Growth Standard Specification Series referred to in this section are as follows:
 Section 100 Series  General Section 200 Series  Formation Section 300 Series  Flexible Pavements Section 400 Series  Asphalt and Surface Treatments Section 500 Series  Concrete Pavements Section 600 Series  Bridgeworks Section 700 Series  Incidental Construction Section 800 Series  Materials.
 175.03 HIERARCHY OF DOCUMENTS
 The following hierarchy of documents shall be used if there is conflict between any referenced documents and the specification whereby the higher listed documents shall take precedence over lower listed documents:
 Acts of Parliament and Regulations (Federal / Victorian) Contract Specific Clauses Standard Section 175 All other Standard Specification Sections VicRoads Codes of Practice and Bridge Technical Notes Australian Standards (except test methods) VicRoads Test Methods Australian Standards Test Methods Austroads Test Methods Other Standards and Test Methods VicRoads Technical Bulletins Austroads Guideline Documents and Guides Other Publications
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 1 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 175.04 APPLICATION AND ACCESS TO REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
 Acts of Parliament These documents shall be obtained through the appropriate level of Government, either Federal or Victorian and are statutory requirements referred in Standard Sections. A copy of the document can be viewed on the relevant Government web site. These documents are referenced in Table 175.051.
 Australian Standards Australian Standards are commonly referenced to reduce the size of the specification document. If only part of the Australian Standard is to apply, the relevant Standard Section will specify particular and/or alternative requirements. Whenever there is conflict between the Australian Standard and the Standard Section, the Standard Section shall take precedent over the Australian Standard. A list of current Australian Standards with a brief description of each can be viewed on the Standards web site http://www.standards.org.au/. These documents are referenced in Table 175.061.
 Australian Standard Test Methods Australian Standard Test Methods are also listed in this section and are to be used unless there is an applicable VicRoads Test Method listed. The Contractor is expected to become familiar with relevant Australian Standard Test Methods applicable to particular materials or groups of materials that are referenced by the Australian Standard or VicRoads Codes of Practice. Where there is choice of more than one Australian Standard Test Method, the Test Method to be used is specified in either VicRoads Code of Practice 500.05 or 500.16 or by separate reference within this section. Australian Standard Test Methods shall be obtained directly from Standards Australia, GPO Box 476, Sydney NSW 2001. A list of current Australian Standard Test Methods with a brief description of each can be viewed on the Standards web site http://www.standards.com.au/. These documents are referenced in Table 175.061.
 VicRoads Codes of Practice and Bridge Technical Notes VicRoads Codes of Practice and Bridge Technical Notes are companion documents to the VicRoads Standard Specifications and may or may not be referenced in the Standard Specifications. The Contractor is expected to obtain copies of the Codes of Practice or Bridge Technical Notes to be read in conjunction with the Standard Specifications. The relevant Codes of Practice or Bridge Technical Notes as applicable to each Standard Section are specified in this section. All current Codes of Practice and Bridge Technical Notes can also be accessed from the VicRoads website http://www.vicroads.vic.gov.au/. These documents are referenced in Table 175.071.
 VicRoads Test Methods All Testing Laboratories are expected to become familiar with the contents of the VicRoads Manual of Test Methods. The Test Methods to be used are specified in either VicRoads Code of Practice 500.05 or 500.16 or by separate reference within this section. VicRoads Test Methods, if applicable, shall take precedent over all other Test Methods. All current VicRoads Test Methods can be accessed from the VicRoads website http://www.vicroads.vic.gov.au/. These documents are referenced in Table 175.081.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 2 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Austroads Test Methods Austroads has produced a series of Test Methods for Bituminous Products. The Austroads Test Methods to be used will be either listed in this section or listed in VicRoads Code of Practice 500.16. If there is to be a variation in the Austroads Method, the variation will be described in Code of Practice 500.16 or in the relevant Standard Specification Section. The current Austroads Test Methods can be obtained from the Austroads Web Site http://www.austroads.com.au/. These documents are referenced in Table 175.091. VicRoads Technical Bulletins VicRoads has produced a number of Technical Bulletins. These or parts of these documents may form part of this Specification if referenced in the relevant Standard Section. VicRoads Technical Bulletins can be accessed from the VicRoads website http://www.vicroads.vic.gov.au/. These documents are referenced in Table 175.111. Austroads Guides and Specification Framework Documents Austroads has produced a number of specification framework and guideline documents listed in this section. These or parts of these documents may form part of this Specification as specified in the relevant Standard Section. Austroads Specification Framework and Guideline documents can be purchased from the ARRB Group, 500 Burwood Highway, Vermont South. These documents are referenced in Table 175.121. Other Documents and International Standards Other referenced standards, test methods and documents produced by organisations not mentioned above, are also specified in this section, e.g. ASTM, BS, ISO, RTA and APAS. These documents shall be obtained from Australian Standards or the relevant publishing authority responsible for the document. These documents are referenced in Table 175.101 (standards and test methods) and Table 175.131 (for other referenced documents).
 175.05 ACTS OF PARLIAMENT Table 175.051 lists the Acts of Parliament that are applicable to the Standard Specification Section contained in this Specification.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 3 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 175.051  Acts of Parliament Document
 A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999 Aboriginal Relics Act 1975
 Aboriginal Relics Act 1975
 Australian Government Building and Construction Occupational Health and Safety Accreditation Scheme Australian Government Building and Construction Occupational Health and Safety Accreditation Scheme Education Act 1994 Education Act 1994 Environmental Management and Pollution Control Act 1994 Environmental Management and Pollution Control Act 1994 Fair Work (Building Industry) Act 2015 Version incorporating amendments as at 27 November 2015 Fair Work (Building Industry) Act 2015 Version incorporating amendments as at 27 November 2015 Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995
 Work Health and Safety Act 2012
 Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012
 
 Standard Specification Section 160 160 176 177 176 177 168
 168
 160 160 160
 160
 168
 
 168
 
 176 177
 
 168
 
 602 713
 
 606 765
 
 608
 
 612
 
 613
 
 614
 
 622
 
 687
 
 688
 
 168
 
 606 713 820
 
 613 765
 
 614
 
 631
 
 681
 
 687
 
 688
 
 689
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 4 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 175.06 AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS
 
 Table 175.061 lists the Australian Standards (including test methods) that are applicable to the Standard Specification Section contained in this Specification.
 
 Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods)
 
 Australian Standard
 AS 1012 (series) : Methods of testing concrete Part 1 : 2014  Sampling of fresh concrete Part 2 : 2014  Preparation of concrete mixes in the laboratory Part 3 : 1998 (3.1:2014, 3.23.4 (R2014))  Determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete Part 4 : 2014 (4.1-4.3) - Determination of air content of freshly mixed concrete Part 8 : 2014 (8.1-8.2)  Method of making and curing concrete (Compression, indirect tensile and flexural) Part 9 : 2014  Determination of the compressive strength of concrete specimens Part 12 : 1998 (12.112.2 (R2014))  Determination of mass per unit volume of hardened concrete Part 13 : 2015 - Determination of drying shrinkage of concrete for samples prepared in the field or in the laboratory Part 14 : 1991  Method for securing and testing cores from hardened concrete for compressive strength Part 20 : 1992 - Determination of chloride and sulphate in hardened concrete and concrete aggregates Part 21 : 1999 (R2014) - Determination of water absorption and apparent volume of permeable voids in hardened concrete
 AS 1074 : 1989 - Steel Tubes and Tubulars for ordinary service
 AS 1101.3 : 2005 - Graphical Symbols for General Engineering - welding and non destructive examination
 AS 1111 (series) : ISO Metric Hexagon Bolts and Screws Part 1 : 2015 - ISO metric hexagon bolts and screws  Product grade C  Bolts Part 2 : 2015 - ISO metric hexagon bolts and screws  Product grade C  Screws
 AS 1112 - ISO Metric Hexagon Nuts Part 1 : 2015 Style 1 Product grades A and B Part 2 : 2015 Style 2 Product grades A and B Part 3 : 2015 Product grade C Part 4 : 2015 Chamfered thin nuts - Product grades A and B
 
 Standard Specification Section 503 607 703 520 610 708 521 619 711 683 730 684
 707 733 630 630 707 708 760 630 707 708
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 5 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 AS 1141 (series) : Methods for sampling and testing aggregates
 Part 3.1:2012  Sampling - Aggregates Part 3.2:2012  Sampling  Rock spalls and boulders Part 6.1:2000 - Particle density and water absorption of coarse aggregate  Weighing-in-water method) Part 11.1:2009/Amdt 1 - 2011  Particle size distribution  sieving method Part 15:1999 - Flakiness Index Part 17:2014 - Voids in dry compacted filler Part 18:1996/amdt 1 1998 - Crushed particles Part 20.3:2000 (R2013) - Average least dimension (nomograph) Part 22:2008 - Wet/Dry strength variation Part 23:2009 - Los Angeles Value Part 25.1:2003 (R2013) - Degradation factor source rock Part 26:2008 - Secondary minerals content in igneous rocks Part 28:2014 Ball mill value Part 30.1:2009 - Coarse Aggregate Quality by Visual Comparison
 AS 1160 : 1996 - Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements
 AS 1163 : 2009 - Cold-formed structural steel hollow sections
 AS 1170 (series) - Structural design actions Part 1:2002/Amdt 2:2009 - Permanent, imposed and other actions Part 2:2011/Amdt 3:2013 - Wind actions
 AS 1180 (Pt 1 to 3, 4A to 4B, 6) : 1972 - Methods of test for hose made from elastomeric materials - First group: Methods 1, 2, 3, 4A, 4B, 6
 AS 1180 (Pt 7A to 7D, 7F, 7G, 7J, 8A and 8B) : 1972 Methods of test for hose made from elastomeric materials - Second group: Methods 7A, 7B, 7C, 7D, 7F, 7G, 7J, 8A, 8B
 AS 1195 : 1973/Cor 1-1976 - Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) skived tape
 AS 1196 : 1973/Cor 1-1976 - Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) moulded sheet
 AS 1214 : 1983 - Hot-Dip Galvanized Coatings on Threaded Fasteners (ISO metric coarse thread series)
 AS 1237 : 2002 (series) - Flat Metal Washers for General Engineering Purposes (metric series)
 Part 1 : 2002 Amdt 1 2015 - Plain washers for metric bolts, screws and nuts for general purposes  General plan Part 2 : 2002 - Plain washers for metric bolts, screws and nuts for general purposes - Tolerances
 AS/NZS 1252 : 1996 - High Strength Steel Bolts with Associated Nuts and Washers for Structural Engineering
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 205 307 404 503 610 701 801
 
 290
 
 405 520 619 702 802
 
 407
 
 703 811
 
 408
 
 706 812
 
 409
 
 713 815
 
 410
 
 715 818
 
 417
 
 760 820
 
 418
 
 821
 
 421
 
 831
 
 423
 
 427
 
 407
 
 802
 
 408
 
 630 760
 
 613
 
 653 653
 
 653
 653
 630 707 653 708
 760 653 707
 
 630 653
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 6 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS 1275 : 1985/Amdt 1 1986 - Metric Screw Threads for
 
 751
 
 Fasteners
 
 AS 1289 (series) : Methods of Testing Soils for Engineering Purposes
 Part 2.1.1:2005  Moisture content - Oven Drying Part 2.1.6:2005  Moisture Content - Hotplate
 Part 3.1.1:2009  Amdt 1 2015 - Liquid Limit (std) Part 3.1.2:2009  Amdt 1 2015 - Liquid Limit (sub)
 Part 3.3.1:2009  Plasticity Index Part 3.6.1:2009  Grading
 Part 3.7.1:2002 (R2013)  Sand Equivalent Part 3.8.1:2006  Emerson class number
 Part 4.3.1:1997  pH Value of a soil Part 4.4.1:1997  Electrical resistivity
 Part 5.1.1:2003  Standard compaction Part 5.2.1:2003  Modified compaction
 Part 5.4.2:2007  assigned values of MDD and OMC Part 5.7.1:2006  Hilf density ratio and Hilf moisture
 ratio Part 5.8.1:2007  Field density and moisture
 content Part 6.1.1:2014  CBR
 Part 6.2.2:1998  Shear strength of a soil using a shear box
 Part 6.7.1:2001 (R2013)  Permeability Part 6.7.2:2001 (R2013) Permeability, Falling Head
 
 204 304 407 520 610 701 801
 
 205 306 423
 
 632 702 802
 
 210 307
 
 682 706 811
 
 290 308
 
 712 812
 
 310
 
 815
 
 818
 
 820
 
 821
 
 AS/NZS 1314 : 2003  Prestressing anchorages
 
 612
 
 AS 1319 : 1994 - Safety Signs for the Occupational
 
 612
 
 Environment
 
 622
 
 AS/NZS 1365 : 1996/Amdt 1 2014  Tolerances for flat-
 
 708
 
 rolled steel products
 
 AS 1366.3 : 1992/Amdt 1 1993 - Rigid cellular plastics
 
 613
 
 sheets for thermal insulation - Rigid cellular polystyrene
 
 614
 
  moulded (RC/PS - M)
 
 AS 1379 : 2007/Amdt 2 2015  Specification and supply of concrete
 
 503 610 703 619 704
 705 711
 760
 
 AS/NZS 1390 : 1997 - Cup head bolts with ISO metric
 
 707
 
 coarse pitch threads
 
 AS 1391 : 2007/Amdt 1 2012 - Metallic materials Tensile testing at ambient temperature
 
 680 708
 
 AS 1397 : 2011/Amdt 1 2012  Steel sheet and strip 
 
 860
 
 Coatings of zinc and zinc alloyed with aluminium and
 
 magnesium
 
 AS 1443 : 2004 - Carbon Steels and Carbon-Manganese Steels  Cold-Finished Bars
 
 630 760
 
 AS/NZS 1477 : 2006/Amdt 1:2009  PVC pipes and
 
 733
 
 fittings for pressure applications
 
 AS 1478.1 : 2000 - Chemical admixtures for concrete,
 
 520 610 703
 
 mortar and grout  Admixtures for concrete
 
 619 760
 
 683
 
 684
 
 689
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Section 175 (Page 7 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS 1478.2 : 2005 : Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout  Methods of sampling and testing
 admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout
 
 607 703 612 760
 619 683
 689
 
 AS/NZS 1554 (series)  Structural Steel Welding Code
 Part 1 : 2014/Amdt 1 2015 - Welding of steel structures
 Part 2 : 2003/Amdt 1: 2003 - Stud welding (steel studs to steel)
 Part 3 : 2014 - Welding of reinforcing steel Part 5 : 2014 - Welding of steel structures subject
 to high levels of fatigue loading Part 6 : 2012 - Welding stainless steels for
 structural purposes
 
 605 708
 608 611
 620 630
 632 640
 
 AS 1576 : 2010  Scaffolding  General requirements
 
 613
 
 AS 1580 (series)  Paints and related materials  Methods of test
 Part 108.2 : 2004 : Dry film thickness - Paint inspection gauge
 Part 214.5 : 1997 (R2013) : Consistency  Rotational viscometer
 Part 301.1 : 1997/Amdt 1 2006 : Non-volatile content by mass
 Part 408.4 : 2004 : Adhesion (cross-cut) Part 408.5 : 2006 : Adhesion - Pull-off test
 
 520 685 765 686
 
 AS/NZS 1594 : 2002 - Hot-Rolled Steel Flat Products
 
 614 708 630
 685
 
 AS 1597.1 : 2010 - Precast reinforced concrete box
 
 619
 
 culverts - Small culverts (not exceeding 1200 mm span
 
 and 1200 mm height)
 
 AS 1597.2 : 2013 - Precast reinforced concrete box
 
 619
 
 culverts  Large culverts (exceeding 1200 mm span and
 
 1200 mm height and up to and including 4200 mm span
 
 and 4200 mm height)
 
 AS 1604 (series) : Specification for preservative
 
 707
 
 treatment (series)
 
 765
 
 Part 1 : 2012  Sawn and round timber
 
 Part 2 : 2012  Reconstituted wood-based products
 
 Part 3 : 2012  Plywood
 
 Part 4 : 2012  Laminated veneer lumber (LVL)
 
 Part 5 : 2012  Glued laminated timber products
 
 AS 1627 (series) - Metal finishing
 Part 1 : 2003 - Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces  Removal of oil, grease and related
 contamination Part 2 : 2002  Power tool cleaning
 Part 4 : 2005 - Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces - Abrasive blast cleaning of steel
 Part 9 : 2002 - Pictorial surface preparation standards for painting steel surfaces
 
 631 705 653 708 685 765 686 688
 689
 
 AS 1646 : 2007 Elastomeric seals for waterworks
 
 701
 
 purposes
 
 AS 1672.1 : 1997 : Limes and limestones - Limes for building
 
 290 307 407
 
 610 704 815
 
 308
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Section 175 (Page 8 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS 1683 (series) : Methods of test for elastomers Part 11 : 2001 : Tension testing of vulcanized or
 thermoplastic rubber Part 12 : 2001 : Determination of tear strength
 (trouser, angle and crescent test pieces) Part 13 : 1992 : Compression set of vulcanized
 rubber under constant deflection Part 15.2 : 1990 : Durometer hardness
 
 AS 1720 : Timber structures Part 1 : 2010/Amdt 3 : 2015 Design methods
 Part 2 : 2006/Amdt 1 : 2006 Timber properties Part 4 : 2006 : Fire resistance for structural
 adequacy of timber members
 
 AS 1725.1 : 2010 - Chain-link security fencing and gates
 
 AS 1726 : 1993/Amdt 2 : 1994 : Geotechnical site
 
 204
 
 investigations
 
 AS/NZS 1734 : 1997 - Aluminium and aluminium alloys  Flat sheet, coiled sheets and plate
 
 AS 1742 (series) Manual of uniform traffic control devices 160
 
 Part 1 : 2014 General introduction and index of
 
 165
 
 signs
 
 166
 
 Part 3 : 2009 Traffic control for works on roads
 
 AS 1743 : 2001 : Road signs  Specifications
 
 AS 1744 : 2015 - Standard alphabets for road signs
 
 160
 
 168
 
 AS 1761 : 1985 : Helical lock-seam corrugated steel pipes (superseded) See AS/NZS 2014.4:2010
 
 AS 1762 : 1984 : Helical lock-seam corrugated steel pipes  Design and installation (superseded) See AS/NZS 2041.1:2011 (in part) and AS/NZS 2041.2: 2011 (in part)
 
 AS/NZS 1906 (series) Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes
 Part 1 : 2007 Retroreflective materials
 Part 2 : 2007 Retroreflective materials (non pavement application) Part 3 : 1992 Raised pavement markers (retroreflective and non retroreflective)
 
 166
 
 AS 1988.1 : 2006 : Welding of ferrous castings  Steel castings
 
 AS 2008 : 2013 - Bitumen for pavements
 
 308 407 408 427
 
 AS/NZS 2009 : 2006/Amdt 1 2007 - Glass beads for pavement marking materials
 
 AS/NZS 2041.1 : 2011 - Buried corrugated metal structures  Design methods
 
 AS/NZS 2041.2 : 2011 - Buried corrugated metal structures  Installation
 
 AS/NZS 2041.4 : 2010 - Buried corrugated metal structures  Helically formed sinusoidal pipes
 
 653 701
 613 708
 707 682 711
 860 714 860 750 751 714 860
 701 701
 709 853 710 860 711 712 721
 675 802
 721 632 632
 701 702
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 9 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS 2053 (series) : Conduits and fittings for electrical installations
 Part 1 : 2001 - General requirements Part 2 : 2001 - Rigid plain conduits and fittings of insulating material Part 3 : 1995 - Rigid plain conduits and fittings of fibre-reinforced concrete material Part 4 : 1995 - Flexible plain conduits and fittings of insulating material Part 5 : 2001 - Corrugated conduits and fittings of insulating material Part 6 : 2001 - Profile-wall, smooth-bore conduits and fittings of insulating material Part 7 : 2002 - Rigid metal conduits and fittings Part 8 : 1995 - Flexible conduits and fittings of metal or composite material
 AS 2062 : 1997 - Non-destructive testing - Penetrant testing of products and components
 AS 2074 : 2003 - Cast Steels
 AS 2082 : 2007 - Timber - Hardwood - Visually stressgraded for structural purposes
 AS 2144 : 2014 - Traffic signal lantern
 AS 2150 : 2005 - Hot mix asphalt - A guide to good practice
 AS 2157 : 1997 - Cutback bitumen
 AS 2159 : 2009/Amdt 1 : 2010 - Piling - Design and installation
 AS 2193 : 2005/Amdt 1 : 2006 - Calibration and classification of force-measuring systems
 AS 2205 : Methods for destructive testing of welds in metal
 Part 4.2:2003 : Fillet break test Part 5.1:2003 Macro metallographic test for crosssection examination
 AS 2239 : 2003 - Galvanic (sacrificial) anodes for cathodic protection
 AS 2271 : 2004/Amdt 1: 2006 : Plywood and blockboard for exterior use
 AS/NZS 2310 : 2002 : Glossary of paint and painting terms
 AS/NZS 2311 : 2009 : Guide to the painting of buildings
 
 733
 
 611
 
 675 707
 
 751
 
 407
 
 802
 
 427
 
 408
 
 802
 
 603
 604 605
 606 607
 608 640
 
 612 619
 622 680
 683
 
 611
 619 630
 
 681
 603 614 631 765
 685 765 686
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 10 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS/NZS 2312 : Guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by use of protective
 coatings Part 1: 2014 Paint coatings
 Part 2: 2014 Hot dip galvanising
 
 631 765 683
 685 686
 688
 
 AS 2334 : 1980 (R2015) - Steel nails - metric series
 
 707
 
 AS/NZS 2341 (series) : Methods of Testing Bitumen and
 
 408
 
 Related Road Making Products
 
 418
 
 Part 2:2015 Determination of dynamic viscosity by
 
 427
 
 vacuum capillary viscometer
 
 Part 3:1993 Determination of kinematic viscosity by
 
 flow through a capillary tube
 
 Part 4:2015 Determination of dynamic viscosity
 
 by rotational viscometer
 
 Part 8:1992 Determination of matter insoluble
 
 in toluene
 
 Part 10:2015 Determination of the effect of heat
 
 and air on a moving film of bitumen (rolling thin
 
 film oven (RTFO) test)
 
 Part 12:1993 Determination of Penetration
 
 (obsolescent)
 
 Part 13:1997 (R2013) Long-term exposure to heat
 
 and air
 
 Part 18:1992 Determination of softening point,
 
 ring and ball method
 
 AS 2353 : 1999 - Pedestrian push-button assemblies
 
 751
 
 AS 2423 : 2002 - Coated steel wire fencing products for
 
 707
 
 terrestrial, aquatic and general use
 
 AS 2439 (series) : Perforated plastics drainage and
 
 702
 
 effluent pipe and fittings
 
 Part 1 : 2007 : Perforated drainage pipe and
 
 associated fittings
 
 Part 2 : 2007 : Perforated effluent pipe and
 
 associated fittings for sewerage applications
 
 AS 2700 : 2011 : Colour standards for general purposes Note: Each colour has its own standard requirement -
 under AS 2700
 
 431
 
 631 765 860
 
 685
 
 686
 
 AS 2701.2 : 2001 (R2015) - Methods of sampling and
 
 607
 
 testing mortar for masonry constructions - Methods of
 
 sampling
 
 AS 2724.5 : 1987 - Ambient Air Particulate Matter -
 
 176
 
 Determination of impinged matter expressed as direction 177
 
 dirtiness, background dirtiness and/or area dirtiness
 
 (directional dust gauge method) (superseded)
 
 See AS/NZS 3580.10.2:2013
 
 AS 2758.1 : 2014 : Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes  Concrete aggregates
 
 610 701 801 619 703
 
 AS 2832 (series) : Cathodic protection of metals
 
 681
 
 Part 1 : 2015 Pipes and cables
 
 Part 2 : 2003 Compact buried structures
 
 Part 3 : 2005 Fixed immersed structures
 
 Part 4 : 2006 Internal surfaces
 
 Part 5 : 2008 Steel in concrete structures
 
 AS 2858 : 2008 - Timber - Softwood - Visually stress-
 
 707
 
 graded for structural purposes
 
 AS 2876 : 2000 - Concrete kerbs and channels (gutters)Department of State Growth  Aug7u0s3t 2016
 
 - Manually or machine placed
 
 Section 175 (Page 11 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 AS 2891 (series) : Methods of sampling and testing asphalt
 Part 1.1 : 2013 Sampling - Loose asphalt Part 1.2 : 2008 Sampling - Coring method Part 1.3 : 2008 Sampling - Asphalt from slabs Part 2.1 : 2014 Sample preparation - Mixing, quartering and conditioning of asphalt in the laboratory Part 2.2 : 2014 Sample preparation - Compaction of asphalt test specimens using a gyratory compactor Part 3.1 : 2013 Binder content and aggregate grading - Reflux method Part 3.2 : 2013 Binder content and aggregate grading -Centrifugal extraction method Part 3.3 : 2013 Binder content and aggregate grading -Pressure filter method Part 5 : 2015 Determination of stability and flow  Marshall procedure Part 7.1 : 2015 Determination of maximum density of asphalt - Water displacement method Part 7.3 : 2014 Determination of maximum density of asphalt - Methylated spirits displacement Part 8 : 2014 Voids and density relationships for compacted asphalt mixes Part 9.1 : 2014 Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt - Waxing procedure Part 9.2 : 2014 Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt - Presaturation method Part 9.3: 2014 Determination of bulk density of compacted asphalt - Mensuration method Part 10 : 2015 Moisture content of asphalt Part 11 : 2014 Degree of particle coating Part 13.1 : 2013 Determination of the resilient modulus of asphalt - Indirect tensile method Part 14.1.1 : 2013 Determination of field density of compacted asphalt using a nuclear surface moisture-density gauge - Direct transmission mode Part 14.1.2 : 2013 Determination of field density of compacted asphalt using a nuclear surface moisture-density gauge - Backscatter mode Part 14.2 : 2013 Determination of field density of compacted asphalt using a nuclear thin-layer density gauge Part 14.3 : 2013 Field density tests - Calibration of nuclear thin-layer density gauge using standard blocks Part 14.4 : 2013 Field density tests - Calibration of nuclear surface moisture-density gauge Backscatter mode Part 14.5 : 2014 Density ratio of compacted asphalt
 AS/NZS 3000 : 2007/Amdt 1 : 2009 - Electrical installations (known as the Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules)
 AS/NZ 3012 : 2010 - Electrical installations  Construction and demolition sites
 AS 3568 : 1999 : Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 308 404
 
 802
 
 405
 
 831
 
 407
 
 409
 
 410
 
 417
 
 418
 
 421
 
 423
 
 427
 
 681 711 733 751
 681
 
 408
 
 802
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 12 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS 3569: 2010/Amdt 1 : 2012 : Steel wire ropes 
 
 708
 
 Product specification
 
 AS 3580 (series) : Method for sampling and analysis of 176
 
 ambient air
 
 177
 
 Part 9.6 : 2015 Determination of suspended
 
 particulate matter - PM10 high volume sampler with
 
 size selective inlet - Gravimetric method
 
 Part 9.7 : 2009 Determination of suspended
 
 particulate matter - Dichotomous sampler  (PM10
 
 coarse PM and PM2.5) Gravimetric method
 
 Part 9.8 : 2008 Determination of suspended
 
 particulate matter - PM10 continuous direct mass
 
 method using a tapered element oscillating
 
 microbalance analyser
 
 Part 9.9 : 2006 Determination of suspended
 
 particulate matter  PM(sub)10(/sub) low volume
 
 sampler - Gravimetric method
 
 Part 9.11 : 2008/Amdt 1 : 2009 Determination of
 
 suspended particulate matter - PM10 beta
 
 attenuation monitors
 
 Part 10.1 : 2003 (R2014) Determination of
 
 particulate matter - deposited matter - Gravimetric
 
 method
 
 Part 10.2 : 2013 Determination of particulate
 
 matter  impinged matter - Gravimetric method
 
 AS 3582 (series) : Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement
 Part 1 : 1998/Amdt 1 : 1999 - Fly ash Part 2 : 2001 - Slag - Ground granulated iron blast-
 furnace Part 3 : 2002  Amorphous silica
 
 306 407 520 610 703 815
 
 307
 
 619 704 821
 
 308
 
 AS 3600 : 2009/Amdt 2 : 2013 - Concrete Structures
 
 701
 
 703
 
 704
 
 705
 
 707
 
 708
 
 711
 
 714
 
 AS 3610.1 : 2010 - Formwork for concrete  Documentation and surface finish
 
 603 703 613 711
 614 619
 
 AS/NZS 3678 : 2011 - Structural steel - Hot-rolled
 
 608
 
 plates, floor plates and slabs
 
 620
 
 630
 
 653
 
 682
 
 685
 
 AS/NZS 3679 (series) : Structural steel Part 1 : 2010 - Hot rolled bars and sections
 Part 2 : 2010 - Welded I sections
 
 503 611 705 630
 640 682
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 13 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS 3703.1 : 1989  Long-span corrugated steel
 
 632
 
 structures  Materials and manufacture
 
 AS 3703.2 : 1989  Long-span corrugated steel
 
 structures  Design and installation (Available
 
 Superseded) See AS/NZS 2041.1:2011 (in part) and
 
 AS/NZS 2041.2:2011 (in part)
 
 AS 3705 : 2012 Geotextiles - Identification, marking and general data
 
 205
 
 408
 
 683 702
 
 210
 
 AS 3706 (series) : Geotextiles - Methods of test
 Part 2 : 2012 - Determination of tensile properties Wide strip and grab method
 Part 4 : 2012 - Determination of burst strength California bearing ratio (CBR) - Plunger method
 Part 5 : 2014 - Determination of puncture resistance - Drop cone method
 Part 7 : 2014 - Determination of pore-size distribution  Dry-sieving method
 Part 11 : 2012  Determination of durability  Resistance to degradation by light, heat and
 moisture
 
 205
 
 408
 
 683 702
 
 210
 
 AS 3743 : 2003 - Potting mixes
 
 720
 
 AS 3750 (series) : Paints for steel structures Part 6 : 2009 Full gloss polyurethane (two-pack)
 Part 9 : 2009 Organic zinc-rich primer Part 13 : 1997 (R2013) Epoxy primer (two-pack)
 Part 14 : 1997 (R2013) High-build epoxy (two-pack Part 15 : 1998 (R2013) Inorganic zinc silicate paint
 Part 18 : 2002 (R2013) Moisture cure urethane (single-pack) systems
 
 631 707 653 708
 765
 
 AS 3799 : 1998 - Liquid membrane-forming curing compounds for concrete
 
 503 610 703 619 711 681 689
 
 AS/NZS 3845.1 : 2015 : Road safety barrier systems
 
 169
 
 711
 
 AS 3894 (series) : Site testing of protective coatings
 Part 3 : 2002 (R2013) Determination of dry film thickness
 Part 4 : 2002 (R2013) Assessment of degree of cure Part 5 : 2002 (R2013) Determination of surface
 profile Part 6 : 2002 (R2013) Determination of residual
 contaminants Part 10 : 2002 Inspection report  Daily surface and
 ambient conditions Part 11 : 2002 Equipment report
 Part 12 : 2002 Inspection report  Coating Part 13 : 2002 Inspection report  Daily
 Part 14 : 2002 Inspection report  Daily painting
 
 631 765
 
 AS 3972 : 2010 : General purpose and blended cements
 
 307 407 520 607 701 815
 
 308
 
 610 703 821
 
 612
 
 619
 
 683
 
 AS 3978 : 2003 : Non-destructive Testing - Visual Inspection of Metal Products and Components
 
 675
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 14 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 AS 4049 (series) : Paints and related materials  Pavement marking materials
 Part 1 : 2005 - Solvent-borne paint  For use with surface applied glass beads Part 2 : 2005 - Thermoplastic pavement marking materials  For use with surface applied glass beads Part 3 : 2005/Amdt 1-2006 - Waterborne paint - For use with surface applied glass beads Part 4 : 2006 - High performance pavement marking systems
 AS/NZS 4058:2007 - Precast concrete pipes (pressure and non-pressure)
 AS 4100 : 1998/Amdt 1:2012 Supp 1: 1999 - Steel structures - Commentary
 AS 4115 : 1993 Hand torque tools (see ISO 6789)
 AS 4130 : 2009/Amdt 1:2009 - Polyethylene (PE) pipes for pressure applications
 AS 4133.4.1 : 2007  Methods of testing rocks for engineering purposes  Rock strength tests Determination of point load strength index
 AS 4139 : 2003 : Fibre reinforced concrete pipes and fittings
 AS/NZS 4233.1 : 2013 - High pressure water jetting systems - Safe operation and maintenance
 AS 4373 : 2007 - Pruning of amenity trees
 AS 4419 : 2003 - Soils for landscaping and garden use
 AS 4454 : 2012/Amdt 1-2012 - Composts, soil conditioners and mulches
 AS/NZS 4455.1 : 2008  Masonry units, pavers, flags and segmental retaining wall units  Masonry units
 AS/NZS 4456 Masonry units, segmental pavers and flags  Methods of test
 Part.1 : 2003/Amdt 1:2004  Sampling for test Part 4 : 2003/Amdt 2:2009 Determining compressive strength of masonry units
 AS 4489.6.1 : 1997 - Test methods for limes and limestones - Lime index - Available lime
 AS 4534 : 2006 - Zinc and zinc/aluminium-alloy coatings on steel wire
 AS/NZS 4663 : 2013 - Slip resistance measurement of existing pedestrian surfaces (wet method)
 AS/NZS 4671 : 2001/Amdt 1:2003 - Steel reinforcing materials
 AS/NZS 4672 (series) Steel prestressing materials Part 1 : 2007 - General requirements Part 2 : 2007 - Testing requirements
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 408
 
 721
 
 701 733 613 630 660 683 733
 205
 701
 428
 720 750 720 720
 713
 713
 
 290 307 431
 
 815 707
 
 503 611 703 682 705 683
 612 622
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 15 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.061  Australian Standards (including test methods) ... continued
 
 Australian Standard
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AS/NZS 4678 : 2002/Amdt 2 : 2008 - Earth retaining
 
 683
 
 structures
 
 AS/NZS 4680 : 2006 - Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles
 
 503 611 703
 620 705 630 707
 631 708 632 714
 670 765 671
 675 682
 683 684
 
 AS 4738.1 : 2007/Amdt 1 2008 : Metal castings 
 
 675
 
 Ferrous sand moulded
 
 AS/NZS 4791 : 2006 : Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings
 
 705
 
 on ferrous open sections, applied by an in-line process
 
 AS/NZS 4792 : 2006 : Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings
 
 705
 
 on ferrous hollow sections, applied by a continuous or a
 
 specialized process
 
 AS/NZS 4801: 2001 : Occupational Health and Safety  160
 Management Systems  Specification with guidance for use
 
 AS 4848.1 : 2006 : Application specifications for coating
 
 631
 
 systems
 
 Single coat inorganic (ethyl) zinc silicate  Solvent-borne
 
 AS 5100 (series) : Bridge Design Part 3 : 2004/Amdt 1 2010 - Foundations and soil supporting structures Part 4 : 2004/Amdt 2 2010 - Bearings and deck joints (Appendix D) Part 5 : 2004/Amdt 2 2010 - Bridge design concrete Part 6 : 2004/Amdt 2 2010 - Steel and composite construction
 AS 5100.5 Supp 1-2008 Bridge design - Concrete  Commentary (Supplement to AS 5100.5 - 2004) AS 5100.6 Supp 1-2007 Bridge design - Steel and composite construction - Commentary (Supplement to AS 5100.6 - 2004)
 
 603 705
 604 715 605
 606 607
 608 610
 611 612
 613 614
 619 630
 640 652
 653 656
 660 671
 682 683
 689
 
 AS 5101.3.3 : 2008  Methods for preparation and
 
 307
 
 815
 
 testing of stabilized materials - Cement content of
 
 821
 
 cement stabilized materials
 
 AS 5101.4 : 2008 - Methods for preparation and testing
 
 306
 
 815
 
 of stabilized materials - Unconfined compressive
 
 307
 
 821
 
 strength of compacted materials
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 16 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 175.07 VICROADS CODES OF PRACTICE AND BRIDGE TECHNICAL NOTES
 
 Table 175.071 lists the VicRoads Codes of Practice and Bridge Technical Notes that are applicable to the Standard Specification Section contained in this Specification.
 
 Table 175.071  VicRoads Codes of Practice and Bridge Technical Notes
 
 VicRoads Codes of Practice
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 VicRoads RC 500.00 : December 2012 : Code of Practice for Source Rock Investigations
 
 610
 
 801
 
 812
 
 815
 
 818
 
 820
 
 VicRoads RC 500.01 : March 2014 : Code of Practice for
 
 404
 
 Registration of Bituminous Mix Designs
 
 405
 
 407
 
 409
 
 410
 
 417
 
 421
 
 423
 
 427
 
 VicRoads RC 500.02 : December 2012 : Code of Practice
 
 812
 
 for Registration of Crushed Rock Mix Designs
 
 815
 
 820
 
 821
 
 VicRoads RC 500.05 : March 2014 : Code of Practice for Acceptance of Field Compaction
 
 173 204 304 407 205 306 290 307 308
 
 682 701 706
 
 VicRoads RC 500.09 : December 2012 : Code of Practice
 
 408
 
 831
 
 for Testing Aggregates for Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing
 
 VicRoads RC 500.11 : September 2014 : Code of Practice 160
 
 for Surveillance and Testing of Materials and Work
 
 161
 
 162
 
 163
 
 VicRoads RC 500.16 : March 2014 : Code of Practice for
 Selection of Test Methods for Testing of Materials and Work
 
 160 204 304 407 503 610 701 801
 
 161 290 306
 
 682
 
 802
 
 162
 
 307
 
 811
 
 163
 
 308
 
 812
 
 815
 
 818
 
 820
 
 821
 
 831
 
 VicRoads RC 500.20 : March 2014 : Code of Practice for Assignment of CBR Strength and Percentage Swell to
 Earthworks Fill and Pavement Materials
 
 204 304
 
 682
 
 811
 
 812
 
 818
 
 VicRoads RC 500.23 : March 2014 : Code of Practice for
 
 290
 
 Lime Stabilised Earthworks Materials  Available Lime
 
 Content, Assignment of CBR and % Swell
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 17 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.071  VicRoads Codes of Practice and Bridge Technical Notes... continued
 
 Bridge Technical Notes
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 1999/002 V2.1  July 2010 - Design of Deck Joints for Road Bridges
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 1999/006 V2.1  July 2006 - Noise Barriers
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 1999/008 V1.1 June 2005 - Detailing of Reinforced Soil Facing Panels
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 1999/010 V1.0  January 2006 - Design criteria for large rectangular precast R.C culvert units
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2002/001 V1.1 June 2005 - Reinforcement of Deck Joints
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2002/002 V1.1 June 2005 - Procedures for Testing Pot Bearings
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2003/001 V1.1  March 2005 - Design of Laminated Elastometric Bearings
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2005/009 V2.0  September 2009 - Buried Corrugated Metal Structures
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2010/001 V1.1  November 2010 - Design of Steel Cantilever and Portal Sign Structures and High Mast Light Poles
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2011/001 V1.0 November 2010 - Bending, Splicing and Welding of Grade 500 Reinforcement
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2012/001 V1.0  May 2012 - Post Flood Management of Bridges
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2012/002 V1.0  October 2012 - Bonded Anchors
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2013/001 V1.1  September 2014 - Use of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Composites for Strengthening of Bridge Structures
 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 2014/002 V1.1  May 2015 - Design Parameters for Driven Piles
 
 Standard Specification Section 660
 765
 682
 610 611 620 626 660
 653
 656
 632
 760
 611
 750
 611 680 610 688
 605 610 611 620 630
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 18 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 175.08 VICROADS TEST METHODS
 
 Table 175.081 lists additional VicRoads Test Methods to be used that are not mentioned in VicRoads Codes of Practice 500.05 or 500.16.
 
 Table 175.081  VicRoads Test Methods
 VicRoads Test Method
 VicRoads RC 252.01 : March 2014  Slump Flow, T500 Time and J-Ring Passing Ability for Self Compacting Concrete (SCC)
 VicRoads RC 252.02 : June 2013  Determination of the Tensile Bond Strength of Concrete Repairs and Strengthening Systems
 VicRoads RC 253.01 : June 2013 - Determination of Aggregate Moisture Content and Estimated Free Water (Using Microwave or Hot Plate)
 VicRoads RC 316.00 : June 2013 - Density ratio and moisture ratio lot characteristics VicRoads RC 316.10 : 2013 - Selection of test sites within a test lot (random stratified sampling method)
 VicRoads RC 316.14 : June 2013 - Moisture Ratio Determination for Assessment of Dry-Back of Granular Pavement Materials
 VicRoads RC 317.01 : October 2012 - Surface Texture by Sand Patch VicRoads RC 317.03 : December 2012 - Stripping of Aggregate from Sprayed Seals
 VicRoads RC 330.01 : December 2012 - Cementitious Binder and Granular Additive Content for the Stabilisation of Pavement Materials VicRoads RC 330.02 : March 2014 - Determination of the Maximum Allowable Working Time for a Cementitious Binder VicRoads RC 330.03 : January 2013 - Decay Correction Factor for Granular Materials Stabilised with Cementitious Binder
 VicRoads RC 370.05: June 2013 - Degradation Factor Fine Aggregate
 VicRoads RC 372.01 : June 2013 - Coarse Aggregate Quality by Visual Assessment (see AS 1141.30.1)
 VicRoads RC 372.04 : June 2013 - Foreign Materials in Crushed Concrete
 VicRoads RC 374.01 : March 2014 - Polished Stone Value (based on BS EN 1097-8:2009)
 
 Standard Specification Section 610
 
 688 689
 610
 
 204 304 407
 
 682
 
 205 306 431
 
 308
 
 310
 
 310
 
 408
 427 428
 430 431
 
 306
 
 815
 
 307
 
 821
 
 308
 
 801
 812 815
 820 821
 
 407 520 408
 410 423
 427
 
 701 801 702 802
 812 815
 818 821
 831
 
 204
 
 820
 
 821
 
 407
 
 801
 
 430
 
 831
 
 431
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 19 of 30)
 
 Table 175.081  VicRoads Test Methods ... continued
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 VicRoads Test Method
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 VicRoads RC 376.03 : August 2014 - Potential Aggregate-Silica Reactivity (Accelerated Mortar Bar Method)
 VicRoads RC 376.04 : June 2013  Alkali Aggregate Reactivity Assessment using the Concrete Prism Test
 VicRoads RC 421.02 : November 2000 - Skid Resistance of a Road Pavement Using SCRIM
 VicRoads RC 422.03 : June 2001 - Pavement Roughness (Inertial Laser Profiler Method)
 VicRoads RC 422.06 : June 2001 - Pavement Roughness (ARRB TR Walking Profiler Method)
 VicRoads RC 423.02 : June 2004 - Measurement of Surface Levels of Pavement Layers (a generic spreadsheet is supplied with this method)
 VicRoads RC 423.03 : October 2002 - Ride Quality Pavement Construction (ARRB TR Walking Profiler Method)
 VicRoads RC 423.04 : October 2002 - Ride Quality Pavement Construction (Static Level Method)
 VicRoads RC 423.05 : October 2002 - Ride Quality Pavement Construction (Inertial Laser Profiler Method)
 VicRoads RC 424.01 : December 2012 - Determination of Retroreflectivity of Pavement Markings
 
 430 431 180
 180
 173 204 304 407 306 308
 180
 180 180
 
 610 610
 721
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 20 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 175.09 AUSTROADS TEST METHODS
 
 Table 175.091 lists Austroads Test Methods to be used that may not be listed in VicRoads Codes of Practice 500.05 or 500.16.
 
 Table 175.091  Austroads Test Methods
 
 Austroads Test Method
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 Austroads AGPT/T101 : March 2006 V2 : Method of
 
 404
 
 Sampling PMBs, Polymers and Crumb Rubber
 
 407
 
 410
 
 417
 
 421
 
 AGPT/T103 : June 2006 V1 : Pre-Treatment and loss of
 
 418
 
 Heating of Bitumen, Multigrade and Polymer modified
 
 Binders (Rolling Thin Film Oven (RTFO) test)
 
 Austroads AGPT/T143 : December 2010 V1 : Particle
 
 421
 
 Size and Properties of Crumb Rubber
 
 Austroads AGPT/T144 : March 2006 V1: Morphology of
 
 421
 
 crumbed rubber  Bulk density test
 
 (references ARRB AIR 286-3 table 11)
 
 Austroads AGPT/T221 : May 2007 V2 : Sampling of
 
 427
 
 Bituminous Slurry
 
 Austroads AGPT/T231 : January 2006 V2 : Deformation
 
 418
 
 resistance of asphalt mixes by the wheel tracking test
 
 Austroads AGPT/T232 : January 2007 V3 : Stripping
 
 409
 
 Potential of Asphalt  Tensile Strength Ratio
 
 Austroads AGPT/T235 : June 2006 V2 : Asphalt Binder
 
 404
 
 Drain Off
 
 410
 
 417
 
 Austroads AGPT/T236 : June 2005 V2: Asphalt Particle
 
 410
 
 Loss
 
 Austroads AGPT/T237 : June 2005 V1: Binder Film Index
 
 410
 
 Austroads AGPT/T251 : January 2010 V2: Ball
 
 310
 
 Penetration Test
 
 Austroads AGPT/T271 : May 2007 V2: Determination of
 
 427
 
 Set and Cure for Bituminous Slurry (cohesion test)
 
 Austroads AGPT/T272 : June 2005 V1: Determination of
 
 427
 
 Abrasion Loss of Bituminous Slurry (Wet Track Abrasion
 
 Test)
 
 Austroads AGPT/T274 : May 2015 V1 : Characterisation
 
 418
 
 of Flexural Stiffness and Fatigue Performance of
 
 Bituminous Mixes
 
 AG:PT/T530: May 2012 V4 Calibration of Bitumen
 Sprayers  General Introduction and List of Methods AG:PT/T531: November 2012 V4 Volumetric Calibration
 of Bitumen Pumps AG:PT/T532: November 2012 V3 Transverse Distribution
 by Fixed Pit Facility AG:PT/T533: November 2012 V4Transverse Distribution
 by Field Mat AG:PT/T534: April 2015 V5 Transverse Distribution by
 Portable Trough AG:PT/T535: November 2012 V4 Road Speed Calibration
 AG:PT/T536: November 2012 V4 Viscosity of Test Fluid
 
 308 408 427
 
 Austroads AG:PT/T537: June 2005 V1 Field Spread Rate
 
 408
 
 of Cover Aggregate
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Section 175 (Page 21 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 175.10 OTHER STANDARDS AND TEST METHODS Table 175.101 lists standards and test methods, other than VicRoads, Australian Standards or Austroads, published by other authorities or agencies and which are applicable to the Standard Specification Section contained in the Specification. These include ASTM, BS and RTA Test Methods. Table 175.101  Other Standards and Test Methods
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
 
 306
 
 811
 
 Wastewater, 22nd edition - water tests (series) : 2510 :
 
 307
 
 812
 
 2011 conductivity
 
 815
 
 Joint Publication:
 
 818
 
 AHPA American Public Health Association
 
 820
 
 AWWA American Water works Association
 
 821
 
 Water Environment Federation
 
 AS/CA S009 - 2013 3rd Edition : Installation
 
 733
 
 requirements for customer cabling (Wiring Rules)
 
 751
 
 Australian Technical Infrastructure Committee (ATIC)
 
 765
 
 ATIC-SP39 : September 2009 Fasteners for Structural
 
 Purposes
 
 Australian Technical Infrastructure Committee (ATIC)
 
 610
 
 ATIC-SP43 : March 2012 Cementitious materials for
 
 Concrete
 
 Australian Paint Approval Scheme Specifications -
 
 631
 
 (series)
 
 APAS 2908 : November 2003 Inorganic zinc coating for protection of steel
 
 APAS 2911/1 : May 2005 Polyurethane coating for protection of steel, standard durability
 
 APAS 2916/1 : June 2007 Organic zinc rich coating for protection of steel  primers
 
 APAS 2930 : December 2003 Single pack moisture cure urethane coating for the long term protection of steel
 
 APAS 2971 : December 2003 Epoxy two-pack durable primer for protection of steel in atmosphere
 
 APAS 2973 : December 2003 Medium build two-pack epoxy coating for the long term protection of steel in
 atmosphere
 
 APAS 0041/2 : October 2015 Road marking paint,
 
 721
 
 solvent borne
 
 APAS 0041/5 : October 2015 Road marking paint, water
 
 borne
 
 APAS 0042 : June 2014 Glass beads for pavement
 
 marking paint
 
 American Concrete Institute (ACI) 440.6M-08 : 2008
 
 683
 
 Specification for Carbon and Glass Fiber-Reinforced
 
 Polymer Bar Materials for Concrete Reinforcement
 
 ASTM A240/A240M-15bc : Specification for Chromium
 
 653
 
 and Chromium-Nickel Stainless Steel Plate, Sheet, and
 
 Strip for Pressure Vessels and for General Applications.
 
 Finishes specified in ASTM A480/A480M-15 :
 
 653
 
 Specification for General Requirements for Flat-Rolled
 
 Stainless and Heat-Resisting Steel Plate, Sheet, and
 
 Strip
 
 ASTM A802-95(2015) : Standard Practice for Steel
 
 675
 
 Castings, Surface Acceptance Standards, Visual
 
 Examination
 
 ASTM A820/A820M-11 : Standard Specification for SteeDl epartment of State Growth 68A4ug7u0s5t 2016
 
 Fibers for Fiber-Reinforced Concrete
 
 Section 175 (Page 22 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.101  Other Standards and Test Methods ... continued
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 ASTM A1059/A1059M08 : (2013) Standard
 
 683
 
 Specification for Zinc Alloy Thermo-Diffusion Coatings
 
 (TDC) on Steel Fasteners, Hardware, and Other Products
 
 ASTM B265-15 Standard Specification for Titanium and
 
 681
 
 Titanium Alloy Strip, Sheet, and Plate
 
 ASTM C295/C295M-12 : Standard Guide for Petrographic
 
 610
 
 Examination of Aggregates for Concrete
 
 ASTM C603-14 : Standard Test Method for Extrusion
 
 503
 
 Rate and Application Life of Elastomeric Sealants
 
 ASTM C679-15 : Standard Test Method for Tack-Free
 
 503
 
 Time of Elastomeric Sealants
 
 ASTM C793-05(2010) : Standard Test Method for Effects
 
 503
 
 of Laboratory Accelerated Weathering on Elastomeric
 
 Joint Sealants
 
 ASTM C794-15a : Standard Test Method for Adhesion-in-
 
 503
 
 Peel of Elastomeric Joint Sealants
 
 ASTM C 940-10a : Standard Test Method for Expansion
 
 683
 
 and Bleeding of Freshly Mixed Grouts for Preplaced-
 
 Aggregate Concrete in the Laboratory
 
 ASTM C1116/C1116M-10a(2015) : Standard
 
 705
 
 Specification for Fiber-Reinforced Concrete
 
 ASTM C1399/C1399M-10(2015) : Standard Test Method
 
 705
 
 for Obtaining Average Residual-Strength of Fiber-
 
 Reinforced Concrete
 
 ASTM C1609/C1609M-12 : Standard Test Method for
 
 705
 
 Flexural Performance of Fiber-Reinforced Concrete (Using
 
 Beam With Third-Point Loading)
 
 ASTM D5/D5M-13 : Test Method for Penetration of
 
 853
 
 Bituminous Materials
 
 ASTM D36/D36M-14e1 : Standard Test Method for
 
 853
 
 Softening Point of Bitumen (Ring-and-Ball Apparatus)
 
 ASTM D92-12b : Standard Test Method for Flash and Fire
 
 853
 
 Points by Cleveland Open Cup
 
 ASTM D412-06a(2013) : Standard Test Methods for
 
 520
 
 Vulcanized Rubber and Thermoplastic Rubbers and
 
 Thermoplastic Elastomers  Tension
 
 ASTM D792-13 : Standard Test Methods for Density and
 Specific Gravity (Relative Density) of Plastics by Displacement  (Method A)
 
 503
 
 705
 
 520
 
 ASTM D2171/D2171M-10 : Standard Test Method for
 
 853
 
 Viscosity of Asphalts by Vacuum Capillary Viscometer
 
 ASTM D2240-05(2010) : Standard Test Method for
 
 503
 
 Rubber Property  Durometer Hardness (standard
 
 520
 
 curing)
 
 ASTM D2628-91(2011) : Standard Specification for
 
 503
 
 Preformed Polychloroprene Elastomeric Joint Seals for
 
 520
 
 Concrete Pavements
 
 ASTM D2669-06(2012)e1 : Test Method for Apparent
 
 853
 
 Viscosity of Petroleum Waxes Compounded with
 
 Additives (Hot Melts)
 
 ASTM D2835-89(2012) : Standard Specification for
 Lubricant for Installation of Preformed Compression Seals in Concrete Pavements
 
 503 521
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 23 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.101  Other Standards and Test Methods ... continued
 
 Document
 ASTM D3822/D3822M-14 : Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Single Textile Fibers
 ASTM D4262-05(2012) : Standard Test Method for pH of Chemically Cleaned or Etched Concrete Surfaces
 ASTM D4263-83(2012) : Standard Test Method for Indicating Moisture in Concrete by the Plastic Sheet Method
 ASTM D4414-95(2013) : Standard Practice for Measurement of Wet Film Thickness by Notch Gages
 ASTM D5329-09 : Standard Test Methods for Sealants and Fillers, Hot-Applied, For Joints and Cracks in Asphaltic and Portland Cement Concrete Pavements
 ASTM D7205/D7205M-06(2011) : Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Fiber Reinforced Polymer Matrix Composite Bars
 BS 1881.208: 1996: Testing concrete. Recommendations for the determination of the initial surface absorption of concrete
 BS EN 1881: 2006: Products and systems for the protection and repair of concrete structures. Test methods. Testing of anchoring products by the pull-out method.
 BS 6319 : Testing of resin and polymer/cement compositions for use in construction.
 Pspaertci1m:e1n9s83 - Method for preparation of test Part 2 : 1983  Method for measurement of compressive strength Part 3 : 1990  Methods for measurement of modulus of elasticity in flexural and flexural strength Part 7 : 1985  Method for measurement of tensile strength
 BS 6744: 2001+A2:2009: Stainless steel bars for the reinforcement of and use in concrete. Requirements and test methods
 BS EN 1097-8 : 2009 - Tests for mechanical and physical properties of aggregate. Determination of the polished stone value (see RC 374.01)
 BS EN 10088 Stainless steels (series) Part 1 : 2014  List of stainless steels Part 2 : 2014  Technical delivery conditions for sheet/plate and strip of corrosion resisting steels for general purposes Part 3 : 2014  Technical delivery conditions for semi-finished products, bars, rods, wire, sections and bright products of corrosion resisting steels for general purposes Part 4 : 2009  Technical delivery conditions for sheet/plate and strip of corrosion resisting steels for construction purposes Part 5 : 2009  Technical delivery conditions for bars, rods, wire, sections and bright products of corrosion resisting steels for construction purposes
 
 Standard Specification Section 705
 686 685 686 685 686
 853
 683
 686
 686
 687 688 689
 611
 43 0
 61 1
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 24 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.101  Other Standards and Test Methods ... continued
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 ISO 9000:2015 - Quality management systems 
 
 16
 
 63
 
 Fundamentals and vocabulary
 
 0
 
 0
 
 ISO 9001:2015 - Quality management principles
 
 16
 
 AS/NZS ISO 9001:2008/Amdt 1:2012 - Quality
 
 1
 
 management systems - Requirements
 
 16
 
 ISO 14001:2015 - Environmental management systems 2
 
 ISO 19011:2011 - Guidelines for auditing management 16
 
 systems
 
 3
 
 ISO 17020:2012  Conformity assessment 
 
 16
 
 Requirements for the operation of various types of bodies 0
 
 performing inspection
 
 (standard governing NATA Inspection Services)
 
 ISO/IEC 17025:2005/Cor 1:2006 - General requirements 16
 
 for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories 0
 
 Technical Corrigendum 1
 
 16
 
 (standard governing NATA laboratories)
 
 1
 
 ISO 9223:2012  Corrosion of metals and alloys 
 
 16
 
 corrosivity of atmospheres  Classification,
 
 2
 
 determination and estimation
 
 16
 
 3
 
 17
 
 0
 
 ISO 6789:2003 Assembly tools for screws and nuts Hand torque tools - Requirements and test methods for design conformance testing, quality conformance testing and recalibration procedure - (see AS 4115)
 
 ISO 3549:1995 - Zinc dust pigments for paints  Specifications and Test Methods
 
 63 0 68 76 25
 66 0
 63 1
 
 ISO 8501 - Preparation of steel substrates before application of paints and related products -- Visual
 assessment of surface cleanliness. Part 1: 2007 Rust grades and preparation grades of
 uncoated steel substrates and of steel substrates after overall removal of previous coatings.
 Part 3: 2006 Preparation grades of welds, edges and other areas with surface imperfections.
 ISO 11127-6:2011 - Preparation of steel substrates before application of paints and related products  Test
 methods for non-metallic blast cleaning abrasives Determination of water-soluble contaminations by
 conductivity measurements.
 
 ISO 10319:2008 : Geosynthetics - Wide-width tensile
 
 68
 
 test
 
 3
 
 ISO 10321:2008 : Geosynthetics - Tensile test for joints/seams by wide-width strip method
 
 ISO 13431:1999 : Geotextiles and geotextile-related products - Determination of tensile creep and creep
 rupture behaviour
 
 AMSS8802D(December 2015) : Sealing Compound,
 
 52
 
 Temperature Resistant, Integral Fuel Tanks and Fuel Cell
 
 0
 
 Cavities, High Adhesion MIL S 8802F (September 1999)
 
 Status : cancelled.
 
 ANSI/MSS SP-55-2011: Quality Standard for Steel
 Castings for Valves, Flanges and Fittings and other Piping Components, Visual Method - Manufacturers
 Standardisation Society of the Valve and Fittings Industry
 
 67 5
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 25 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth Table 175.101  Other Standards and Test Methods ... continued
 
 Document
 RMS-NSW T534 : November 2012 : Residue on Sieving of Bituminous Material and Bitumen Emulsion RMS-NSW T865 : November 2012 : Non-volatile Content of Concrete Admixtures and Curing Compounds RMS-NSW T1005 : November 2012 : Recording the Infrared Spectrum of Materials
 RMS-NSW T1192 : November 2012 : Adhesion of sealant
 RMS-NSW T1193 : November 2012 : Accelerated ageing of cured sealant
 ATIC SPEC SP43 - 2012  Cementitious Materials for Concrete published by ATIC (Australian Technical Infrastructure Committee) and its immediate predecessor CCURG (Cement and Concrete Users Review Group)
 WTIA : Technical Note No. 5 (1994) : Flame cutting of steels
 
 Standard Specification Section 520 520 520 503 520 503 610
 630 670
 
 175.11 VICROADS TECHNICAL BULLETINS Table 175.111 lists the VicRoads Technical Bulletins either referenced in the Standard Sections or if not referenced, documents that may be used to obtain additional information.
 
 Table 175.111  VicRoads Technical Bulletins
 
 VicRoads Technical Bulletin
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 VicRoads TB 38 : April 2001 : Guide to the Selection and Design of Geotextile Reinforced Sprayed Seals
 
 VicRoads TB 40 : December 1995 : Pavement
 
 160
 
 Investigation  Guide to Inspection and Testing
 
 VicRoads TB 42 : June 2000 : Curing of Concrete
 
 VicRoads TB 45 : April 2004 : Bituminous Sprayed Surfacing Manual
 
 VicRoads TB 46 : November 2003 : Guide to Surveillance 160 of Structural Steelwork
 
 VicRoads TB 47 : November 2003 : Guide to Surveillance 160 of Precast Concrete (TB47 amendment No. 1062004V2)
 VicRoads TB 48 : November 2003 : Guide to Surveillance 160 of Protective Coatings of Structural Steelwork
 
 408
 610 703 408
 611 708 630 670 671 620 704
 630
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 26 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 175.12 AUSTROADS GUIDES AND SPECIFICATION FRAMEWORK DOCUMENTS
 Table 175.121 lists all Austroads Guides and Specification Framework Documents applicable to the Standard Section contained in this Specification and other relevant Austroads Guides for further information.
 
 Table 175.121  Austroads Guides and Specification Framework Documents
 
 Austroads Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 Austroads AGPT04B-14 : Guide to Pavement Technology
 
 410
 
 - Part 4B : Asphalt
 
 Austroads AGPT/T190 : 2014 : Specification Framework
 
 407
 
 for Polymer Modified Binders
 
 408
 
 410
 
 417
 
 Austroads AP-T26-03 : Guidelines and Specifications for
 
 427
 
 Bituminous Slurry Surfacing
 
 Austroads AP-T68-06 : Update of Spray Seal Design
 
 408
 
 Austroads AP-T236-13 : Update of Double/Double Design
 
 408
 
 for Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method
 
 Austroads AGRS 06-09 : Guide to Road Safety  Part 6: 160 Road Safety Audit
 
 175.13 OTHER REFERENCE DOCUMENTS
 Table 175.131 lists all other documents applicable to the Standard Specification Section contained in this Specification or required for further information.
 
 Table 175.131  Other Reference Documents
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 AASHTO Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware
 
 711
 
 (MASH-1) 2009
 
 AASHTO LRFD Specifications for Structural Supports for
 
 760
 
 Highway Signs, Luminaires and Traffic Signals
 
 1st edition 2015
 
 Catalogue No. 6427, Producer Price Indexes, Table 17, 199 3101 Road and Bridge Construction Victoria
 
 SAI Global Communications Cabling Manual  Volumes 1
 
 733
 
 and 2 May 2007
 
 751
 
 Volume 1 Handbooks, Codes and Regulations
 
 Volume 2 Standards
 
 Copies of the Standards
 
  AS/CA S009:2013 Installation Requirements for
 Customer Cabling (Wiring Rules); and
 
  AS/CA S008:2010:Amdt 1 2014 Requirements for
 customer cabling products.
 
 may also be downloaded from the Communications Alliance (CA) website free of charge.
 
 Australian Seed Federation - National Code of Practice for
 
 720
 
 Seed Labelling and Marketing, September 2013
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Document
 
 Department of StatSetaGnrdoawrtdh SpeAcuigfiucsatti2o0n1S6ection
 
 Australian and New Zealand guidelines for fresh and
 
 17S7ection 175 (Page 28 of 31)
 
 marine water quality: Volume 1 The Guidelines
 
 (October 2000) PIMC and NRMMC
 
 Volume 1 errata (June 2005)
 
 Table 175.131  Other Reference Documents ... continued
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 Country Fire Authority (CFA) - Roadside Fire
 
 752
 
 Management Guidelines (2001)
 
 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning 177
 (formerly Department of Sustainability and Environment) - Native Vegetation Revegetation Planting Standards
 (June 2006) Guidelines for establishing native vegetation for net gain accounting
 
 Department of Environment, Land, Water and Planning 177 (formerly Department of Sustainability and Environment)
 - Victoria's Native Vegetation Management  A Framework for Action (2011) : repealed May 2013,
 now Permitted clearing of native vegetation - Biodiversity assessment guidelines - September 2013
 
 Energy Safe Victoria (ESV) publications and safety alerts
 
 751
 
 Energy Safe Victoria (ESV)
 
 751
 
 (Office of Chief Electrical Inspector)
 
 Code of practice for safe electrical work, Low Voltage
 
 Electrical Installations 1997
 
 Energy Safe Victoria (ESV)
 
 752
 
 (Office of the Chief Electrical Inspector)
 
 Electricity Safety (Electric Line Clearance) Regulations
 
 2015
 
 Engineers Australia - Australian Runoff Quality
 
 176
 
 A guide to Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD)
 
 177
 
 (December 2015)
 
 EPA Publication No. 275 - Construction Techniques for
 
 176
 
 Sediment Pollution Control (May 1991)
 
 177
 
 EPA Publication No. 347 - Bunding (October 2015)
 
 176
 
 177
 
 EPA Publication No. 448  Classification of Wastes
 
 176
 
 720
 
 (May 2007)
 
 177
 
 EPA Publication No. 464.2 Guidelines for Environmental 176 Management - Use of Reclaimed Water (November 2003) 177
 
 EPA Publication No. 480 - Environmental Guidelines for
 Major Construction Sites (February 1996) International Erosion Control Association - `Best Practice Erosion and Sediment Control' (IECA, 2008)
 
 176 177
 
 EPA Publication No. 669 - Groundwater Sampling
 
 176
 
 Guidelines (April 2000)
 
 177
 
 EPA Publication No. 880 - Guideline for Environmental
 
 161
 
 Management: Spraying Bituminous Materials
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 (November 2002)
 
 Department of State GrowtShectAioungu1s7t52(0P1a6ge 28 of 30)
 
 Section 175 (Page 27 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 EPA Publication No. 960 - Doing it Right on Subdivisions - 176
 
 Temporary environmental protection measures for
 
 177
 
 subdivision construction sites (October 2004)
 
 Florabank Guidelines and Codes of Practice 
 
 720
 
 Florabank Model Code of Practice
 
 Florabank Guidelines Nos 1-10
 
 http://www.florabank.org.au/
 
 Table 175.131  Other Reference Documents ... continued
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 Industrial Waste Resource Guidelines (IWRG): Sampling 176
 
 and analysis of waters, wastewaters, soils and waste
 
 177
 
 IWRG701 (June 2009) (replaces EPA publication No 441)
 
 International Erosion Control Association (IECA
 
 176
 
 Australasia) - Best Practice Erosion and Sediment Control
 
 (BPESC) (2008)
 
 Melbourne Water (2005) Water Sensitive Urban Design 176
 
 Engineering Procedures: Stormwater
 
 177
 
 NCHRP Report 350, TRB 1993, Recommended
 
 711
 
 Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of
 
 Highway Features  Superseded by AASHTO Manual for
 
 Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH-1) 2009
 
 VicRoads Biodiversity Guidelines (2005)
 
 176
 
 177
 
 VicRoads Contaminated Land (Planning, Construction
 
 176
 
 and Maintenance) Guidelines
 
 177
 
 VicRoads Cultural Heritage Guidelines (2007)
 
 176
 
 177
 
 VicRoads Integrated Water Management Guidelines
 
 176
 
 June 2013
 
 177
 
 VicRoads ITS Group: Standard Drawings and
 
 751
 
 Specifications
 
 VicRoads Manual of Standard Drawings for Road Signs
 
 714
 
 November 2014, superseded by VicRoads Supplement to
 
 AS 1743 (2001) Road Signs - Specification
 
 VicRoads Road Design Guidelines
 
 711
 
 Standard Drawings for Roadworks
 
 720
 
 Final Drawing Presentation
 
 VicRoads Supplement to Austroads Guide to Road
 
 Design
 
 VicRoads Road Design Note 06-02C,Amdt 1 (May 2014) -
 
 711
 
 The use of wire rope safety barriers (WRSB)
 
 VicRoads Road Design Note 06-04G (May 2015) 
 
 711
 
 Accepted safety barrier products
 
 VicRoads Road Design Note 06-09 (October 2014)  Accepted frangible post systems
 
 Department of State Growth  Aug7u1s4t 2016 Section 175 (Page 29 of 30)
 
 Document
 VicRoads Road Design Note 06-10C (August 2015)  Accepted guide posts
 VicRoads Road Design Note 06-11A (August 2015)  Accepted retro-reflective sheeting materials
 VicRoads Road Management Plan - see Road Management Act and codes on VicRoads web site
 VicRoads Roads Structures Inspection Manual (RSIM) June 2014
 VicRoads Roadside Handbook See Road Management Act and codes on VicRoads website
 
 Department of State Growth Standard Specification Section
 709 860
 752 750 752
 
 Table 175.131  Other Reference Documents ... continued
 
 Document
 
 Standard Specification Section
 
 VicRoads Safety Requirements for Traffic Devices Works
 
 751
 
 on Traffic Signals and on Road Electrical and
 
 Communication Devices - see also Code of Practice
 
 Worksite Safety - traffic management and Office of Chief
 
 Electrical Inspector: Code of practice for safe electrical
 
 work
 
 VicRoads Supplement to AS 1742.3 (2009)
 
 165
 
 750
 
 166
 
 VicRoads Sustainability and Climate Change Policy
 
 176
 
 (2011)
 
 177
 
 VicRoads Technical Guidelines - Noise Guidelines -
 
 176
 
 Construction and Maintenance Works 2007
 
 177
 
 VicRoads Temporary Sedimentation Basin Design Tool
 
 176
 
 V1.03
 
 177
 
 VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2  Signs
 
 160
 
 709
 
 and Markings  (April 2014)
 
 711
 
 VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2, Chapter 6
 
 714
 
  Edition 3, December 2001
 
 721
 
 VicRoads Water Usage Policy - Refer to Sustainability and 176
 
 Climate Change Policy 2011, and Sustainability and
 
 177
 
 Climate Change Strategy 2010-2015
 
 Victorian Stormwater Committee
 
 177
 
 Urban Stormwater: Best Practice Environmental
 
 Management Guidelines
 
 Published by CSIRO Publishing
 
 Water Services Association of Australia publication
 
 701
 
 WSA 05-2013 Version 3.1  Conduit Inspection Reporting
 
 Code of Australia
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 175 (Page 30 of 30)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 176 - ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
 This section specifies the minimum environmental management obligations relating to the work to be constructed under this Contract. Additional contract specific requirements may be included in Section 100.
 PART A - ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PART B - WATER QUALITY PART C - AIR QUALITY PART D - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PART E - CONTAMINATED SOILS AND MATERIALS PART F - WASTE AND RESOURCE USE PART G - FUELS AND CHEMICALS PART H - NOISE PART I - FLORA AND FAUNA PART J - CULTURAL HERITAGE PART K - REPORTING
 PART A - ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
 176.A1 INTRODUCTION
 Works under the Contract shall be undertaken so that impacts on the environment are avoided or minimised. The Contractor shall ensure that the environmental objectives and measures outlined in the relevant State and Federal legislation are complied with. Where different objectives are nominated, the more stringent requirement shall be adopted.
 The Contractor shall prepare a project specific Environmental Management Plan for the management of activities that impact on the environment in accordance with the requirements of this section.
 ##(strikethrough the following paragraph where project is not identified as containing high environmental risk  seek advice from Environmental Sustainability):
 Work under the Contract includes activities which the Department of State Growth has assessed as having potentially high environmental risk. The Contractor shall ensure a strong focus on environmental management is maintained whilst executing the work under the Contract, including the provision of staff with environmental skills and experience to manage these risks.
 176.A2 DEFINITIONS
 Ancillary Work Area  an area outside the Limit of Works that is used by the Contractor to support the delivery of the project. This may include but is not limited to the establishment of site compounds, borrow areas and temporary sedimentation basins and temporary works.
 Contaminated Material  the presence of any chemical substance or waste that exists above the natural background level of the land or water and represents, or potentially represents, an adverse health or environmental impact.
 Cultural Heritage  protected objects and protected sites as defined in the Aboriginal Relics Act 1975 and heritage areas and places of historic cultural heritage significance as defined in the Historic Cultural Heritage Act 1995, including but not limited to, Aboriginal artefacts,
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 1 of 20)
 
 scarred trees, burial sites, and historic bridges and buildings.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 2 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Environmental Management Plan (EMP)  Contractor's document that provides:  an overview of the environmental management processes to be utilised for work under the
 Contract, including procedures to protect the beneficial uses of the environment; and  and details proposals/actions to be undertaken for the management of individual stages of
 work (defined by work activity and/or location) that impact on the environment.
 Environmental Incident  an event which results in or has the potential to result in the environmental requirements in this Contract being breached, and occurs at any location where works under the Contract are performed.
 Noise Sensitive Receptors  dwellings that may be affected by construction noise during the day such as aged persons homes, hospitals, schools, kindergartens, libraries and other noise sensitive community buildings.
 Rain Event  when rainfall results in an offsite discharge, and/or when onsite construction activities are ceased due to rain, and/or rainfall that is equal to or greater than the Rainfall Intensity Chart attached as Attachment A to this Section 176.
 Waterway  means a water resource as defined in the Water Management Act 1999
 Watercourse  means a river, creek or other natural stream of water (whether modified or not) flowing in a defined channel, or between banks, notwithstanding that the flow may be intermittent or seasonal or the banks not clearly or sharply defined, and includes; a) a dam that collects water flowing in any such stream; and b) a lake through which water flows; and c) a channel into which the water of any such stream has been diverted; and d) part of any such stream; and the floodplain of any such stream.
 but does not include; e) a channel declared by the regulations to be excluded from this definition; or f) a drain or drainage depression in the contours on the land which only serves to relieve
 upper land of excess water in times of major precipitation.
 176.A3 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLANS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the preparation, implementation and other arrangements associated with the Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMP shall include, as a minimum:
 (a) a statement of scope, purpose and environmental objectives
 (b) a schedule of environmental elements that are expected to be affected by the works under the Contract including an outline of proposed mitigation treatments and proposed timeframes
 (c) the identification of work activities and an assessment of their potential impacts and associated risks to onsite and offsite environmental receptors (e.g. community, land uses, watercourses, flora and fauna, cultural heritage, etc.) including times when the Contractor is not on site, including but not limited to matters covered in this specification
 (d) processes and responsibilities for -
  the implementation, onsite review and maintenance of EMP and associated controls
  reporting and investigation of environmental incidents or complaints relating to any environmental issue under the Contract
  an adaptive approach for the review and update of the EMP as works progress and/or following non-conformances, complaints, or previously unidentified issues
  after hours response including arrangements for containing environmental damage and attendance on site in the event of an emergency
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 3 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (e) legal and other requirements - details of approvals, licences and permits necessary to meet statutory requirements and associated conditions
 (f) competence, training and awareness - an induction and training plan to ensure that all site personnel (including subcontractors) understand the EMP and are aware how the EMP is to be implemented in relation to the works, including any possible emergency response procedures
 (g) operational control  the EMP shall document environmental procedures to manage all identified impacts and environmental protection requirements, including the requirements, where relevant, in Section 176 Parts B  H and any specific environmental requirements in Section 100. These procedures shall include inspection and monitoring
 (h) scaled drawings that clearly show the location and extent of environmental controls, modifications to existing control devices and monitoring locations
 (i) emergency preparedness and response - an emergency response procedure shall include processes for managing any environmental emergency on-site, such as contacting relevant stakeholders and clean-up of the site
 (j) nonconformity, environmental incidents and corrective and preventative action procedures
 (k) audit - a documented process for audit of the EMP against the contract requirements, including the effectiveness of on-site environmental protection measures.
 The EMP shall consider any other Contract specific requirements identified elsewhere in the Specification.
 
 HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review an EMP not less
 than two weeks prior to the commencement of work. Work shall not commence until:
 
 - the Superintendent is satisfied that the EMP meets the requirements of
 
 the
 
 specification for that stage of work
 
 - the controls detailed in the EMP relevant to that stage of work are implemented.
 
 Control measures identified in the EMP shall be installed prior to works commencing, or at the programmed timing for their implementation. Control measures shall be maintained in
 working order for the duration of the associated works.
 
 The Superintendent will undertake surveillance of the Contract and may arrange for audits of
 the EMP and may issue a non compliance report. If the Contractor does not take action within seven days of receipt of a non compliance report, remedial action may be arranged by
 the Superintendent and the cost of such remedial work shall be deducted from money due to the Contractor.
 
 176.A4 TRAINING
 Prior to commencement of works onsite, the Contractor shall ensure that all personnel are informed of the environmental issues and specific risks associated with the project and the required management and mitigation measures to address these risks.
 Prior to commencement of works onsite, the Contractor shall ensure that personnel directly involved in the implementation of the EMP and the installation and maintenance of control measures for this contract:
  have demonstrated competence and suitable experience in environmental management in a construction environment; or
  have successfully completed a nationally accredited training course which addresses management practices for erosion and sediment control (Green Card or equivalent).
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 4 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 5 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.A5
 
 PERMITS
 
 The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from the relevant authorities, other than those already obtained by the Department of State Growth. Copies of all relevant documentation relating to permits and approvals obtained by the Contractor shall be provided to the Superintendent within one week of their receipt and prior to any works relating to the permit commencing. Copies of all permits and approvals will be kept on site.
 
 The Contractor shall be responsible for implementing any conditions identified in any permits
 whether obtained by the Department of State Growth or the Contractor. All permits and associated conditions shall be identified in the EMP.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 6 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 PART B - WATER QUALITY
 
 176.B1 WATER QUALITY
 
 (a) General
 
 The quality of water in watercourses shall not be detrimentally impacted by runoff from the site.
 
 Water quality and rainfall shall be monitored for the parameters identified in Table 176.B1.01 during all stages of construction to ensure that the water quality in the receiving waterways:
  does not vary between the upstream and downstream limits of the works site during the period (where upstream results become the background limits), although a variation between results of no more than twice the measurement uncertainty of the instrument will be allowable; or
  is as agreed between the Contractor, the Superintendent and EPA.
 Table 176.B1.01 Construction Monitoring
 
 Parameter
 
 Method
 
 Turbidity - NTU
 
 Measure with on-site meter
 
 Electrical Conductivity (EC)  S/cm
 
 Measure with on-site meter
 
 pH
 
 Measure with on-site meter
 
 Dissolved oxygen (DO)  mg/L
 
 Measure with on-site meter
 
 Temperature - C
 
 Measure with on-site meter
 
 Litter (definition, including solid inert waste) Visual (prevent litter from entering waterways and drainage systems)
 
 Oils and Greases
 
 Visual (No visible free oil or greases)
 
 (b) Monitoring
 Monitoring shall be carried out in waterways and/or drainage infrastructure upstream and downstream of the limits of the site for each rain event as follows:  within one hour of commencement of rain event during working hours  every four hours for periods of continuous rain during working hours  within 12 hours of a rain event, outside working hours.
 
 (c) Dewatering
 
 Water quality monitoring shall be undertaken when dewatering ponded water to receiving waterways.
 
 The quality of ponded water to be dewatered to receiving waterways shall be not more than 10% greater than the turbidity of the water in the receiving waterways.
 
 ***
 
 The pH of ponded water to be dewatered shall be within 1.0 pH unit of the receiving
 
 waterways and shall be within the range of ##:6.4 - 7.7 / 6.5 - 8.3. ##(strikethrough
 
 the pH range that is not applicable, as defined in EPA Publication 960  Section 4.4
 
 Dewatering (Figure 37)):
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 7 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 8 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth PART C - AIR QUALITY 176.C1 DUST All work under the Contract shall comply with the following requirements:  dust generated from road construction activities shall not create a hazard or nuisance to
 the public, disperse from the site or across roadways, nor interfere with crops and stock or commercial or residential properties or other dust-sensitive receptors  emissions of visible smoke from construction plant and equipment shall be for periods no greater than ten consecutive seconds  emissions of odorous substances or particulates shall not create or be likely to create objectionable conditions for the public  materials of any type shall not be disposed of through burning  materials that may create a hazard or nuisance dust shall be covered during transport.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 9 of 20)
 
 PART D - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.D1 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
 The Contractor shall minimise the risk of soil erosion and sediment pollution of the site, adjacent land, and waterways, by defining and implementing erosion and sediment controls measures as part of its EMP.
 The control measures shall be developed with reference (but not limited) to the Environment Protection Authority's publications including EPA Publication No. 960 `Doing it Right on Subdivisions', EPA Publication No. 275 `Construction Techniques for Sediment Pollution Control', EPA Publication No. 480 `Environmental Guidelines for Major Construction Sites' and the International Erosion Control Association `Best Practice Erosion and Sediment Control' (IECA, 2008).
 The Contractor shall inspect all erosion and sedimentation control works at least once per week with additional inspections during a rain event as follows:
  within one hour of commencement during working hours
  every four hours for periods of continuous rain during working hours
  within 12 hours of a rain event outside working hours
  when runoff is leaving the site.
 Any defects and/or deficiencies in control measures identified by monitoring undertaken shall be rectified immediately and these control measures shall be cleaned, repaired and augmented as required to ensure effective control measures thereafter.
 
 176.D2 STOCKPILES
 Where soil is stockpiled on site it shall be located no less than 10 metres from watercourses. Where it is not possible to provide a clearance of 10 metres, the stockpile shall be above the normal high water level of the watercourses and protection shall be provided to prevent stockpiled material entering the watercourses.
 
 176.D3 MUD ON PUBLIC ROADS
 The Contractor shall take all steps necessary to prevent vehicles from trafficking and depositing mud and other debris on the surface of adjacent roads when entering and leaving the site. The cleaning of plant and equipment shall not impact on any other element of the environment.
 Any mud deposited on the road shall be removed immediately.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 10 of 20)
 
 PART E - CONTAMINATED SOILS AND MATERIALS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.E1 CONTAMINATED SOILS AND MATERIALS
 All work under the Contract shall comply with the following requirements:
  soils or materials shall not be contaminated as a consequence of work under the Contract
  materials imported to the site shall be free from contaminants
  contaminated materials shall only be reused on site through agreement and approval from the Superintendent and relevant regulators
  contaminated materials to be reused onsite shall be temporarily stored and managed to minimise any impact on the site or surrounding environment
  the transport and disposal of contaminated soils or materials offsite shall be undertaken in accordance with relevant legislation and relevant approvals and permits.
  contact with unexpected and potentially contaminated material, shall cause works to cease immediately. An exclusion zone shall be established and the Superintendent notified.
 
 REFER TO CONTRACT SPECIFIC CLAUSES FOR USE OF CONTAMINATED MATERIAL IN THE WORKS
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 11 of 20)
 
 PART F - WASTE AND RESOURCE REUSE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.F1 WASTE AND RESOURCE REUSE
 
 (a) General
 
 The generation of waste materials shall be managed in accordance with the hierarchy, of avoid, reuse, recycle or dispose of waste material. The Contractor shall be responsible
 for the management of any waste produced in performing the work under the Contract.
 
 Solid inert wastes may be reused when approved by the Superintendent.
 
 The Contractor shall also control the generation of wind blown litter, or litter spread by birds and animals, from disturbed material. This may include limiting the disturbed area
 or recovering material.
 
 All vehicles transporting waste shall be covered and appropriately licensed.
 
 (b)
 
 Monitoring
 
 The Contractor shall monitor the whole site for instances of inappropriate waste management or disposal at intervals of not more every 7 days.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 12 of 20)
 
 PART G - FUELS AND CHEMICALS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.G1 FUELS AND CHEMICALS
 (a) General
 Any leakage or spillage of any fuels or chemicals shall not have detrimental environmental impact.
 The Contractor shall include specific procedures to mitigate the effect on the environment from fuels and chemicals, including herbicides and pesticides. Such procedures shall include but not be limited to:
  nominated fuel and chemical storage areas that comply with the requirements under the Environmental Management and Pollution Control Act 1994, the Explosives Act 2012 and all applicable regulations made under those acts.
  the refueling and fluid top up of vehicles and plant shall be undertaken at least 20 metres from any drainage point or watercourses
  provision of readily accessible and maintained spill kits for the purpose of cleaning up chemical, oil and fuel spillages on the Site at all times
  ensuring that personnel trained in the efficient deployment of the spill kits are readily available in the event of spillages
  a contingency plan that shall address the containment, treatment and disposal of any spill.
 (b) Monitoring
 Fuel and chemical storages and equipment fill areas shall be monitored for compliance at intervals of not more than 7 days.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 13 of 20)
 
 PART H - NOISE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.H1 NOISE
 All work under the Contract shall comply with the following requirements:
  hours of work shall be between 7am and 6pm Monday  Friday, 8am  6pm Saturdays and 10am  6pm Sundays
  construction vehicles and equipment shall have appropriate measures fitted and be effectively maintained to minimise engine noise
  noisy equipment shall be enclosed where possible
  advise local residents in advance when unavoidable out-of-hours work will occur.
 The contractor shall obtain the Superintendent's approval prior to undertaking works outside of the above hours.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 14 of 20)
 
 PART I - FLORA AND FAUNA
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.I1 FLORA AND FAUNA
 (a) General
 All work under the Contract shall comply with the following requirements:  avoid, minimise and offset (where appropriate) the removal of native vegetation during
 construction  avoid injury to fauna or damage to protected vegetation or habitat  protect significant flora and fauna sites, species or habitat not previously identified.
 (b) Permits and Approvals
 Permits from relevant authorities shall be obtained prior to disturbance of flora/fauna sites or relocation of native fauna affected by works under the Contract. Works under the Contract shall comply with all permits and approvals and associated conditions.
 (c) Protection of Flora and Fauna
 Areas of existing vegetation and native fauna habitat identified to be retained, shall be identified as `No-Go Zones' and protected by temporary fencing and signage. No Signage is to identify the nature of the `No-Go' zone.
 HP Prior to removing any vegetation or habitat, the Contractor shall arrange an on- site inspection with the Superintendent and other relevant authorities to confirm and clearly identify and mark trees, vegetation or habitat to be removed. Any removal shall be consistent with the Contract drawings and any relevant permits and shall fence and sign all sites nominated as No-Go Zones.
 Plant, equipment, material or debris shall not be placed or stored within the limit of the root zone of the tree or vegetation to be retained.
 (d) Soil Compaction
 The Contractor shall avoid trafficking and compacting, or storing materials on soil in all areas that are currently vegetated and those areas to be re-vegetated.
 (e) Monitoring
 The Contractor shall undertake monitoring of the condition of flora and fauna habitat sites and protective measures at the site every 7 days.
 
 176.I2 WEED PEST AND DISEASE MANAGEMENT
 (a) General
 Declared weeds, pests and diseases (also referred to as pathogens) shall not be introduced to the Site, spread through the Site, or removed from the Site as a consequence of work under the Contract.
 The Contractor shall prevent the spread of declared weeds, pests and diseases within the Site and off-site through the implementation of controls that as a minimum shall include:
  treatment of declared weeds prior to the commencement of any ground disturbing activities
  response to their identification through monitoring of the site
  management of weed and soil pathogen potential within imported materials
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 15 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth  provisions for cleaning plant and equipment at the following times -
 - prior to arrival on Site - prior to departure from Site - prior to movement within the Site from infested to non-infested areas. (b) Monitoring The Site shall be monitored for the presence of weeds and pests. At intervals of not more than ##(7 days/ 14 days/ other):
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 16 of 20)
 
 PART J - CULTURAL HERITAGE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.J1 CULTURAL HERITAGE
 (a) General
 Cultural heritage sites and areas of cultural significance shall not be damaged, disturbed or otherwise adversely impacted unless an appropriate authorisation has been obtained.
 An Unanticipated Discovery Plan is required to ensure appropriate response in the event that an item, site or object of Aboriginal Cultural Heritage is discovered that could not have otherwise been anticipated.
 The following is a guide to the most common Aboriginal Cultural Heritage site types in Tasmania and will assist in identifying and managing the unanticipated discovery of Aboriginal Cultural Heritage sites and objects.
 Stone Artefact Scatters  A stone artefact is any stone or rock which has been modified by Aboriginal people. Often this is the result of fracturing or `flaking' fine grained rocks to produce sharp cutting or scrapping implements. The most common stone types utilised by Tasmanian Aboriginal people are silcrete and chert, on account of their availability and excellent tool making properties. However we also find hornfels, chalcedony, spongelite, quartzite and other stone types where locally available. In Tasmania, stone artefacts are typically recorded as being `isolated' (i.e. only one) or in a `scatter' (i.e. two or more within a 50m radius). Stone artefacts are found all over Tasmania, in all landscapes and situations, and are the most basic indicator of Aboriginal occupation.
 Shell Middens  Middens are occupational deposits created through an accumulation of debris from human activity. Midden sites can range in size from large mounds to small scatters of shell. The most common shellfish species found in middens in Tasmania are abalone, oyster, mussel, warrener and limpet, however they can also contain other debris such as animal bone, charcoal from campfires and discarded tools made from stone, shell or bone These sites are usually found near waterways and coastal areas.
 Rockshelters  Caves and rock overhangs which bear signs of human activity are, for the purpose of the Aboriginal Heritage Register (AHR), collectively called occupied rock shelters. Aboriginal people utilised these places for shelter, ceremony and other cultural practices, leaving behind occupational deposits such as middens and hearths, tools, or in some cases, rock markings. Rock shelters are usually found where the geology is conducive to the formation of caves and rock overhangs.
 Quarries or Stone Procurement Sites  A quarry is a place where material has been extracted from a natural outcrop by Aboriginal people. The two types of quarry recorded on the AHR are stone and ochre; each typically being located wherever suitable ochre for painting and decoration, or stone for tool-making appear. Quarries can be recognised by evidence of human manipulation, and by the debris left behind from processing the material. Quarries can be extensive or discrete, depending on the size and quality of the outcrop, and how often it was utilised and visited.
 Rock Marking  Rock marking is the term used in Tasmania to define markings on rocks, which are the result of Aboriginal practices. Rock markings come in two forms; engraving and painting. Engravings are made by removing the surface of a rock through pecking, abrading or grinding, whilst paintings are made by adding pigment or ochre to the surface of a rock.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 17 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Burials  Burial sites are highly sensitive places. They can occur anywhere, and have previously been recorded in sand dunes, shell middens and rock shelters
 (b) Protection of Values
 Areas of nominated archaeological and/or heritage values identified to be retained, shall be identified as `No-Go Zones' and protected by temporary fencing and signage. No Signage is to identify the nature of the `No-Go' zone.
 HP Prior to removing any vegetation, the Contractor shall arrange an on- site inspection with the Superintendent and other relevant authorities to confirm and clearly identify the arears of nominated archaeological and/or heritage values to be protected and shall fence and sign all No-Go Zones.
 (c) Unanticipated Discovery Plan
 The Contractor shall, as a minimum, comply with the following procedures which are provided as a guide to meeting the obligations established under the Aboriginal Relics Act 1975 and the Coroners Act 1995 in regard to dealing with unanticipated discoveries of Aboriginal Cultural Heritage such as sites and objects.
 The first section details the process to be followed should any Aboriginal Cultural Heritage item, site or object be discovered excluding skeletal remains (burials), while the second section details the process should skeletal remains (burials) be discovered.
 Discovery of Cultural Heritage Items Step 1: Any person who believes they have uncovered Aboriginal Cultural Heritage material should notify all employees or contractors that are working in the immediate area that all earth disturbance works must cease immediately. Step 2: A temporary `no-go' or buffer zone of at least 10m x 10m should be implemented to protect the suspected Aboriginal Cultural Heritage site or relics. No unauthorised entry or works will be allowed within this `no-go' zone until the suspected Aboriginal Cultural Heritage relics have been assessed by a recognised Aboriginal Heritage Practitioner. Step 3: Aboriginal Heritage Tasmania (AHT) in Hobart (ph 6165 3152) needs to be notified and consulted as soon as possible and informed of the discovery. AHT will then provide further advice in accordance with the Aboriginal Relics Act 1975.
 Discovery of Skeletal Material Step 1: Call the Police immediately. Under no circumstances should the suspected skeletal remains be touched or disturbed. The area must now be considered a crime scene. It is a criminal offence to interfere with a crime scene. Step 2: Any person who believes they have uncovered skeletal material should notify all employees or contractors that are working in the immediate area that all earth disturbance works must cease immediately. Step 3: A temporary `no-go' or buffer zone of at least 50m x 50m should be implemented to protect the suspected skeletal remains. No unauthorised entry or works will be allowed within this no-go' zone until the suspected skeletal remains have been assessed by the Police and or Coroner. Step 4: Should the skeletal remains be determined to be of Aboriginal origin, the Coroner will contact an Aboriginal organisation approved by the Attorney-General, as per the Coroners Act 1995.
 (d) Monitoring
 'No-Go Zones' are to be monitored at least weekly and immediately prior to and following activities with potential to impact the exclusion area.
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 18 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 19 of 20)
 
 PART K - REPORTING
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 176.K1 REPORTING
 
 (a) General
 
 All environmental monitoring results and all non-conformance reports relating to environmental performance and current status shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
 
 The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent copies of the data/information listed in Table 176.K1.01. This submission shall include both the data for the latest report and a
 summary of data collected to date under the Contract.
 
 Table 176.K1.01
 
 Data/Information
 
 Frequency
 
 Pollution Infringement Notices or Pollution Abatement Within 24 hours of receipt by the Contractor. Notices and/or any notices of prosecution.
 
 Statutory documents obtained by the Contractor as part of the project (e.g. permits).
 
 Within one week of receipt by the Contractor.
 
 Results of any air quality and water quality monitoring undertaken as part of the project.
 
 ##Monthly / At completion of Works / Other:
 
 Itemised fuel (diesel unleaded and LPG) use on-site ##Quarterly / At completion of Works / Other: by contractors and sub-contractors.
 
 (b) Notice of Authority Inspections
 The Contractor shall notify the Superintendent immediately should a regulator seek to enter a worksite for any purpose.
 
 176.K2 ENVIRONMENTAL INCIDENTS
 In the event that an environmental incident occurs in relation to the work under the Contract, the Contractor shall:
  take immediate action to avoid continuance of the incident (which may include cessation of work), and to minimise the effect of the incident on the environment
  immediately notify the Superintendent and EPA Pollution Watch (Tel. 1800 005 171) or other responsible authorities of the incident (or by 9am the next working day if the incident occurs outside of working hours)
  submit to the Superintendent for review an incident report within 7 days of the incident. The incident report shall include photographs where available and cover details of the incident, and the proposed corrective action to avoid a re-occurrence.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2017 Section 176 (Page 20 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 180 - RIDE QUALITY FOR PAVEMENTS
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 175, which should be included in the specification.
 If Section 175 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 180.01 GENERAL This section relates to ride quality performance for pavement construction. The locations specified in Table 180.091 are exempt from lot testing under this Contract.
 
 180.02 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
 The finished surface of the pavement shall have a smooth longitudinal profile and comply with the minimum ride quality requirements specified. The upper limits for roughness at various locations are specified in Table 180.092.
 
 180.03 DEFINITIONS
 Continuous Traffic Lane - A length of traffic lane which can be tested in a single test run uninterrupted by areas exempted from ride quality assessment.
 International Roughness Index (IRIqc) - The international measure of ride quality measured and recorded by modern Class 1 profile measuring devices in cumulative metres per kilometre in each wheel path and averaged together. For the purposes of this specification, roughness measurement is to be based on the IRIqc quarter car model.
 Individual Lane Roughness Value - The mean value of the two wheel path IRIqc values measured on a 100 m sub-section of a traffic lane.
 Mean Lane Roughness Value - The mean of the Individual Lane Roughness Values within the lot as determined by the appropriate test method.
 Measuring Device - The device used for measurement of roughness shall be:
 (a) capable of measuring the longitudinal road surface profile along one or both wheel paths at least every 250 mm with a precision in elevation of 0.5 mm over a wave band of 1 to 30 metres;
 (b) calibrated according to the relevant test methods.
 
 180.04 MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING OF RIDE QUALITY
 
 (a) Scope of Testing
 Unless noted otherwise in Table 180.091, the surface of all pavement construction shall be tested for ride quality.
 
 (b) Lot Testing
 
 All work shall be tested in lots of continuous traffic lane. A lot shall be defined as the
 
 length and width of each continuous traffic lane constructed including any freeway ramps
 
 but excluding shoulders and turn lanes. The Contractor shall provide 24 hours notice to
 
 the Superintendent of when ride quality testing will be undertaken and the limits for
 
 each lot.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Section 180 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The maximum length of the lot shall be restricted to 2 km of continuous traffic lane. The minimum length of the lot shall be the lesser of the total job length or 500 m.
 (c) Measurement of Ride Quality The Contractor shall measure the longitudinal road surface profile of each lot in accordance with the relevant Test Method applicable to the particular test equipment being used as listed in Section 175. Ride quality measurement shall be undertaken within three months after the application of the surfacing.
 *** ##(strikethrough if this paragraph not applicable):For contracts with a Defects Liability Period of two years or more, measurement of ride quality shall be repeated no earlier than three months or later than one month before the end of the Defects Liability Period.
 (d) Reporting of Test Results Results shall be processed and reported for each 100 m sub-section. Any sub-sections less than 100 m shall be included with the sub-section immediately preceding it and the individual roughness calculated over the longer sub-section. The Contractor shall provide the Superintendent with a copy of all test results representing the final roughness survey of completed pavement together with the calculated values of the individual and mean lane roughness for each lot.
 180.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
 The Contractor shall comply with the requirements for both the Maximum Individual Lane Roughness and Maximum Mean Lane Roughness as follows:
 (a) Individual Lane Roughness Where an Individual Lane Roughness Value in any 100 m sub-section is greater than the specified Maximum Individual Lane Roughness Value specified in Table 180.092, the Contractor shall rectify work within the sub-section to comply with this requirement. The minimum length of rectification work undertaken shall be 100 m. All rectified 100 m sub-sections shall be re-tested following completion of rectification work.
 (b) Mean Lane Roughness Where the Mean Lane Roughness Value of a lot is greater than the Mean Lane Roughness specified in Table 180.092, the work shall be rectified unless the Superintendent agrees to accept the work at a reduced payment. Where the lot is to be rectified, the minimum length for any rectification work undertaken shall be 100 m. Where the Superintendent agrees to accept the lot at a reduced payment, a deduction to the contract sum shall be made in accordance with Clause 180.06. The Contractor shall re-test the lot following completion of any rectification work.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 180 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 180.06 PAYMENT DEDUCTION PROVISIONS
 
 Where a deduction in payment is to be made for failure to comply with the specified Maximum Mean Lane Roughness for a lot, the deduction shall be made in accordance with the
 following formula:
 
 Deduction to Contract ($) =
 
 AxDxC 100
 
 Where: A = Area of lot in square metres.
 D = Percentage deduction as specified in Table 180.061 C = Unit Cost as specified in Table 180.093
 
 Table 180.061Percentage Deduction for Failure to Comply with the Specified Maximum Mean Lane Roughness Value
 
 Increase in IRI
 0.01 - 0.10 0.11 - 0.20 0.21 - 0.30 0.31  0.40 0.41  0.50 0.51  0.60 0.61  0.70 0.71  0.80
 > 0.80
 
 % Deduction
 1 2 3 4 5 6 8 10 Rectify
 
 180.07 PAYMENT RETENTION
 Where the Contractor is required to carry out measurement of ride quality within three months of the end of the Defects Liability Period, retention of payment shall apply.
 The amount of retention shall be calculated using the following formula:
 Retention ($) = 0.03 (A1 x C1 + A2 x C2 + . . . . . ) + E
 where: A1 = the total area of pavement with the same unit cost as shown in Table 180.093 C1 = the appropriate unit cost from Table 180.093 E = an amount equal to the value of deductions calculated using Clause 180.06 and the test results at Practical Completion
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 180 (Page 3 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 180.08 PAVEMENT RECTIFICATION
 The Contractor shall bear the full cost of any necessary rectification work including the cost of any additional work required to the underlying or adjacent pavement to comply with this section. All rectification work shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of the specification.
 
 180.09 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 (a) The locations shown in Table 180.091 are exempt from ride quality assessment. Table 180.091 - Locations Exempted from Ride Quality Requirement
 
 Serial
 
 Locations exempt from Ride Quality Assessment
 
 ##:
 
 ##include intersections, widenings etc. exempt from testing (refer to Guide Notes):
 
 (b) The ride quality to be achieved at each location is to be in accordance with Table 180.092.
 Table 180.092 - Standard of Ride Quality
 
 Location
 
 Maximum Individual
 Lane Roughness
 Value for any 100 m
 Subsection
 
 Maximum Mean Lane Roughness Value for Lot
 
 ##insert location:
 
 ##refer to Table A of
 Guide Notes:
 
 ##refer to Table A of
 Guide Notes:
 
 (c) The unit cost (C) to be used for calculation of any payment deduction made in accordance with the deduction provision specified in Clause 180.06 shall be in accordance with Table 180.093.
 Table 180.093 - Basis of Payment Deduction
 
 Location
 
 Unit Cost $ per sq m
 
 ##specify locations by pavement type:
 
 ##refer to Table B of Guide Notes:
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 180 (Page 34 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 199 - PROVISION FOR ADJUSTMENT OF CONTRACT SUM
 
 199.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section provides for the rise and fall adjustment of the value of the completed Works, valued on the basis of the Contract Sum, using the indices specified in this section.
 
 199.02 CONTRACTOR'S CLAIMS FOR PAYMENT
 Unless otherwise agreed to by the Superintendent, a payment claim submitted by the Contractor shall be for the full value of that part or parts of the Works executed up to and including the last day of the month for which the payment claim applies.
 
 199.03 PAYMENTS NOT SUBJECT TO RISE AND FALL ADJUSTMENT
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, payments made to the Contractor in respect of the following items will not be adjusted in accordance with this section:
 (a) any variations ordered by the Superintendent pursuant to Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract, except where the variations so ordered are valued at rates lodged with the tender;
 (b) items paid for under a Provisional Sum Item, except where valued at rates lodged with the tender, or as a Prime Cost Item;
 (c) payments made in regard to the return of retention money or security deposit;
 (d) that portion of any payment which represents charges for the provision of goods or services provided by the Department of State Growth;
 (e) payments made for rise and fall adjustments in accordance with this section.
 
 199.04 COST ADJUSTMENT FOR MATERIALS IN ROAD AND BRIDGEWORK CONTRACTS
 
 The adjustment (A1) for the monthly progress payment for both roadworks and bridgeworks
 contracts, including asphalt works, sprayed bituminous surfacing and maintenance contracts, shall be calculated from the following formula:
 
 A1 =
 
 Effective Value (EV)
 
 x
 
 Adjustment Factor (F)
 
 x
 
 Current Construction Index No. - Base Construction Index No. Base Construction Index No.
 
 (a) Effective Value (EV)
 The effective value in respect of each progress payment or final payment is the value of work included in the payment schedule, less:  the value of any work included therein on the basis of actual cost or current prices;  the value of any work which is not subject to rise and fall adjustment in accordance
 with Clause 199.03;  the value of any work which is subject to rise and fall adjustment on a different basis
 from that provided in this section;  the effective value of previous progress payments;
 and disregarding any previous increase or decrease in costs assessed under this section.
 
 (b) Adjustment Factor (F)
 F is the adjustment factor for the type of contract concerned (refer to Clause 199.07, Schedule of Details).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 199 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Construction Index Number
 The Construction Index Number is the Index published in the Australian Bureau of Statistics publication Catalogue No. 6427, Producer Price Indexes, Table 17, 3101 Road and Bridge Construction Victoria. In respect of index numbers published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), the first published index number, whether or not it is described as `preliminary', shall be used and no re-calculation shall be made on the basis of any subsequent revisions to the index number.
 The above ABS index is published quarterly. For the purpose of calculating rise and fall payments, the Department of State Growth will adopt, to two decimal places, a monthly index based on the third points of a linear interpolation between the published quarterly indices. The Construction Index Number so adopted shall apply across the whole of the month to which it refers.
 (d) Base Construction Index Number
 Is the Index Number of the month preceding the month in which tenders close.
 (e) Current Construction Index Number
 Is the Index Number applicable for the month immediately preceding the month during which the work is performed, or where the work, other than maintenance activities during the defects period, is undertaken more than one month following the Date of Practical Completion then it is the month in which the Date of Practical Completion falls.
 
 199.05 PRICE ADJUSTMENT FOR BITUMEN FOR SUPPLY AND PLACEMENT OF ASPHALT
 
 (a) Description
 This clause provides for the adjustment of the Contract Sum for rise and fall in the price of bitumen for the supply and placement of asphalt component of contracts and separate supply and place asphalt contracts.
 
 (b) Asphalt Bitumen Price Variation Adjustment (A2)
 The Contract Sum shall be subject to adjustments for variations in the price of bitumen used in the asphalt to be supplied under the Contract.
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the General Conditions of Contract, any payments made under Clause S18 of the General Conditions of Contract which are in respect of asphalt supplied subsequent to such increased or decreased bitumen prices coming into effect shall be adjusted by an amount determined by the following:
 
 A2
 
 =
 
 ( PL - PT )
 
 x
 
 mass (in tonne) of bitumen derived from the approved job mix design
 
 Where: PT = the price of Class 170 bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month in which tenders closed
 PL = the price of Class 170 bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month during which the work is performed, or the month in which the Date of Practical Completion falls where the works are performed more than one month into the defects period.
 The price of Class 170 bitumen shall be the suppliers published selling price.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 199 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 199.06 PRICE ADJUSTMENT FOR BITUMINOUS MATERIALS FOR SUPPLY OF BITUMEN FOR PRIMING, PRIMERSEALING AND SEALING
 
 (a) Description
 This clause provides for the adjustment of the Contract Sum for rise and fall in the price of bituminous material for supply of bitumen, priming, primersealing and sealing contracts, and the priming, primersealing and sealing component of contracts.
 
 (b) Sprayed Bituminous Material Price Variation Adjustment (A3, A4)
 The Contract Sum shall be subject to adjustments for variations in the price of bituminous material to be supplied under the Contract.
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the General Conditions of Contract, any payments made under Clause S18 of the General Conditions of Contract which are, in respect of bituminous material supplied, subsequent to such increased or decreased bituminous material prices coming into effect shall be adjusted by an amount of A3 or A4 as applicable, determined by the following:
 (i) where the price variation is in terms of mass and materials are supplied by mass:
 
 A3 = ( PL - PT ) x
 
 Mass (in tonne) of bituminous material supplied
 
 (ii) where the price variation is in terms of mass, and materials are supplied on the basis of volume at 15C:
 
 A4 =
 
 ( PL - PT )
 Average density of bituminous material (in litres per tonne at 15C)
 
 x
 
 Volume (in litres at 15C) of bituminous material supplied
 
 Where: PT = the price of Class 170 bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month in which tenders closed;
 PL = the price of Class 170 bitumen applicable for the month immediately preceding the month during which the work is performed, or the month in which the Date of Practical Completion falls where the works are performed more than one month into the defects period..
 The price of Class 170 bitumen shall be the suppliers published selling price.
 The term bituminous material includes bitumen, primer, primerbinder, flux oil, cutter and aggregate precoating oil.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 199 (Page 3 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 199.07 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 The price adjustment in any monthly progress payment under this section will be the sum of adjustments A1, A2, A3, and A4 as applicable. Adjustments applicable to the contract types are as follows.
 *** Table 199.071 Contracts in Excess of 12 Months Duration ## (strikethrough Serial (a) to (f) below as appropriate):
 If rise and fall applies it shall only be applicable after the first 12 months.
 
 Serial
 
 Component of Works
 
 a. Roadworks b. Bridgeworks c. Roadworks and Bridgeworks d. Asphalt Works e. Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing f. Maintenance Contracts
 
 Applicable Schedule 1 Items Subject to Rise and Fall
 ##:
 ##:
 ##:
 ##:
 ##:
 ##:
 
 Adjustment Factor F for Calculation of A1
 0.72 0.80 0.80 0.75 0.50 0.60
 
 *** Table 199.072 Contracts Involving Bituminous Surfacing of any Duration ## (strikethrough Serial (a) and/or (b) below as appropriate):
 
 Serial
 
 Component of Works
 
 a. Asphalt works
 b. Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing
 
 Applicable Schedule 1 Items Subject to Rise and Fall
 ##:
 ##:
 
 Price Variation Adjustment
 A2 A3 or A4
 
 199.08 INDICES PUBLISHED BY AUSTRALIAN BUREAU OF STATISTICS
 In the event that Index Numbers referred to in this section cease to be published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Superintendent will determine in consultation with the Contractor an appropriate substitute published index for the calculation of rise and fall payments for the remaining works under the Contract.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 199 (Page 4 of 4)
 
 SECTION 201 - SITE CLEARING
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 201.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for site clearing and grubbing and for the management of the materials generated.
 
 201.02 DEFINITION
 Clearing and Grubbing
 Clearing and grubbing is the removal within specified limits of:
 (a) vegetation such as trees, tree stumps, tree roots, logs, brush, noxious weeds and decayed vegetable matter
 (b) refuse such as pole stumps, rubbish dumps and sawdust piles resting on or protruding from the ground surface
 (c) obstructions such as concrete paving, concrete edgings, drainage pits, foundations, fences and disused structures, but not underground obstructions such as drainage pipes, service conduits and fuel tanks.
 
 201.03 LIMITS OF WORK
 
 Unless otherwise specified, the limits of clearing and grubbing shall be:
 
 (a) the whole length between the following chainages:
 
 ***
 
 ##(restrict this entry to one typed line):
 
 (b) the whole width between the outside edges of any batters, including any roundings, together with a further horizontal distance of 1 m beyond the outside edges of batters
 but not beyond the road reserve boundary or, where catch drains are required, to the outside edges of catch drains
 
 (c) not more than the width required for completion of the work under the Contract.
 
 201.04 CLEARING
 Unless otherwise specified, the area within the specified limits shall be cleared of all vegetation, refuse and obstructions down to natural surface. The Contractor shall not undertake any clearing work or any type of disturbance outside of the specified limits of work unless approved by the Superintendent.
 Trees shall be brought down in such manner as to avoid danger to personnel and traffic or damage to other trees, shrubs, structures or property outside the area being cleared or designated to be retained within the area being cleared.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 201 (Page 1 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Tree branches extending over the carriageway shall be trimmed to provide a clearance of at least 6 m above the carriageway surface. Where whole branches are to be removed, the Contractor shall use the three cut method which requires: (a) the under cut (b) the upper cut (further away from the trunk than (a) above) to remove the branch (c) the final trim cut which is to be cut close to the main trunk but outside the branch collar.
 201.05 GRUBBING
 In areas where excavation will be made, all vegetation, refuse and obstructions shall be totally grubbed or grubbed to a depth of not less than 0.3 m below the subgrade and batters, whichever is the lesser treatment.
 In areas to be covered by embankments, all vegetation, refuse and obstructions shall be grubbed to a depth of not less than 0.3 m below the stripped surface or not less than 0.6 m below the finished surface of the subgrade, whichever is the lesser treatment. In areas to be covered by embankments exceeding 1 m in height, foundations may remain if located or cut off not more than 0.4 m above the natural surface but not less than 1 m below subgrade.
 Pits which are no longer required shall be removed or broken back to a depth not less than 0.3 m below the finished surface of the subgrade. Remaining pipe openings shall be sealed with concrete. Any remnants of pits shall be backfilled with material and compacted to a density ratio of not less than 95%. The calculation of density ratio shall be based on Standard compactive effort.
 Holes resulting from grubbing shall be backfilled with material similar to the surrounding material and compacted to the same degree as the surrounding material.
 201.06 CLEARING AND GRUBBING AT BRIDGE AND CULVERT SITES
 Unless otherwise shown on the drawings, trees and stumps within 10 m of any portion of a proposed bridge, or proposed culvert having a waterway area greater than 6 m2, shall be cleared and grubbed.
 Clearing and grubbing at bridge and culvert sites shall conform to the other relevant requirements of this section.
 201.07 DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS
 (a) General Unless otherwise specified any salvageable materials shall become the property of the Contractor. Works under the Contract shall be carried out to wherever possible re-use materials generated from clearing and grubbing operations within the works area. Any materials which cannot be re-used on site shall be removed from the site. The Contractor shall not dispose of any materials by burning on site. Burying of materials on site shall only be carried out when permitted by the relevant authorities and approved by the Superintendent.
 (b) Trees Tree trunks and large branches shall be removed from the site. Small tree branches, shrubs and leaves, excluding noxious weeds, shall be disposed of by chipping and mulching to form mulch.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 201 (Page 2 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth 201.08 SURVEY MARKS During clearing and grubbing operations, care shall be taken not to disturb any survey marks.
 201.09 DAMAGE TO FENCES Any damage to fences shall be repaired immediately by the Contractor to a condition at least equal to that existing before damage and no additional payment will be made for this work.
 201.10 PROTECTION AND REMOVAL OF EXISTING VEGETATION (a) Protection of Existing Vegetation
 Prior to commencement of any work, the Contractor and the Superintendent shall conduct a joint inspection of the site to identify vegetation to be retained and protected. Existing trees, shrubs, native grasses and groundcovers and other areas of existing vegetation marked as `to be protected and/or retained' on the Drawings or as directed by the Superintendent shall be protected by temporary fencing and incorporated into the works by the Contractor. No earthworks, travel of equipment or storage compounds shall be established within 5 metres of the drip line of mature trees of trunk diameter greater than 200 mm. Construction of table drains within the drip line of roadside trees shall be undertaken with no disturbance beyond the line of the table drain and no damage to the canopy of the trees. (b) Protective Fencing Protective fencing shall consist of, as a minimum, star pickets with three strands of wire (top, middle and bottom) and parawebbing.
 201.11 SALVAGE OF VEGETATION The Contractor shall co-operate with the Department of State Growth and its agents by co-ordinating works under the Contract with activities involving the salvage of plants and the collection of cuttings and available seed from areas of native vegetation on the site.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 201 (Page 3 of 3)
 
 SECTION 204 - EARTHWORKS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 175, 205, 210, 290, 304, 702 and 720. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification.
 If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 204.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for forming and grading of earthworks including excavation, placement and compaction of topsoil, Type A, Type B, Type C, permeable, oversize and unsuitable materials, disposal of surplus materials, the trimming of batters, surface drains and formation, and the preparation of the final earthwork surfaces and subgrade.
 Rock fills shall be constructed in accordance with Section 205.
 Geotextiles in earthworks shall be in accordance with Section 210.
 Lime stabilisation of earthworks shall be in accordance with Section 290.
 Section 175 details the relevant references to Australian Standards (AS), Test Methods and Codes of Practice referenced in this section.
 
 204.02 DEFINITIONS
 Batter The uniform side slope of a cut or a fill.
 Batter Point The intersection of the batter with the natural surface disregarding any batter rounding.
 Boxing The space above the subgrade to be occupied by the pavement bounded by the subgrade level and the inside faces of the constructed verges, or unsealed shoulders.
 Capping A Type A material layer of low permeability placed immediately below the pavement subbase or selected material to minimise changes in moisture content in the material below the capping layer. Where a capping layer is provided, the top of this layer will typically be subgrade level.
 Catch Drain An open cut surface drain above a cut batter or below a fill batter to intercept and divert surface water to drainage outlets.
 CBR California Bearing Ratio.
 Cut Excavation below the natural surface level after removal of topsoil.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 1 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Cut Floor Level The theoretical level of the formation in a cut after completion of excavation to the underside of any capping or selected material. Where no capping or selected material is required, the cut floor level is subgrade level and the underside of pavement.
 Fill The compacted embankment placed above natural surface level after removal of topsoil.
 Fill Material Fill material includes:  Type A material  a superior quality material complying with the requirements of
 Table 204.041 and used principally as capping, selected material, structural material and/or verge material.  Type B material  a medium quality material that does not meet the requirements of Type A material, and is usually specified with a minimum CBR value.  Type C material  a lesser quality material that does not meet the requirements of Type A or Type B material, which may be used in Type C material zones of embankments as indicated on the drawings.  Rock Fill material  a material comprised of larger rock and rock fragments which may be used within Type B and Type C material zones at lower levels of high embankments in accordance with Section 205.  Permeable Fill material  self draining material, typically sand or aggregate.
 Formation The horizontal and vertical extent of the surface of the formed earthworks. The completed formation includes capping, selected material, verges, batters, batter roundings and table drains.
 Pavement Pavement shall consist of subbase, base and surfacing courses.
 Recycled Material Various products derived from resource recovery of: construction and demolition waste from building waste; reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP) from maintenance and rehabilitation activities; and reclaimed glass from the glass disposal industry blended to produce Type A, Type B, and Type C products.
 Rock Subgrade The surface prepared at or below subgrade level by trimming the otherwise undisturbed in situ floor for the full width of the cutting in consistent, medium to high or higher strength rock, as defined in Table A8 of AS 1726 (1993)  Geotechnical Site Investigations, and which is free of soil and loose material. Areas shall not be considered as a rock subgrade where they do not extend the full width of subgrade and for a continuous length of at least 200 m of a carriageway.
 Selected Material A Type A material layer placed immediately below pavement subbase to provide greater strength to support the pavement.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 2 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Silt A material with properties below the `A line' on the Plasticity Index (PI) / Liquid Limit (LL) graph per Table A1 in AS 1726 (1993).
 Structural Material A zone of Type A material that is placed at a bridge or a culvert structure or in other areas as specified and/or as shown on the drawings. Subgrade Subgrade is the trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement including shoulders is constructed.
 Subgrade Level The level of the prepared subgrade defined as follows:  On Fills  subgrade level is the level of the top of capping and/or selected material or
 where no capping or selected material is to be placed, the top of Type B material.  In Cuts  subgrade level is the level of the top of capping/or selected material or where no
 capping or selected material is to be placed, the cut floor level and the underside of pavement.
 Surface Drain An open drain to collect and drain surface water to drainage outlets.
 Surplus Material Material which is surplus to the total quantity of material required.
 Table Drain A surface drain adjacent to the shoulder or verge with an invert level designed to be lower than the top of the Type B material or the Cut Floor Level wherever possible.
 Topsoil The layer of fertile, organic soil immediately below natural surface or placed to the finished formation level outside areas to be paved.
 Unsuitable Material Material that is soft, excessively wet, unstable or otherwise not suitable for the specified use.
 Verge The portion of the formation between the outer edge of the shoulder and the start of the batter slope, or as detailed on the drawings.
 
 204.03 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 
 Earthworks shall be finished to conform to the levels, lines, grades and cross sections specified or shown on the drawings within the following limits:
 
 (a) Formation Width and Alignment
 
 The widths measured either side of the specified centreline or design line to the tops and
 
 toes of cut batters and fill batters shall be not less than the widths specified or shown on
 
 the drawings.
 
 DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt ooff SSttSSaaeetteeccttGGiioorrnnooww22tt00hh44 ((PPAAaauuggggeeuu32ssttoo22ff 0011119966))
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Formation Level and Shape (outside subgrade width, excluding batters)
 Verges shall be constructed such that they match the finished surface level at the outer edge of shoulder or pavement, or where installed the level of kerb and channel or concrete edgings.
 Both prior to and after completion of placement of topsoil, the level at any point on the surface outside those areas to be paved shall not differ by more than 50 mm from the specified level and the surface shall be free from depressions capable of retaining water. No point on these surfaces shall lie more than 25 mm below a 3 m straightedge laid on the surface.
 (c) Boxing Width and Alignment
 The boxing width shall not be less than specified or shown on the drawings and the edges of boxing shall not deviate by more than 50 mm from the designed offset from the centreline or design line.
 (d) Type A Material
 The thickness, width and shape of placed Type A material shall not be less than the specified thickness, width and shape at any point.
 (e) Type B Material immediately below Capping and/or Selected Material
 Where capping and/or selected material is to be placed on Type B material to subgrade level, the level at any point on the surface of Type B material immediately below capping and/or selected material shall not differ by more than 15 mm above or 30 mm below the specified level, unless assessment by random levelling is specified in which case the surface shall comply with Clause 204.03(h) and Table 204.161.
 (f) Cut Floor Level
 Where capping and/or selected material is to be placed above the Cut Floor Level to subgrade level, the level at any point on the surface of the Cut Floor Level immediately below capping and/or selected material shall not differ by more than 15 mm above or 30 mm below the specified level, unless assessment by random levelling is specified in which case the surface shall comply with Clause 204.03(h) and Table 204.161.
 Where capping and/or selected material is not required, the Cut Floor Level shall be prepared to the appropriate tolerance for the subgrade.
 (g) Subgrade Level and Shape
 The subgrade shall be constructed to the surface level requirements of either Scale A, Scale B or Scale C as nominated in Clause 204.16.
 Where Scale A or Scale B is nominated, the surface shall be assessed by random levelling and shall comply with the requirements of Clause 204.03(h). Where Scale C is nominated, random levelling is not required; however no point on the subgrade surface shall be more than 10 mm above or 30 mm below the specified level.
 For either Scale A, B or C level tolerances, the level at any point on the subgrade shall not lie more than 20 mm below a 3 m straightedge laid in any direction, except across a crown and water shall not pond at any point. Where the scale of testing has not been specified, Scale A of Clause 204.03(h) shall apply.
 (h) Random Level Assessment - Scale A and B Surface Level Requirements
 Level measurements shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with Section 173  Examination and Testing of Materials and Work (Roadworks). The number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in Table 204.031. Random level assessments of the surface shall be undertaken in lots not exceeding 4000 m2. Department of State Growth  August 2016
 Section 204 (Page 4 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The mean and standard deviation of the departures from the theoretical surface level within each lot shall meet the requirements of Table 204.031.
 Table 204.031 Minimum Number of Level Measurements and Tolerances
 
 Scale of Surface Level Measurement
 
 Minimum Number of Measurements
 per Lot
 
 Tolerance
 
 x Range (mm)
 
 Maximum S (mm)
 
 Scale A
 
 80
 
 +5 to -15
 
 12
 
 Scale B
 
 40
 
 +5 to -25
 
 15
 
 Notes:
 1. x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot
 2. S is the standard deviation of all level readings taken in the lot
 3. A negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive value designates a surface level above the design level
 
 (i) Batter Slope and Shape
 At any cross section the batter slope shall be not steeper than the slope specified. The batter face shall be finished to uniform shape.
 (j) Batter Line
 Cut batters shall be constructed so that the batter point is not more than 10% of the batter height outside the calculated batter line.
 Fill batters shall be constructed so that the toe of the batter is not more than 10% of the batter height outside the calculated batter line.
 The dimensions of batter rounding shall be within 10% of the dimensions shown on the drawings.
 On all sections beneath bridges, and on other sections where it becomes necessary to confine the lateral spread of the earthworks to closer limits due to site constraints, the tops of cut batters and the toes of fill batters shall be not more than 300 mm outside the calculated batter lines.
 (k) Surface Drains
 Surface drain invert levels and side slopes shall be finished to within 50 mm of the specified level at any point and shall be free from depressions capable of retaining water.
 
 204.04 MATERIALS
 Testing of materials shall be undertaken in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice 500.16.
 Materials shall meet the requirements described below:
 (a) Topsoil
 Topsoil placed on formations and disturbed areas shall be capable of supporting healthy, full cover of grass growth, be friable, contain organic material and unless further defined in Section 720, shall be free from subsoil, tree roots, clay balls, stones, rocks, rubbish, contaminants, weeds, pathogens and toxic levels of any element with a pH in the range of 5 to 8.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 5 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (b) Type A Material
 
 Type A material shall comply with the requirements of Table 204.041 and shall be free of topsoil, deleterious and/or perishable matter.
 
 HP Material classified as silt, either before or after compaction, is not acceptable
 as Type A material without stabilisation to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 
 *** Table 204.041
 
 Location and Use of
 Type A Material
 
 Physical Properties
 
 Assigned CBR
 (min) % (1)
 
 Swell % (1)
 
 Permeability (max) m/s (2)
 
 Limits of Grading (% passing by mass) Post Compaction Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 75.0
 
 37.5
 
 4.75
 
 0.425 0.075
 
 PI x % passing 0.425 mm Post
 Compaction (max)
 
 PI Range Post
 Compactio n
 
 Capping Layer
 
 ##:6  1.5
 
 5 x 10-9
 
 ##:100 ##:- ##:40-80 ##:- ##:10-40
 
 ##:1000
 
 ##:6-25
 
 Selected Material
 
 ##:6  1.5 Not Applicable ##:100 ##:- ##:40-80 ##:- ##:10-40
 
 ##:1000
 
 ##:6-25
 
 Verge Material
 
 ##:6  1.0
 
 5 x 10-9
 
 ##:100 ##:- ##:40-80 ##:- ##:10-40
 
 ##:1000
 
 ##:6-25
 
 Structural Material
 
 ##:6  1.5 Not Applicable ##:100 ##:- ##:40-80 ##:- ##:10-40
 
 ##:1000
 
 ##:6-25
 
 Other Type A Material
 
 ##:6  1.5 Not Applicable ##:100 ##:- ##:40-80 ##:- ##:10-40
 
 ##:1000
 
 ##:6-25
 
 ##:
 
 Notes: (1) The Assigned CBR and percentage swell values are to be determined in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC 500.20. Sampling for CBR testing shall be undertaken after field compaction.
 (2) The permeability value is to be determined in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC 500.16. The permeability value is to be determined on specimens manufactured from that fraction of material which passes a 19.0 mm AS sieve, compacted at optimum moisture content and 98% of maximum dry density as determined by testing using standard compactive effort for CBR and swell.
 
 (c) Type B Material
 
 Type B material shall be totally free of organic content, topsoil, deleterious and/or perishable matter such as bricks, concrete, glass, plastic, timber, steel or steel byproducts. After compaction Type B material shall have a maximum particle dimension of not more than:
 (i) 150 mm within 400 mm of the top of Type B material; and
 (ii) 400 mm at depths greater than 400 mm below the top of Type B material.
 
 ***
 
 Type B material shall have a minimum Assigned CBR of ##:2%, and Assigned Percent
 
 Swell less than 2.5% which has been determined in accordance with VicRoads Code of
 
 Practice RC 500.20.
 
 Materials that exhibit swells greater than or equal to 2.5% shall be classified as expansive and shall only be used as Type B material if approved by the Superintendent.
 
 Where the highest quality Type B materials are available they shall be reserved for placement in higher levels of the fills being constructed. Material within the top 400 mm
 of top of Type B material shall have a swell less than 2.5%.
 
 Materials that exhibit swells of 5% or greater are not permitted.
 
 Sampling for CBR testing shall be undertaken after field compaction.
 
 Material classified as expansive or silt, either before or after compaction, shall not be
 
 used as Type B material.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Section 204 (Page 6 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (d) Type C Material
 Type C material shall be capable of being spread in layers of not more than 500 mm and compacted as specified to achieve a stable condition.
 
 (e) Recycled Materials
 Blends of crushed recycled materials such as crushed concrete, crushed brick, reclaimed asphalt pavement (RAP), slag and crushed glass may be used as Type A, B and C materials in earthworks applications.
 The blend of recycled materials shall be manufactured in a controlled manner which ensures the blended product has consistent physical properties.
 The registered blend of recycled materials shall meet all relevant requirements and properties as listed in Clause 204.04.
 Low density foreign materials such as plastic, rubber, plaster, clay lumps and other friable material shall not exceed 3% by mass. Wood and other vegetable or decomposable matter shall be limited to a maximum of 0.5% by mass and assessed using test method RC 372.04 `Foreign Materials in Crushed Concrete Products' shown in Section 175.
 Crushed glass used in any recycled material blends shall be crushed to a cubic shape and able to pass the 4.75 mm AS sieve.
 Any blend of recycled materials shall be able to be classified as `clean fill' in accordance with Environment Protection Authority, Victoria guidelines.
 
 (f) Permeable Fill Material
 Permeable fill material shall be a mixture of hard, durable, clean sand, gravel or crushed aggregate complying with the requirements of Table 204.042, which is free of clay balls and perishable matter.
 
 Table 204.042 Permeable Fill Material
 
 Location
 
 Type of Permeable Fill Material
 
 ##:Against Structures
 
 ##:Grade A4, A5 or A6 (1)
 
 ##:Backfill for Open Jointed Pipes ##: Grade A4, A5 or A6 (1)
 
 ##:Drainage Blanket Material
 
 ##: Grade A6, B4 (1)
 
 Note: (1) Grading requirements are specified in Section 702.
 
 (g) Oversize Material
 Oversize material shall have a maximum particle dimension after compaction not greater than that specified for the type of material and depth of layer being placed.
 
 204.05 STRIPPING OF TOPSOIL
 Topsoil shall be stripped for the full width of the formation:
 (a) defined by the line through batter points extended to include any rounding and any surface and catch drains;
 (b) by a means which avoids contamination with subsoil and does not increase the extent of unstable areas; and
 (c) placed in stockpile or prepared areas.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 7 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Topsoil shall not be removed from the site unless approved by the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall treat and manage site topsoil before stripping, and after spreading, to remove and/or minimise the spread of weeds and other pathogens and pest organisms throughout the site.
 Stockpiles shall be maintained in a neat, well shaped state capable of shedding water. Topsoil shall be re-spread as soon as practicable.
 Stripped surfaces shall be graded to an even self-draining surface.
 204.06 SITE EXCAVATION
 (a) General
 Site excavation shall be excavation within the limits of the batters, open and underground drainage and approved borrow areas from within the Site, and shall include the handling of excavated material to the point of disposal.
 (b) Catch Drains and Batter Rounding
 The Contractor shall construct catch drains where shown on the drawings or where required for the temporary collection and diversion of surface runoff or as otherwise agreed to by the Superintendent.
 Permanent catch drains and batter rounding at the top of cut batters shall be constructed at the commencement of the cutting excavation.
 (c) Material Category
 HP Prior to commencing excavation in any area and during excavation work, the Superintendent and the Contractor shall inspect each type of material encountered and subject to verification by appropriate laboratory testing, agree on the category of the material in accordance with Clause 204.04.
 (d) Excavation Operations
 The Contractor shall conduct its operations such that the area outside the limits of the excavation is not unduly disturbed. Any falls or slips of material that occur shall be removed and the area treated to prevent recurrence.
 If any area on cut batters becomes unstable or unsafe, the Contractor shall install suitable measures to restrict access to the area, e.g. the erection of warning signs and fencing. The affected area shall be inspected and assessed by a geotechnical engineer, and made safe prior to excavation proceeding in the affected area.
 Oversize material shall be treated in accordance with Clause 204.08.
 (e) Treatment of Cuttings at Cut Floor Level
 The material within 400 mm below Cut Floor Level shall have an Assigned CBR of not less than that specified for Type B material and shall have a swell less than 2.5%.
 (i) In situ material below Cut Floor Level having an Assigned CBR less than that specified for Type B material, or a swell of 2.5 % or greater, shall be removed to a depth of 400 mm below Cut Floor Level and replaced with conforming Type B material to the underside of the capping or selected material layer, or where no capping or selected material is required, to subgrade level.
 (ii) Where removal and replacement of material below the Cut Floor Level is not required, the surface shall be loosened to a depth of 150 mm and re-compacted to meet the specified requirements. Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 8 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where the cut floor on which capping or selected material or pavement is to be placed consists of soil and rocky materials meeting the specification requirements but is too rocky to trim to the tolerances specified in Clause 204.03(f), the material shall be ripped to a minimum depth of 150 mm, loosened and broken down to a maximum particle size of 50 mm. Any rocks or boulders larger than 50 mm shall be removed and any resulting depressions shall be backfilled with Type B material and such backfilling together with the loosened material shall be reworked and compacted as specified to the Cut Floor Level.
 (f) Treatment of Rock Subgrade
 Where rock exists in a cut below subgrade level but within the designed capping or selected material layer, the material shall be excavated to a depth of not less than 150 mm below subgrade level in all areas on which pavement is to be placed and all loose material and soil shall be removed from the rock floor. Any resulting depressions lower than 150 mm below subgrade level shall be cleaned of loose material and backfilled with 20 mm Class 3, 3% cement treated crushed rock and compacted as specified.
 A regulating layer of Class 4, 20 mm Crushed Rock shall then be placed above the rock to subgrade level in lieu of the specified capping or selected material, in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of 150 mm in accordance with Section 304.
 HP Prior to construction of the regulating layer, the areas of rock subgrade shall be presented to the Superintendent for acceptance.
 The Contractor shall submit details of any necessary amendments to the subsurface drainage design including transverse subsurface drainage at the interfaces to the Superintendent for review.
 No adjustment to the Contract Sum will be considered for the treatment of a rock subgrade, or for the construction of the regulating layer in lieu of capping or selected material, or for any modifications to the subsurface drainage.
 (g) Treatment of Cut to Fill Zones
 All pavement and verge areas at cut to fill zones shall be excavated to a minimum depth of 600 mm below the Cut Floor Level or top of Type B material, for a distance of not less than 15 m into the cut and 30 m under the fill from the cut-fill line at the upper surface of Type B material earthworks.
 In sideling cut areas, the cut shall be excavated to a depth of 600 mm below the Cut Floor Level for the full cut width to be occupied by pavement and verge material.
 The above excavations shall be backfilled in layers with Type B material.
 (h) Groundwater
 HP Where groundwater or seepage is encountered the Contractor shall notify the Superintendent and submit the proposed action to be taken to the Superintendent for review.
 The Contractor shall submit any necessary approvals from relevant authorities for the treatment and disposal of this groundwater.
 (i) Surface Finish of Cut and Fill Batters
 The surface of cut and fill batters to be topsoiled shall be textured by scarifying or horizontal grooving.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 9 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 204.07 UNSUITABLE MATERIALS
 (a) General
 Excavation of unsuitable material shall be undertaken such that the extent of unstable areas is not increased.
 Material used to replace excavated unsuitable material shall be Type B material.
 (b) Cuts
 Where in situ material within 400 mm below capping, selected material and/or pavement has an Assigned CBR less than that specified at that level, or has a swell of 2.5% or greater, it shall be treated in accordance with Clause 204.06(e)(i).
 Other unsuitable materials below the Cut Floor Level on which pavement subbase, capping or selected material is to be placed shall be either treated in situ or excavated and replaced with Type B material. All treated areas or replacement material shall be spread and/or compacted to the specified density in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of 200 mm.
 Where material:
 (i) is unsuitable and does not exceed 150 mm in depth, it shall be treated in situ or excavated and replaced and no additional payment will be made for this work;
 (ii) is unsuitable and exceeds 150 mm in depth, it shall be treated in situ or excavated and replaced. Separate payment if applicable (i.e. if the Contract is a schedule of rates contract or the work is covered by a Provisional Item under a lump sum Contract) will be made for the volume of material below the Cut Floor Level so treated or excavated and replaced;
 (iii) has become unsuitable to any depth due to the Contractor's negligence or use of inappropriate methods it shall be treated in situ or excavated and replaced and no additional payment will be made for this work.
 (c) Areas Upon Which Fill is to be Placed
 After completion of clearing, grubbing and stripping of areas upon which fill is to be placed, any unsuitable material immediately below these areas shall be treated in situ or be excavated and replaced with suitable material which shall be spread and compacted as specified.
 If the Contract is a schedule of rates Contract or the work is covered by a Provisional Item under a lump sum Contract, payment will be made for the full volume of material so treated or excavated and replaced except that, where material has become unsuitable due to the Contractor's negligence or use of inappropriate methods, no additional payment will be made for this work.
 (d) Treatment of Unsuitable Materials
 HP Where unsuitable material is encountered the Contractor shall submit the proposed in situ treatment or extent of excavation to the Superintendent for review.
 (e) Fills
 Unsuitable materials in fills shall be treated in situ or be excavated and replaced at the Contractor's cost.
 (f) Stockpiles
 Material complying with the requirements of Type A, B or C material, which is unsuitable for immediate use due to being over wet, mayDbeepastrotmckepnilteodf fSotraltaeteGrruoswet.h  August 2016
 Section 204 (Page 10 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 204.08 SURPLUS EXCAVATED MATERIAL
 No material shall be transported offsite, where such material can be used within the designed earthworks under the Contract.
 Surplus material shall be disposed of off site at the Contractor's cost.
 204.09 BORROW EXCAVATION
 Borrow excavation shall be limited to the quantity of material necessary to complete the work under the Contract and will not be permitted where sufficient suitable material is available from within the limits of site excavation. The Contractor shall obtain all necessary permits and approvals for borrow areas outside the road reservation.
 Borrow excavations within the road reservation will not be permitted without the prior approval of Superintendent.
 Where the Superintendent's approval is obtained the Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all other necessary permits and approvals prior to the commencement of borrow excavation.
 204.10 FILL CONSTRUCTION
 (a) General
 Fill construction includes the preparation of areas upon which fills are to be constructed and the selection, placement, and compaction of material.
 (b) Areas Upon Which Fills are to be Constructed
 Areas upon which fills are to be constructed shall be prepared for test rolling by the Contractor. The surface of the prepared area shall be test rolled in accordance with Clause 204.12. Any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified.
 Where the height of fill to be placed to top of Type B material level over the stripped surface is less than 1.0 m, material immediately below the surface exposed after stripping of topsoil or removal of existing pavements shall be scarified to a depth of not less than 150 mm and re-compacted to the specified density ratio for the location and type of material being placed.
 Existing pavements under areas upon which fills are to be constructed, that are not required to be salvaged shall be scarified to a depth of not less than 150 mm and compacted as specified.
 If groundwater is encountered, the requirements of Clause 204.06(h) shall apply.
 HP The Contractor shall not commence placing any fill on the prepared areas until the area has been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 (c) Benching
 Where a fill is to be constructed on steep sideling ground or against an existing embankment with side slope steeper than 4 horizontally to 1 vertically, benches shall be progressively cut over the full area to be covered by new fill. The width of each bench shall be such as to permit safe and effective operation of plant but shall be not less than 1 m.
 Material excavated during benching may be used in construction of fills if it meets the requirements specified in Clause 204.04 for the type of material being placed.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 11 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (d) Placing of Fill
 
 (i) General
 Fill material shall be placed and spread in uniform layers and shall be compacted to meet the specified requirements for the location and type of material being placed.
 Each layer of fill shall be keyed into the layer above by creation of a textured surface.
 Any rocky material present in a layer of fill shall be uniformly distributed throughout the layer and the whole shall be compacted to meet specified requirements.
 During the placement of fill material the surface of each layer shall be kept generally parallel to the surface of the subgrade. Prior to the cessation of work each day, the top of the fill shall be shaped and compacted to minimise damage resulting from wet weather.
 The Contractor shall establish a procedure to verify that compacted layers do not exceed the specified maximum thickness. Verification records must provide evidence of measurements taken at least every three layers in consistent locations across the filled areas, and must be retained with the lot records.
 
 (ii) Type A Material
 Type A material shall be placed in locations shown on the drawings or, if surplus Type A material is available, it may be used in locations specified for Type B material.
 Type A material shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of 200 mm.
 Type A structural material shall be placed in accordance with the requirements of Clauses 204.11 and 204.13.
 
 (iii) Type B Material
 Type B material shall be placed in locations shown on the drawings, or if surplus Type B material is available, it may be used in locations specified for Type C material. The highest quality Type B materials available shall be reserved for placement in the higher levels of Type B fills being constructed.
 Type B material shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding a compacted thickness of 200 mm.
 Where Type B material contains 25% or more of rock by volume, which will not break down during compaction to meet the maximum particle dimension required for a 200 mm thick layer, the loose thickness of each layer may equal 125% of the typical maximum particle dimension of the rock up to a maximum layer thickness of 500 mm. Any rock with a maximum particle dimension greater than 80% of the loose thickness of the layer shall be removed. The material shall be placed and compacted such that voids are completely filled with fine material.
 Type B material containing rock with a particle dimension greater than 150 mm after compaction shall not be placed within 400 mm of the top of Type B and/or Type C material zones.
 
 (iv) Type C Material
 
 Type C material shall be placed in locations shown on the drawings or in other areas approved by the Superintendent.
 
 Type C material shall be spread compacted thickness of 300 mm.
 
 andDecpoamrtpmaecntet dof iSntaltaeyGerrsownthot eAxucgeuesdtin2g016a Section 204 (Page 12 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where Type C material contains 25% or more of rock by volume, which will not break down during compaction to meet the maximum particle dimension required for a 300 mm thick layer, the loose thickness of each layer may equal the maximum particle dimension of the rock up to a maximum layer thickness of 500 mm.
 Rocks with a maximum particle dimension of less than 800 mm may be placed in Type C material zones as specified, with sufficient spacing between larger rocks to enable full compaction of the Type C material.
 The material shall be placed and compacted such that voids are completely filled with fine material.
 204.11 FILL AT STRUCTURES
 (a) General
 This clause covers the requirements for the placement and compaction of fill material adjacent to or preparatory to the construction of structures such as bridge abutments, retaining walls, wing walls, crown units and culverts with an opening height greater than 1200 mm. Such material shall be placed at locations as specified or shown on the drawings.
 (b) Fill at Structures
 HP No fill shall be placed against or within 3 m of a structure until the foundation for the fill has been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 In addition to the placement of Type A material at bridge abutments as structural material, embankment material or backfilling within 3 metres of retaining walls, wing walls, all crown units, and culverts with an opening height greater than 1200 mm, shall be material of at least Type A material quality.
 No material shall be placed against concrete within 14 days of casting.
 Unless a geocomposite drainage mat is specified as a drainage medium, material to be placed within 300 mm of bridge abutments, retaining walls, wing walls or large culverts shall consist of permeable fill material which meets the requirements of Clause 204.04. The permeable fill material shall be placed in conjunction with the adjacent fill in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness, and compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment. The bottom of the permeable fill material or any geocomposite drainage mat shall be connected to suitable drainage outfalls by subsurface drainage pipes as shown on the drawings or as otherwise specified.
 Material to be placed adjacent to permeable fill material or geocomposite drainage mat within 3 m of the face of structures shall be Type A structural material which meets the requirements of Clause 204.04. Such material shall be spread and compacted as specified in horizontal layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness.
 Compaction plant shall not be operated within the minimum distances from structures shown in Table 204.111. These minimum distances apply until the fill reaches the level above the top of the structure corresponding to the relevant specified minimum cover.
 The difference in level of any fill being placed on opposite sides of a structure or structural component shall not exceed H/4 or 500 mm, whichever is the lesser, where H is the height of the structure.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 13 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 204.111 Fill at Structures
 
 Non Vibrating
 Rollers Static
 Weight * (tonne)
 
 Vibrating Rollers - Total
 Applied Force **
 (kN)
 
 Minimum Distance from Compaction
 Plant to Side of Structures
 (m)
 
 Minimum Distance from Compaction
 Plant to Abutments,
 Retaining Walls and Wing Walls
 (m)
 
 Less than 2 Less than 20
 
 0.15
 
 0.15
 
 25
 
 21 - 50
 
 0.3
 
 0.3
 
 6  10
 
 51 - 100
 
 1.2
 
 1.2
 
 11  20
 
 101 - 200
 
 2.4
 
 1.2
 
 21  35
 
 201 - 350
 
 2.4 or height of structure
 (whichever is greater)
 
 1.2 or height of structure
 (whichever is greater)
 
 * Includes vibrating rollers operating in non-vibrating mode.
 ** Total Applied Force is the sum of the static weight and the vertical component of the centrifugal force.
 
 Minimum Cover over Top of Culverts
 (m)
 0.15 0.15 0.4 0.4
 0.7
 
 (c) Fill Placed Prior to Erection of Structures
 Material placed within 3 m of any future structure shown on the drawings shall be Type A structural material.
 
 204.12 TEST ROLLING
 Areas upon which fills are to be constructed, all layers of fill, and material within 150 mm of the cut floor level in cuts, shall be test rolled in accordance with Section 173. The Contractor's quality plans and procedures shall include test rolling as a hold point.
 The Contractor shall provide for the Superintendent to be present during all test rolling.
 The Superintendent reserves the right to direct the Contractor to undertake further test rolling on any layer prior to it being covered by a successive layer. No additional payment will be made for any requirement to carry out such further test rolling.
 
 204.13 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF COMPACTION AND MOISTURE CONTENT
 Fills shall be compacted to either Compaction Scale A, Scale B or Scale C as nominated in Clause 204.16. Where the compaction scale has not been specified, Compaction Scale A shall apply. Testing for compaction shall be undertaken in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice 500.05.
 
 (a) Test Lots
 
 A test lot shall be as defined in Section 173. The lot size for Type A, Type B and Type C material shall be as specified in Table 204.142.
 
 The calculation of density ratio and moisture ratio shall be based on laboratory values determined using standard compactive effort.
 
 For work to be tested for compliance with Scale A or Scale B compaction requirements,
 
 the number of tests per lot shall be six, unless the lot is to be treated as a small lot in
 
 accordance with Section 173.
 
 For work to of tests per
 
 be lot
 
 tested for compliance shall be three.
 
 with
 
 ScaDleepCacrtommepnatcotifonSSteraecteqtiuoGinrreo2mw0e4thn(tPsa,Agtuehge1u4nstuom2f 01b19e6r)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (b) Compaction (i) Material of Nominal Size 40 mm or Less after Compaction
 
 Fill material, and material within 150 mm of the Cut Floor Level having a nominal size after compaction of 40 mm or less shall be compacted to comply with the requirements of Table 204.131.
 Each lot to be tested for compaction shall be test rolled in accordance with Section 173. Any unstable areas shall be excluded from the lot and shall be rectified by the Contractor and assessed separately. If the total area of the excluded areas exceeds 20% of the area of the lot, the whole of the lot shall be rejected.
 
 Table 204.131 Compaction Requirements
 
 Scale A
 
 Scale B
 
 Material Type and Location
 
 Minimum
 
 Minimum
 
 Characteristic Characteristi
 
 Value of
 
 c Value of
 
 Density Ratio Density Ratio
 
 (%)
 
 (%)
 
 Scale C
 Minimum Mean Value of Density
 Ratio (%)
 
 All Type A Material
 
 Type B Material placed within 400 mm of top of Type B Material
 Ripped and re-compacted material below Cut Floor Level
 Type B Material placed more than 400 mm below top of Type B Material
 The top 150 mm of areas where fill is to be constructed
 Type C Material
 
 99.0
 97.0 95.0
 
 98.0
 
 100.0
 
 95.0 93.0
 
 95.0 92.0
 
 (ii) Material of Nominal Size Greater than 40 mm (after Compaction)
 All fill material and ripped and re-compacted material in cuts below Cut Floor Level with a nominal size after compaction greater than 40 mm shall be compacted using a grading, mixing, watering and rolling procedure as agreed by the Superintendent.
 The Superintendent may require that trial sections be constructed to verify that the proposed compaction routine is acceptable. No additional payment will be made for any requirement to construct trial sections.
 All fill material and material below the Cut Floor Level shall be compacted at minimum moisture ratio of 80%. The moisture ratio shall be determined using the material which passes the 37.5 mm sieve, where the material contains less than 20% oversize material. If the material contains more than 20% oversize material, the moisture ratio shall be determined using an alternative method in accordance with the appropriate test method or Code of Practice.
 Acceptance of work for compaction will be based on compliance with the accepted placement and compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with Section 173.
 Any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified. Where unstable areas exceed 20% of the area being test rolled, the whole of the area shall be ripped, re-compacted as specified above, and re-DperepsaerntmteedntfoorftSestat treolGlinrogw. th  August 2016
 Section 204 (Page 15 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Treatment of Expansive Materials
 All material with a percentage swell equal to or greater than 2.5% shall be considered as expansive and shall be treated in accordance with Clause 204.06(e)(i) and Clause 204.10(d)(iii).
 All layers of Type A material placed over expansive Type B or expansive in situ material, shall be maintained at a characteristic moisture ratio of not less than 90% for the period between completion of compaction and placement of the overlying layer.
 Expansive material shall be placed at a characteristic moisture ratio of 90% to 110% during compaction, maintained through test rolling and up to placement of the overlying layer.
 The Contractor may nominate a lesser characteristic moisture ratio for agreement of the Superintendent if it can demonstrate that complying with the above requirement will result in the material being unstable under a test roll performed in accordance with the requirements of Section 173.
 Where the nominal size of material after compaction is greater than 40 mm, the moisture ratio shall be determined on that material which passes the 19.0 mm sieve, otherwise the moisture ratio shall be determined on the material passing the 37.5 mm sieve or 19.0 mm sieve taking into account oversize material as required by the test method.
 204.14 FREQUENCY OF TESTING
 The Contractor shall carry out testing at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the materials and work supplied under the Contract complies with the specified requirements. Notwithstanding this requirement, testing shall be undertaken at either Scale A or Scale B level of testing, at a frequency not less than that specified below. Where the scale of testing has not been specified, Scale A shall apply.
 (a) Material Properties Testing - Scale A
 (i) CBR and Percentage Swell
 Materials shall be tested to demonstrate compliance with the material property requirements specified in Clause 204.04. Where Scale A is specified, the following frequency of testing shall apply.
 The initial lot of each material type shall be tested to determine the Assigned CBR (strength) and percentage swell of the material and shall be carried out in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.20. Unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent sampling for CBR testing shall be undertaken after field compaction of the initial lot. If either the Assigned CBR value or percentage swell value does not meet the requirements specified in Clause 204.04, the lot shall be rejected and all subsequent material from that source will be considered as nonconforming for that use.
 Where both the Assigned CBR and percentage swell values meet the requirements of Clause 204.04 the material will be considered to be conforming subject to it complying with other specified requirements, and the Contractor may seek the Superintendent's agreement to undertake future testing for CBR and percentage swell at the reduced frequency specified in Table 204.141.
 The continued acceptance of Assigned CBR and percentage swell will be assessed against the CBR and percentage swell values of a single CBR test and a single percentage swell test. Provided that the single CBR test value is greater than the specified Assigned CBR value and that the percentage swell value is less than the specified percentage swell value, the lot shall be accepted for CBR and percentage swell.
 SpreehtroecusetlndetdaegfitoehresArwstsehilglenvseaidnlugCeleBbRCeBagnRrdevapateleurrceetbnhetaangleDestehsspewtahesraltplmnevceatinhlfuiteeedossf.psSeSwtceaeifctlileteidovGnarAlou2swe0s,i4tghtn(hePeadAgluCoegtB1uRs6shtooar2fll01th1b9ee6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The values obtained from the new Assigned CBR and percentage swell tests shall comply with the requirements of Clause 204.04 and shall be considered to be the new Assigned CBR and percentage swell values. Subject to compliance to Clause 204.04, single test verification of the Assigned CBR and percentage swell shall continue at the reduced testing frequency. Should either the verification tests for the Assigned CBR and/or percentage swell value not comply with the requirements of Table 204.041, the material from that source will be considered as non conforming and the lot and any subsequent lots from that source will be rejected.
 
 (ii) Gradings, PI, LL, Permeability and Particle Dimension
 
 Testing for grading, PI, LL, permeability and maximum particle dimension shall be undertaken at the initial testing frequency specified in Table 204.141 until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements. After satisfying this requirement, the Contractor may seek the Superintendent's agreement to reduce the frequency of testing of subsequent lots to the reduced testing frequency specified in Table 204.141.
 
 If the Contractor has obtained the Superintendent's agreement to reduce the frequency of testing and any lot fails to achieve the specified requirements, all testing of all subsequent lots shall be undertaken in accordance with the initial testing frequency in Table 204.141 until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements in the first test. After satisfying this requirement, the Contractor may again reduce the frequency of testing to the reduced testing frequency specified in Table 204.141. If a material source changes, or the properties of a material differ from the material initially tested, a new testing regime shall be established in accordance with this clause. Table 204.141 Frequency of Testing for Material Properties
 
 Material Properties
 
 Material
 
 Initial Testing
 
 Reduced Testing Frequency (minimum)
 
 CBR and percentage swell
 
 Type A Material
 
 1 Lot Test to determine Assigned CBR and swell
 
 Single CBR test to confirm Assigned CBR and swell per every ##:2 lots
 
 Type B Material
 
 1 Lot Test to determine Assigned CBR and swell
 
 Single CBR test to confirm Assigned CBR and swell per every ##:8 lots
 
 In situ material in cuts within 400 mm below Cut Floor Level
 
 1 Lot Test to determine Assigned CBR and swell
 
 Single CBR test to confirm Assigned CBR and swell per every ##:4 lots
 
 Grading
 
 Type A Material
 
 1 Test for each lot
 
 1 test for every second
 
 tested for compaction lot tested for compaction
 
 Permeable Fill Material
 
 1 Test per lot
 
 1 Test per every ##:2 lots
 
 PI and calculation of PI x % Passing 0.425 mm
 
 Type A Material
 
 1 Test per 2 lots
 
 1 test per every ##:4 lots
 
 LL and comparison of PI against LL, (identification of silt)
 
 Type A Material Type B Material
 
 1 Test per 2 lots
 
 1 test per every ##:4 lots
 
 Permeability
 
 Capping and Verge Materials and Other Type A Material
 
 1 Test per 2 lots
 
 1 test per every ##:4 lots
 
 Maximum Particle Dimension 1
 
 Type A Material, Type B and Type C Material containing rock greater than 150 mm
 
 Every lot Every lot
 
 Every lot Every lot
 
 Note: 1 Visual inspection, assessment and measurement of larger rock particles.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 17 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (b) Material Properties Testing - Scale B
 Where Scale B is specified in Table 204.161, the first lot of each material type shall be tested to demonstrate compliance with the material property requirements specified in Clause 204.04.
 Where the first lot of each material type satisfies the material property requirements in Clause 204.04 as applicable to that material type, no further testing will be required for that material except where changes to the physical properties of the material are observed or where directed by the Superintendent.
 Where the first lot of each material type does not satisfy the material property requirements in Clause 204.04 as applicable to the material type, the lot will be rejected.
 
 (c) Compaction and Moisture Content Testing Frequency
 Every lot shall be tested initially to demonstrate compliance with the requirements for compaction and moisture content. Testing of every lot shall continue until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements in the first test. After satisfying this requirement and establishing a compaction procedure to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, the Contractor may seek the Superintendent's agreement to reduce the frequency of testing of subsequent lots to the minimum requirements specified in Table 204.142.
 If the Contractor has obtained the Superintendent's agreement to test for compaction and moisture content at the minimum testing frequency and any lot fails to achieve the specified requirements, testing of all subsequent lots shall be undertaken until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified requirements in the first test. After satisfying this requirement, the Contractor may submit changes to the compaction procedure for the Superintendent's review and may again seek approval to reduce the frequency of testing to the minimum requirements.
 For the purposes of this sub-clause, small areas as defined in Section 173 shall not be included in the initial consecutive lots tested for compliance, nor any subsequent set of consecutive lots.
 Table 204.142 Minimum Frequency of Testing for Compaction and Moisture Content
 
 Material
 Type A Material
 Type B Material  ripped and re-compacted
 below Cut Floor Level  placed within 400 mm of
 top of Type B Material  placed more than 400 mm
 below top of Type B material
 Type C Material
 
 Acceptable Lot Size in a Single Layer of Work One day's production or 5,000 m2, whichever is the lesser
 One day's production or 10,000 m2, whichever is the lesser One day's production or 10,000 m2, whichever is the lesser One day's production
 One day's production
 
 Minimum Testing Frequency
 Every second lot of like material and work
 Every second lot of like material and work Every second lot of like material and work Every third lot of like material and work
 Every sixth lot of like material and work
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 18 of 19)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 204.15 PREPARATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FINAL EARTHWORK SURFACES AND SUBGRADE
 The top of the Type B material, Cut Floor Level and subgrade surfaces shall be prepared to level and shape within the tolerances specified in Clause 204.03(g) to produce a smooth, hard, tightly bound surface, free from depressions capable of holding water.
 Material within 150 mm of subgrade shall be maintained such that its moisture content is not less than 70% of optimum moisture content prior to the placement of any pavement layer.
 
 204.16 SCHEDULES FOR TOLERANCES, MATERIAL PROPERTIES AND COMPACTION TESTING
 
 Table 204.161 nominates the level of testing required for acceptance of Surface Level Measurement as specified in Clause 204.03, for acceptance of material properties as specified in Clauses 204.04 and 204.14, and for acceptance of compaction as specified in Clause 204.13.
 
 *** Table 204.161 Schedule for Surface Tolerance, Material Properties and Compaction Testing
 
 Road Name
 
 Chainage /Location
 
 Scale of Surface Level
 Measurement (A, B or C)
 
 Scale of Material
 Property Testing
 (A or B)
 
 Scale of
 Compaction (A, B or C)
 
 ##:Freeway M Roads Within Limits of Works
 
 A
 
 A
 
 A
 
 ##:Arterial A Roads Within Limits of Works
 
 A
 
 B
 
 A
 
 ##:Arterial B Roads Within Limits of Works
 
 B
 
 B
 
 B
 
 ##:Arterial C Roads Within Limits of Works
 
 C
 
 Not Applicable
 
 C
 
 Note: Where no level of testing is nominated, Scale A applies.
 204.17 TOPSOILING
 Topsoiling shall not be placed over cut and fill areas until the Contractor has verified that such areas comply with the requirements in Clause 204.03
 All unpaved cut and fill areas within the limits of the batters, including batter roundings but excluding cut batters steeper than 1.5 to 1 (horizontal to vertical), and any other area disturbed by the Contractor's operations, shall be topsoiled to the following thicknesses measured normal to the slope:
 (a) batters with slopes of 2 to 1 (horizontal to vertical) or steeper - 50 mm minimum
 (b) tree and shrub plantation bed areas other than (a) above - 100 mm minimum
 (c) verges: In areas without kerb and channel or concrete edging strips the depth of topsoil shall vary uniformly from 50 mm deep at the outside edge of verge to 20 mm deep within 100 mm of the edge of seal or asphalt surface treatment
 (d) all other areas - 75 mm minimum.
 Topsoil shall be placed and levelled but not compacted except for verge areas, which shall be compacted. Topsoil on batters shall be placed so as to prevent rilling.
 The surface level of topsoil shall match the finished surface level, or level of back of kerb or concrete edging, as appropriate.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 204 (Page 19 of 19)
 
 STATE GROWTH  SUPPLEMENT TO SEC 204 EARTHWORKS
 The following information should be considered by Project Managers, Road Designers and Contract Administration staff when soft subgrades are identified during geotechnical investigations, or are encountered during the construction phase of a road project.
 Soft Subgrade Material
 The following hierarchy of controls should be implemented when soft subgrades or other unsuitable materials are encountered on road projects:
  Excavation and replacement of the soft material with suitable select fill material
  Stabilisation of the subgrade with suitable stabilisation agents  Use of geotextiles, geofabrics and geogrids (note these products are
 not to be used to modify the thickness of proposed pavements)
 In all of the options above critical attention to drainage is required. The following types of drainage systems are applicable:
  Surface drainage  Subsurface drainage  Drainage blankets
 Drainage blankets have a particular application in the construction of road pavements and road embankments.
 Drainage Blankets
 Drainage blankets should be utilised in locations subject to high ground water levels, where other drainage alternatives and formation features are ineffective in intercepting or managing free water. In this situation, the use of a rock blanket as a lower subbase layer may be the most effective means of removing the free water from beneath the pavement or embankment.
 Drainage blankets should only be used for their intended purpose and should not be used as general solution for subgrade improvement regardless of actual site conditions.
 Reference Documents
 Additional information relating to this topic can be found in the following Reference Documents:
  Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology  Part 2: Pavement Structural Design  2012
 
 [Type here]
 
 [Type here]
 
 April 2018
 
 STATE GROWTH  SUPPLEMENT TO SEC 204 EARTHWORKS
  Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology  Part 8: Pavement Construction  2009
  Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology  Part 10: Subsurface Drainage - 2009
 
 [Type here]
 
 [Type here]
 
 April 2018
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 205 - ROCK FILL
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 204 and 210. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 205.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the use of rock fill in embankment construction. This section should be used taking into account the requirements of Section 204.
 
 205.02 DEFINITIONS
 Fill: The compacted embankment placed above natural surface level after removal of topsoil.
 Rock Fill: A material comprised of larger fragments of hard, sound durable rock containing only a small amount of fine particles, which when placed and compacted produces an embankment deriving its stability from the mechanical interlock of the coarser rock particles and not from the compaction of finer material.
 
 205.03 MATERIALS
 
 (a) Rock Fill Material
 Material for rock fill embankment construction shall be obtained from excavations within the works.
 Rock fill shall be comprised of sound rock fragments having not less than two broken or angular faces. Not less than 10 individual, randomly selected, rock samples, with dimensions greater than 100 mm, shall be tested for each nominated point load test. Not less than 90% of rock fragments with dimensions greater than 100 mm shall have a Point Load Strength (IS(50)) of 2.0 MPa or greater.
 Prior to placement, rock fill material shall have no particle dimension exceeding 500 mm and minimal fine material.
 After placement and compaction, rock fill material, including Rock Fill cover layer material, shall comply with post-compaction gradings in Table 205.031.
 Table 205.031 Post-Compaction Grading of Rock Fill Material
 
 Rock Fill Type
 
 Limits of Grading (% passing by mass) Post Compaction AS Sieve Size (mm)
 
 500
 
 300
 
 150
 
 75
 
 37.5
 
 Maximum Particle Size 500 mm
 
 100
 
 10-25
 
 0-10
 
 Maximum Particle Size 300 mm
 
 100
 
 10-25
 
 0-10
 
 Maximum Particle Size 150 mm
 
 100
 
 10-25
 
 0-10
 
 Maximum Particle Size 75 mm
 
 100
 
 10-25
 
 Maximum Particle Size 37.5 mm
 
 100
 
 (b) Geotextile Fabric
 Geotextile fabric required for the construction of rock fills shall have a G robustness rating of greater than 3000 and shall be supplied, handled and placed in accordance with the requirements of Section 210.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 205 (Page 1 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 205.04 SITE EXCAVATION
 (a) General
 Site excavation of rock fill material shall be within the limits of batters, open and underground drainage and approved borrow areas from within the Site, and shall include the handling of excavated material to the point of disposal.
 (b) Material Category
 HP Prior to the use of excavated rock material as rock fill, the Superintendent and the Contractor shall inspect the material encountered and subject to verification by appropriate testing, agree on the suitability of the material for rock fill as described in Clause 205.03.
 (c) Excavation Operations
 If excavated rock is to be used in the construction of rock fill embankment, the working methods employed in the excavation of cuttings must be adjusted so as to produce rock fill material of the size and grading and rock strength specified in Clause 205.03. Such working methods generally must include screening and, if necessary, secondary processing.
 (d) Oversize Rock
 Oversize rock produced as a consequence of rock fill production shall be used or disposed of only in areas specified or shown in the drawings or approved by the Superintendent.
 HP The Superintendent's approval shall be obtained to the use or disposal of oversize rock with a maximum particle dimension greater than the requirements for Type B fill material in Type C fill areas in accordance with Section 204.
 205.05 ROCK FILL EMBANKMENT CONSTRUCTION
 (a) Areas Upon Which Rock Fills are to be Constructed
 Areas upon which fills are to be constructed shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 204. Topsoil and material classified as silt shall be removed prior to construction of any rock fills.
 Where a rock fill is to be constructed on steep sideling ground or against an existing embankment with side slope steeper than 4 horizontally to 1 vertically, benches shall be progressively cut over the full area to be covered by new fill. The width of each bench shall be such as to permit safe and effective operation of plant but shall be not less than 1 m.
 Material excavated during benching may be used in construction of earthworks in accordance with Section 204.
 Foundations under rock fills must be shaped to ensure that drainage is maintained and treated to ensure that erosion of the foundation will not occur.
 (b) Placement and Compaction of Rock Fill
 Prior to placement of the first layer of rock fill, a geotextile fabric shall be placed as a separation layer.
 The rock fill material shall be placed and compacted in layers in accordance with the accepted placement and compaction procedure and Table 205.051.
 Rock fill shall be placed and compacted to ensure rock particle to particle contact between coarser rock particles is maintained aDnedptaortamcheinetveofsStatabtileityGroofwtthhe laAyuerg.ust 2016
 Section 205 (Page 2 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Interlock between successive rock fill layers shall be ensured by limiting the placement of finer particles over the surface of the rock fill layer to that necessary to achieve interlock between the courser rock particles.
 Where earthworks fill material is to be placed over or adjacent to a rock fill, cover layers of rock fill material shall first be placed in accordance with Table 205.051. A geotextile separation fabric with a G robustness rating of greater than 3000 shall then be placed over the top of the rock fill layers, and extended to cover the longitudinal edge of the top layer. A minimum layer of 200 mm of Type B fill material with a maximum particle dimension of 75 mm shall then be placed on top of the geotextile fabric, above which the earthworks fill layer can then be constructed.
 
 Table 205.051 Thickness of Rock Fill Material Layers
 
 Rock Fill Type
 
 Maximum Thickness of
 each Compacted
 Layer
 
 Maximum Particle Size 500 mm Maximum Particle Size 300 mm Maximum Particle Size 150 mm Maximum Particle Size 75 mm
 
 600 mm 400 mm 300 mm 200 mm
 
 Minimum Distance
 Below Subgrade
 Level 2.0 m 1.2 m 800 mm 400 mm
 
 Thickness of Rock Fill Cover Layers
 
 Bottom Layer Maximum Particle Size 150 mm
 
 Middle Layer Maximum Particle Size 75 mm
 
 Top Layer
 
 Total
 
 Maximum Thickness
 
 Particle Size of Rock Fill
 
 37.5 mm Cover Layers
 
 300 mm
 
 200 mm
 
 100 mm
 
 600 mm
 
 Not Required
 
 200 mm
 
 100 mm
 
 300 mm
 
 Not Required Not Required 100 mm
 
 100 mm
 
 Not Required Not Required 100 mm
 
 100 mm
 
 (c) Rock Fill around Structures
 At structures, including abutments, retaining walls, wingwalls and culverts, rock fill and rock fill cover material shall not be placed within any specified Type A fill zone or within 2 m of any structure.
 (d) Level Control
 Each layer of rock fill including cover layers shall be surveyed to confirm that placement is in accordance with the following tolerances:
 Intermediate layers of rock fill shall be placed to a tolerance of +/- 100 mm.
 The surface level tolerance of the top of final layer of rock fill or zone shall be finished to a tolerance of:
 +0 mm / -100 mm.
 205.06 ACCEPTANCE OF PLACEMENT AND COMPACTION
 HP The first lot shall be placed as a trial section for review by the Superintendent. The Contractor shall then develop a material grading, mixing, watering and rolling routine based on the construction and testing of trial section for review by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 205 (Page 3 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 As a minimum, trial sections shall be carried out both for the initial layer of rock fill over in situ material and then for the subsequent (second) layer of rock fill and each trial section shall:
  have an area of not less than 1000 m2
  be thoroughly watered prior to applying roller passes
  be compacted by the application of not less than 15 roller passes or more, if consolidation is still occurring
  be surveyed for level changes in surface levels after each roller pass at not less than 20 pre-determined monitoring points
  be assessed to determine the point at which effective refusal occurs
  be inspected and tested for compliance with this Section 205.
 Where any monitoring point has been, in the opinion of the Superintendent, destroyed or significantly damaged by crushing or rock break down, the survey level result for that point shall be disregarded for that roller pass and a replacement monitoring point established for monitoring of subsequent roller passes.
 The accepted compaction routine shall provide not less than three additional passes of the compaction plant above the number of passes identified from the compaction trials as having no further consolidation of rock particles and the compactive effort shall be not less than the equivalent of 6 passes of a vibrating pad foot roller which can transmit a minimum force to the ground through the surface of the drum of 50 kN per metre of drum length, when operated at the maximum frequency of vibration. The frequency of vibration of the roller shall be between 16 and 25 Hz, and the travel speed shall not exceed 1 m for every three seconds.
 The Superintendent may require that further trial sections be constructed to verify that the proposed placement and compaction routine is acceptable where there is a change in the type or quality of the material being placed.
 Assessment of placement and compaction will include visual inspection of inspection trenches excavated to the full depth of the rock fill layer and test rolling carried out in accordance with Clause 205.07.
 Assessment of placement and compaction shall also include monitoring the level of rock particles at the surface of the layer to identify the point at which no further consolidation of the rock particles occurs when subject to three additional passes of the compaction plant. The number and location of monitoring sites shall be to the satisfaction of the Superintendent but shall not be less than 12 locations for each lot monitored.
 Acceptance of work for compaction will be based on compliance with the accepted placement and compaction procedure, testing and inspection as specified and the confirmation by survey level monitoring that effective refusal has be achieved for the rock fill layer. For the purpose of this clause, effective refusal is where the average cumulative deflection over the last three roller passes is no greater than 5 mm.
 205.07 TEST ROLLING
 All layers of rock fill shall be test rolled in accordance with Section 173.
 Prior to any layer being covered by a successive layer, the Superintendent may require further test rolling to confirm that the layer is stable.
 Any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 205 (Page 4 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 205.08 MINIMUM FREQUENCY OF TESTING
 
 (a) Material Properties
 
 Materials shall be tested to demonstrate compliance with the material property requirements specified in Clause 205.03. Testing shall be undertaken at the frequency
 specified in Table 205.081.
 
 Table 205.081 Minimum Frequency of Testing for Material Properties
 
 Material Properties
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Rock Strength  Point Load Index  IS(50) Each source prior to the commencement of work and every 500 m of production.
 
 Grading Prior to Compaction
 
 Prior to the commencement of work and at other times when in the opinion of the
 Contractor or the Superintendent, the nature and/or physical properties of the
 material have changed.
 
 After Compaction Grading
 
 For each trial section and for every third lot, and at other times when in the opinion of
 the Contractor or the Superintendent, the nature and/or physical properties of the
 material have changed.
 
 Consolidation Measurement of Rock Fill Survey monitoring for all trial sections and
 
 Layers
 
 each layer of rock fill including cover layers.
 
 Test Rolling
 
 All layers of rock fill including cover layers.
 
 (b) Compaction
 The Contractor shall initially test each trial section to verify the adequacy of placement and the compaction procedure to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 Once a placement and compaction routine is established, each lot shall be placed in accordance with this procedure.
 Every layer shall be tested for stability by test rolling and every third lot shall be monitored to verify that no further consolidation is occurring. Should the rock fill in any layer be found to be continuing to consolidate within the past three roller passes, the placement and compaction procedure shall be reviewed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 205.09 AS-CONSTRUCTED RECORDS
 The location and extent of all rock fill zones and cover layers constructed shall be surveyed and shown in As-Constructed Drawings.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 205 (Page 5 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 210 - GEOTEXTILES IN EARTHWORKS
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 160 and 204. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 210.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the supply, handling and placing of geotextiles as listed below or used as a separation layer, or as a separation and filtration layer, in earthworks at locations shown on the drawings or specified.
 (a) Woven Geotextile
 (b) Non-woven Geotextile.
 
 210.02 SUPPLY OF MATERIALS
 The Contractor shall supply the geotextiles as specified in Clause 210.07 and as shown on the drawings. The physical and mechanical properties of the geotextiles shall be provided in accordance with Clause 210.03.
 After delivery of the geotextiles to site, the Contractor shall ensure that the geotextiles are kept clean and undamaged and stored away from direct sunlight until covered. Any damaged or improperly stored geotextiles shall be replaced by the Contractor.
 
 210.03 PROPERTIES OF GEOTEXTILES
 
 (a) General
 The geotextile shall consist of woven or non-woven fabric manufactured from synthetic fibres of a long chain polymer such as polypropylene, polyethylene, polyester or similar.
 Woven geotextiles shall have filaments interlaced in two sets, mutually at right angles. One set shall be parallel to the longitudinal direction of the geotextile.
 Non woven geotextiles shall have filaments bonded by needle punching, heat or chemical bonding processes.
 
 (b) Robustness
 
 The geotextile shall have a robustness (Geotextile Strength Rating - G) complying with the requirements of Table 210.031.
 
 Table 210.031
 
 Classification
 
 Robustness (G)
 
 Moderately Robust
 
 900 - 1350
 
 Robust
 
 1350 - 2000
 
 Very Robust
 
 2000 - 3000
 
 Extremely Robust Greater than 3000
 
 Determination of robustness (G) shall be in accordance with VicRoads Test Method RC 381.01 Calculation of Robustness of Geotextile Material, as listed in Section 175.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 210 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Equivalent Opening Size
 Where specified in Clause 210.07 as a separation/filtration material, both woven and non-woven geotextiles shall have an equivalent opening size between 85 and 230 microns. The equivalent opening size determination shall be carried out in accordance with AS 3706.7 Determination of pore size distribution - Dry sieving method, as listed in Section 175.
 
 (d) UV Radiation Stabilisation
 The geotextile shall be stabilised against deterioration due to ultra-violet radiation such that when tested in accordance with AS 3706.11, the geotextile must have retained strength of at least 50% after 28 days of test exposure. After forming, the geotextile shall be processed so that the fibres retain their relative positions with respect to each other. The geotextile shall be free from defects or flaws which adversely affect its physical and mechanical properties.
 
 (e) Testing
 
 All testing shall be performed by laboratories with third party accreditation to
 ISO/IEC 17025 by a signatory to the International Laboratories Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC) scheme, e.g. by NATA (National Association of Testing Authorities, Australia), or
 by a laboratory accredited to ISO/IEC 17025 through NATA's Mutual Recognition Arrangement (MRA) Network process.
 
 Test certificates shall be in the English language.
 
 Sampling shall be in accordance with AS 2490, and testing shall be in accordance with
 the relevant part of AS 3706, including the determination of the material properties specified in Clause 210.03(b), (c) and (d).
 
 Test certificates shall be submitted for each delivery of geotextile supplied to the works. Test certificates for the same material produced and tested within 12 months prior to the
 proposed use will be accepted, except for geotextile material used in structural applications, as detailed in Table 201.032, below.
 
 Where no test certification is provided, test samples from each roll of geotextile shall be selected and the test results reported in accordance with the relevant part of AS 3706.
 Tests shall include the determination of the material properties specified in Clause 210.03(b), (c) and (d) of the geotextile for the consignment delivered.
 
 Table 210.032 Frequency of Testing for Geotextile Material Properties
 
 Geotextile Use
 
 Test
 
 Test frequency
 
 General use
 
 AS 3706.1 AS 3706.2
 AS 3706.3 AS 3706.4
 AS 3706.5 AS 3706.7
 AS 3706.9 AS 3706.11
 RC 381.01
 
 Annual
 
 Geotextile used in structural fill
 applications
 
 AS 3706.1 AS 3706.2
 AS 3706.3 AS 3706.4
 AS 3706.5 AS 3706.7
 AS 3706.9 RC 381.01
 
 Test results on the test certificate shall include at least one set of results for each month of geotextile
 manufacture.
 
 AS 3706.11 Annual
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 210 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 210.04 PREPARATION
 Prior to placing any geotextiles the Contractor shall excavate the surface material to the depth shown on the drawings or specified. The area shall then be trimmed to provide a uniform surface freely draining to points clear of the road formation.
 Where the surface having been trimmed becomes unstable for whatever reason, the Contractor shall treat in situ or remove and replace the unstable material to the condition that the surface has the required strength to support the weight of construction traffic and plant and no additional payment shall be made for this work.
 210.05 PLACING GEOTEXTILES AND BACKFILLING
 HP The placement of geotextile is not permitted without the written approval of the Superintendent.
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall place the specified geotextile to the limits as shown on the drawings or specified. The geotextile shall be subject to a visual inspection by the Contractor's geotechnical consultant during placing. A certificate of compliance shall be provided by the Contractor's geotechnical consultant to verify that the coverage and ground preparation for placement of the geotextile have been executed in accordance with the drawings and this specification.
 The geotextile shall be placed without punctures or tears and, if these occur, they shall be rectified or the entire roll of geotextile replaced prior to covering. Any rolls with imperfections shall not be used. Geotextiles used in subsurface drains shall be placed to conform approximately to the shape of the excavation. The geotextile shall fully envelop the drainage material in the excavation. All joints shall be overlapped or sewn in accordance with requirements specified in Clause 210.07. Geotextiles shall be covered by filling within 48 hours of placement.
 (b) Type B Material
 The Contractor shall supply and place over the geotextile Type B material of maximum particle size of not more than 150 mm and moisture ratio of not less than 85% as determined by test using the Standard compactive effort. The initial layer of Type B material shall be placed and compacted to the maximum density practicable without causing further instability in the underlying materials upon which the geotextile has been placed. Subsequent layers of Type B material shall also be placed to the maximum density practicable until stability is achieved and a layer satisfies the test rolling requirements specified in Section 204 as applicable. Any remaining layers of fill to be placed above the stable layer shall be placed and compacted in accordance with the requirements of Section 204 as applicable.
 (c) Permeable Fill Material
 Where shown on the drawings or specified, the Contractor shall supply and place permeable fill material of the depth specified in Clause 210.07 over the geotextile. The geotextile shall be of the type of filtration and separation classification. The permeable fill material shall comply with the requirements of Clause 210.06 and have a moisture content compatible with achieving maximum density practicable. The initial layer of permeable fill material shall be placed and compacted to the maximum density practicable without causing further instability or loss of shape to the trimmed surface upon which the geotextile has been placed. Any subsequent layers of permeable fill material shall also be placed to the maximum density practicable until the full depth of permeable fill material specified has been placed.
 Following placement of the specified depth of permeable fill material, a second layer of gtheeotpeexrtmileea(bfilletrafitlliomnaatenrdiasl ebpeaforaretiopnla)csehmaellntbeoDfpeTlpyapaceertdmBaemsnatstopefericSaitflaiecStodeemcGttmoirooencwnot2cmhe1ps0.le(AtPeualggyuese3tnc2ol0fo1s46e)
 
 Department of State Growth
 210.06 SUPPLY OF PERMEABLE FILL MATERIAL ##(strikethrough (a) or (b)):
 For the purpose of this section, permeable fill material shall:
 (a) comply with the requirements of Section 204;
 (b) consist of hard, durable and clean sand or gravel, or crushed stone from a source rock with a Los Angeles Abrasion Loss of not more than 45;
 (c) have maximum particle size not exceeding 19 mm and a permeability not less than 104m/sec when compacted to a density ratio value of 100% based on Standard compactive effort.
 
 210.07 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS *** (a) Supply of Geotextiles (Clause 210.02).
 
 Classification
 
 (i) Separation Only
 
 ##:
 
 (ii) Separation/Filtration ##:
 
 Overlap Requirements
 
 Type
 
 ##: mm ##:
 
 ##: mm ##:
 
 *** (b) Permeable Fill Material (Clause 210.05(c)) Depth ##: m.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 210 (Page 4 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 290 - LIME STABILISATION OF EARTHWORKS MATERIALS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 175 and 307. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 290.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for lime stabilisation of earthworks materials within the formation. The requirements relate to preparation of the formation to be stabilised, quality of lime, spreading, mixing, and compaction of the stabilised earthworks material.
 This section is not applicable for lime pre-treatment of pavement layers. For lime pretreatment of pavement layers, Standard Section 307  Insitu Stabilisation of Pavements with Cementitious Binders shall be used.
 290.02 DEFINITIONS
 Available Lime The amount of Calcium Oxide (CaO) or Calcium Hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) contained in Quicklime or Hydrated Lime respectively.
 Available Lime Index (ALI) The Calcium Oxide or Calcium Hydroxide content of quicklime or hydrated lime respectively, expressed as a percentage of the total mass of lime determined in accordance with AS 4489.6.1.
 Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime The spread rate of pure Calcium Oxide or Calcium Hydroxide.
 Fly Ash A fine powder of pozzolanic material extracted from the flue emissions produced from the burning of black coal.
 Lime Lime is either Hydrated Lime (Calcium Hydroxide) or Quicklime (Calcium Oxide).
 Hydrated Lime Hydrated lime is a powdered form of lime consisting primarily of calcium hydroxide, also referred to as slaked lime.
 Lime Spreading Rate The required spread rate of lime determined from the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime corrected for the ALI of the lime to be used.
 Quicklime Quicklime is a fine granulated powder consisting primarily of Calcium Oxide that can be readily slaked by the application of water after it has been evenly spread to form Calcium Hydroxide.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 290 (Page 1 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Slag (Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag)
 Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS) is a pozzolan produced by fine grinding of slag produced as a by-product from the smelting of iron ore.
 290.03 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 Lime stabilised layers shall be finished to conform within the following limits to the levels, lines, grades, thicknesses and cross sections specified or shown on the drawings:
 (a) Surface Level
 Surface level measurement shall be undertaken in lots not exceeding 4000 m 2 in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 173 - Examination and Testing of Materials and Work (Roadworks).
 Unless otherwise specified in other Standard Sections or elsewhere, the surface level of the lime stabilised layer at subgrade level at any point shall not differ by more than 15 mm above or 25 mm below the specified level.
 (b) Depth of Stabilisation
 The depth of lime stabilised material as specified in Clause 290.15(a) or (b) shall not at any point be less than the depth as specified in Clause 290.15 by more than 15 mm and the average depth of the lot shall be not be less than the specified depth.
 (c) Alignment
 Lime stabilised earthworks carried out in a boxed formation shall extend to the full width of the boxing. Where there is no boxed formation, the edges of the lime stabilised material shall not be more than 50 mm inside the specified offset from centreline or design line.
 (d) Width
 The width of the lime stabilised material shall not be less than that specified width by more than 50 mm.
 (e) Shape
 Where the finished surface of the lime stabilised material is at subgrade level, no point on the surface of the lime stabilised material shall lie more than 15 mm below a 3 m straightedge placed in any direction on the surface except on the part of the crosssection designed with a crown.
 
 290.04 MATERIALS
 
 Materials supplied under the Contract shall comply with the following properties:
 
 (a) Lime
 
 Quicklime and hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of AS1672 as listed in Section 175.
 
 All quicklime and hydrated lime supplied to the job shall be provided with delivery docket showing an assigned ALI at the start of each production week. The assigned ALI shall be determined by averaging the six most recent test results for ALI. A test certificate for determination of the ALI shall be made available on request
 
 Lime shall be stored in a moisture free environment and shall be re-tested for compliance
 
 with AS 1672.1 Limes and limestones Part 1 LDimeepsarftomr ebnutilodfinSgtaiftestGoroedwtfhormAourgeutshta2n0146
 
 days after receipt from the manufacturer.
 
 Section 290 (Page 2 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Cementitious Binders
 (i) Slag/Lime Blends
 Slag and hydrated lime may be used in blended combination as a stabilising additive. The requirements for hydrated lime shall be as specified in Clause 290.04(a) above. Slag used shall be Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS) meeting the requirements of AS 3582, Supplementary cementitious materials for use with Portland and blended cement Part 2, Slag-Ground granulated iron blast furnace as listed in Section 175. The Contractor shall nominate the type, brand and source of the GGBFS to be used.
 Slag/lime shall be blended uniformly in the ratio of 85% slag to 15% hydrated lime unless laboratory testing indicates that superior strength of the stabilised mixture is achieved by using a different ratio. If the blend is to be varied, the proportion of lime shall not be less than 10%. The Contractor shall provide evidence that the blend ratio has been met for all material supplied to the job. Slag/lime blend shall have a mortar bar 7 day compressive strength of 10 MPa and 28 day compressive strength of 16 MPa. The test shall be the same test specified in AS 5101.4 Method 4 Unconfined compressive strength of compacted materials for Portland and blended cements listed in Section 175, except that the cement to water ratio shall be adjusted to match the consistency of mortar produced for the compressive strength test for GB cement in accordance with the relevant Australian Standard.
 (ii) Slow Cementitious Blends Incorporating Alkali Activated Slag or Fly Ash
 Special blends of slow setting cementitious stabilising agents incorporating alkali activated slag or fly ash which are not produced to meet the requirements of a GB cement may be used subject to the blend satisfying the mortar bar test requirement specified in Clause 290.04(b)(i) above and the specified mix requirements. The maximum binder working time shall be determined in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method RC 330.02 Determination of the Maximum Allowable Working Time for a Cementitious Binder as listed in Section 175, to confirm that the binder is a slow setting binder.
 Fly ash shall be supplied to meet the requirements of AS 3582 Supplementary cementitious materials for use with Portland and blended cement Part 1 Fly ash as listed in Section 175.
 (c) Water
 Water added to the material shall be clear and substantially free from sediments and detrimental impurities such as oils, salts, acids, alkalis and vegetable substances. Water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are known or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use. The electrical conductivity shall not be more than 3500 S/cm and the amount of chloride and sulphate in any water used shall each be no greater than 300 ppm.
 Water sources classified by the relevant Water Authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement.
 290.05 INVESTIGATION AND DETERMINATION OF DESIGN LIME SPREADING RATE
 Where the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime is not specified in Clause 290.15(b), the Contractor is required to carry out the site investigation and perform laboratory testing to determine the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC 500.23 Code of Practice for Lime Stabilised Earthworks Materials-Available lime content, assignment of CBR and % swell. The Design Distribution Rate so determined shall satisfy all the requirements for the stabilised material as specified in Clause 290.15(a).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 290 (Page 3 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 290.06 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
 HP The Contractor shall not commence work until the Lime Spreading Rates have been presented to the Superintendent for review. If the Contractor is required to determine the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime, evidence shall be produced to show that the material properties specified in Clause 290.15(a) have been met.
 290.07 CONSTRUCTION PLANT
 The Contractor shall provide construction plant meeting the following requirements and capability.
 (a) Lime Spreader
 A purpose built mechanical spreader capable of accurately regulating the discharge of lime directly to the roadbed shall be used such that the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime is uniformly met in accordance with the requirements of Clause 290.12.
 (b) Mixing Machine
 A purpose built machine mixing machine designed for insitu stabilisation of roadworks shall be used to pulverise and uniformly mix the earthworks formation material with water and lime for the specified depth of stabilisation. Rotary hoes and other types of agricultural machinery shall not be used.
 After pulverisation and mixing, all stabilised material other than isolated hard rock particles up to a nominal size of 75 mm shall be capable of passing a 37.5 mm sieve.
 (c) Watering Plant
 Watering plant or any purpose designed watering system incorporated within the mixing machine shall be capable of uniformly distributing sufficient water to hydrate quicklime and if required add more water to increase the moisture content to aid compaction.
 (d) Compaction Plant
 Compaction plant shall be of such mass as to be capable of compacting the stabilised layer to the minimum density ratio throughout the depth of the layer.
 290.08 CONSTRUCTION
 (a) General
 Construction includes the preparation of the earthworks formation, spreading of lime, slaking of quicklime, mixing, compaction, trimming and curing of the stabilised material.
 (b) Pre-treatment of Earthworks
 The material to be stabilised shall be pre-treated by scarifying or pulverising to the specified depth to provide an even surface capable of being trimmed to meet the requirements of Clause 290.03. Any hard rock particles larger than 75 mm shall be removed from the scarified soil.
 (c) Spreading of Lime
 Spreading of lime shall not be carried out at times when lime could become airborne or dispersed in such a way as to become a nuisance or a hazard to persons, property or livestock.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 290 (Page 4 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Lime shall be spread uniformly over the prepared surface at the Lime Spreading Rate calculated using the appropriate formula (i) or (ii) below.
 (i) Where hydrated lime has been used in the laboratory testing to determine the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime and it is proposed to use quicklime at the job site, the Lime Spreading Rate shall be determined from:
 
 Lime Spreading Rate = 0.76
 
 X
 
 Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime ALI of Lime to be Used (%)
 
 (ii) Where the same type of lime (hydrated lime or quicklime) is to be used at the job
 site as has been used in the laboratory tests to determine the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime, the Lime Spreading Rate shall be determined from:
 
 Lime Spreading Rate =
 
 Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime ALI of Lime to be Used (%)
 
 Under no circumstances shall the Design Content of Available Lime be less than 1.5% by mass as determined under VicRoads Code of Practice 500.23 Code of Practice for Lime Stabilised Earthworks Materials-Available lime content, assignment of CBR and % swell.
 Immediately following completion of spreading of lime, the Contractor shall check and record the Average Lime Spreading Rate and the Uniformity of Spreading Rate in accordance with Clause 290.12.
 If the required Lime Spreading Rate exceeds 15 kg/m2 it shall be spread in two equal spreading runs with material from the first spread run being fully mixed into the earthworks material prior to the second spreading run being undertaken.
 (d) Slaking of Quicklime
 Quicklime shall be slaked with sufficient water to allow full hydration to take place. Full hydration will be deemed to have been achieved when all quicklime that has been spread has changed from a cream coloured granulate to a fine white powder and there is a cessation of rising vapours.
 (e) Mixing
 Where quicklime is used, mixing shall not commence until full hydration has been achieved.
 All lime shall be mixed to the specified depth within 6 hours of spreading regardless of the number of spreading and mixing runs required. If lime stabilised material contains non-friable wet clay lumps with a nominal size in excess of 75 mm after the initial mixing run, the lime stabilised material shall be allowed to stand for up to 72 hours to allow sufficient time for clay lumps to dry out and react with the lime.
 Once the lime stabilised material is friable it shall be remixed prior to compaction. Remixing shall proceed until all stabilised material other than isolated hard rock particles up to a nominal size of 75 mm, is capable of passing a 37.5 mm AS sieve and a minimum of at least 60% is capable of passing a 9.5 mm sieve when shaken without forcing material through the openings. The stabilised material shall be visually inspected for uniform mixing by excavating test holes for the full depth of the loose material at six random locations within each compaction test lot as defined in Clause 290.11(a).
 The number of mixing runs undertaken after spreading of lime shall not be less than two
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 290 (Page 5 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (f) Final Trimming
 The surface may be further trimmed before or during compaction to meet the requirements of Clause 290.03(a) and (e).
 (g) Compaction
 Compaction shall not commence until the requirements of Clause 290.08(e) are met. Prior to compaction, additional moisture may be added if required to achieve the specified density ratio.
 Compaction shall commence within 2 hours and be completed within 8 hours after completion of mixing.
 
 290.09 PRELIMINARY TRIAL
 If specified in Clause 290.15(c), the Contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operation.
 The trial shall determine:
 (a) the effectiveness of the construction plant; (b) the number of passes of the stabilisation machine necessary to achieve uniform
 pulverisation and mixing; (c) the field moisture content required to achieve specified compaction requirements; (d) the rolling routine required to meet specified compaction requirements.
 The trial section shall be located within the Works area.
 The length of the trial section shall be between 100 and 200 metres over the full width of the area proposed for stabilisation.
 HP Lime stabilisation shall not proceed outside the trial section until the Superintendent has reviewed all aspects of the work. The outcome of the Superintendent's review will be provided to the Contractor within three working days after completion of the trial. If the Specification requirements are not met for the trial, the Superintendent may direct that another trial be undertaken or that the work be re- stabilised and presented for re- assessment.
 
 290.10 TEST ROLLING
 All lime stabilised material shall be test rolled in accordance with Section 173 of the Specification.
 If the Superintendent considers that a completed stabilised earthworks layer has been affected by rain or damaged in some way before a successive layer is placed, further test rolling shall be carried out by the Contractor on the layer immediately prior to being covered by a succeeding layer.
 
 290.11 REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF COMPACTION
 
 (a) General
 
 Density testing shall be undertaken within 12 hours after completion of compaction.
 
 Remoulding of compacted specimens for determination of the laboratory reference
 
 density at each test stabilised material.
 
 site
 
 shall
 
 be
 
 completed
 
 wiDtheipna2rt4mheonutrsofaSfttearteexGtrroawcttihonoAf usgaumspt l2es01o6f Section 290 (Page 6 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The work shall be assessed for compliance with Scale A or Scale B requirements for acceptance of compaction of the lot as specified in Clause 290.15. The calculation of the characteristic or mean density ratio shall be based on Standard compactive effort.
 A lot shall consist of a single layer of like material and work compacted on the same day up to a maximum area of 4000 m2.
 For work to be tested for compliance with Scale A requirements, the number of randomly selected test sites per lot shall be six.
 For work to be tested for compliance with Scale B requirements, the number of randomly selected test sites per lot shall be three.
 If the depth of stabilisation or any compacted layer exceeds 200 mm, the Contractor shall measure and assess the field density in two sub-layers in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice 500.05.
 (b) Scale A Requirements for Acceptance of Compaction
 The work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is not less than 99.0%. If the characteristic density ratio is less than 99% the material shall be immediately reworked and/or recompacted as specified in Clause 290.08(g) to meet specification requirements.
 (c) Scale B Requirements for Lot Acceptance of Compaction
 The work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean density ratio for the lot is not less than 99.0%. If the mean density ratio is less than 99% the material shall be immediately reworked and/or re-compacted as specified in Clause 290.08(g) to meet specification requirements.
 
 290.12 REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF LIME SPREADING RATE
 
 (a) Mat or Tray System
 The average Lime Spreading Rate shall be ascertained by dividing the mass of lime used by the area over which the lime has been spread. Where the average Lime Spreading Rate is less than specified, additional lime shall be spread over the surface to bring the average Lime Spreading Rate up to at least the specified rate.
 The Contractor shall check the uniformity of the spreading of lime at the frequency specified in Table 290.131 by placing a minimum of three mats or trays with a plan area not less than 1 m2 in the path of the spreading vehicle at an equal spacing of not less than 25% of the length of the spreading run. The Lime Spreading Rate over each mat or tray shall be calculated by dividing the mass of lime deposited on each mat or tray by the plan area of the mat or tray. Where the Lime Spreading Rate so determined for any mat or tray is less than the specified rate by more than 10%, additional lime shall be spread over the part or all of the area over which the lime has been spread.
 
 (b) Continuous Weighing System
 
 The mass of lime spread over the pavement surface may be measured and recorded by a
 spreader fitted with a fully calibrated computerised electronic weigh scale system capable of continuously measuring and recording the mass of lime at intervals of not more than
 100 m of forward travel. If requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall produce the print out of the actual Lime Spreading Rate.
 
 The Contractor shall have a current certificate of calibration for the computerised
 
 spreading requested
 
 equipment and shall produce by the Superintendent.
 
 evidenDceepaorftmtheenatcotfuaSltartuennGirnogwsthpreaAdurgautset w2h0e1n6 Section 290 (Page 7 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 290.13 MINIMUM TESTING FREQUENCY
 
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall carry out testing at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the materials and work supplied under the Contract complies with the specified requirements but which is not less than that shown in Table 290.131.
 
 (b) Frequency of Density Testing for Assessment of Compaction
 The Contractor shall initially test every lot for acceptance of compaction in accordance with the requirements of the Specification. Density testing of every lot shall continue until three consecutive lots of like material or work have achieved the specified standard when tested for the first time. The Contractor may reduce the frequency of density testing to the minimum testing requirements specified after satisfying the above requirement.
 If the Contractor has satisfied the above requirement and is density testing lots at the minimum test frequency and any lot fails to achieve the specified standard, the Contractor shall test all subsequent lots until three consecutive lots of like material or work have achieved the specified standard, at which time the frequency of density testing may again be reduced to the minimum frequency.
 For the purposes of this sub-clause, acceptance of compaction for small areas as defined in Section 173 will not be regarded as satisfying the initial testing requirements stated above.
 
 Table 290.131 Frequency of Testing
 
 Test
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Available Lime / Available One test per production day at the point of manufacture. Lime Index
 
 Uniformity of Spreading Rate
 
 A mat or tray test (minimum of three mats or trays as
 specified in Clause 290.12(a) for each separate continuous spreading run except where calibrated load cell computerised
 spreading devices are fitted with a system to continuously monitor the lime spreading rate every 100 m.
 
 Average Lime Spreading Rate Each continuous spreader run with no breaks or pauses in spreading.
 
 Uniformity of Mixing
 
 For each compaction lot  Visual inspection of six random test holes excavated for the full depth of the loose material after
 mixing of the binder prior to commencement of compaction.
 
 Characteristic
 
 or
 
 Mean Every second lot subject to the qualifying period as defined in
 
 Density Ratio
 
 Clause 290.13(b).
 
 290.14 CURING AND PROTECTION OF COMPACTED LAYERS
 The surface of the compacted layer shall be kept continually moist, and free from contamination until the succeeding layer is placed.
 *** If the stabilised material overlies an expansive material with a percentage swell exceeding 2.5%, the stabilised material shall be maintained at a minimum characteristic moisture ratio of ##:90%.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 290 (Page 8 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 290.15 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 *** (a) Job Details and Design Requirements ##(strikethrough this clause if the Design Distribution Rates of Available Lime are to be specified in Clause 290.15(b)):
 Job details and design requirements are shown in Table 290.151.
 
 Table 290.151 Job Details (Contractor Design) ##(delete all # symbols. Limit after # symbol may be changed or deleted if not required):
 
 Road ##:
 
 Location
 
 From
 
 To
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Minimum CBR
 Strength
 
 Maximum Swell %
 
 Maximum Permeability
 m/sec
 
 Minimum Depth of Stabilisation
 (mm)
 
 Compaction Assessment (Scale A or B)
 
 ##:
 
 ##:1.5% ##:5 x 10-9
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 *** (b) Job Details and Design Distribution Rates ##(strikethrough this clause if the Contractor is to determine the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime from the job details and design requirements specified in Clause 290.15(a) above):
 Job details and Design Distribution Rates of Available Lime are shown in Table 290.152.
 
 Table 290.152 Design Distribution Rates of Available Lime (Department of State Growth Design) ##(insert values as appropriate and delete all # symbols):
 
 Road ##:
 
 Location
 
 From
 
 To
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Design Distribution
 Rate of Available
 Lime * (kg/m2)
 ##:
 
 Minimum Depth of Stabilisation
 (mm)
 
 Compaction
 Assessment (Scale A or B)
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 * This figure is to be used to determine the Lime Spreading Rate in the formula given in Clause 290.08(c) once the Available Lime Index of the lime to be used on the job is known.
 ##(in the paragraph below, strikethrough inapplicable word(s)):
 *** (c) A preliminary trial ##is/:is not required.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 290 (Page 9 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 304 - UNBOUND FLEXIBLE PAVEMENT CONSTRUCTION
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 175, 180, 204, 801, 811, 812, 818 and 820. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent: ## (include the option to use crushed concrete as a specified alternative to the use of Class 3 or Class 4 pavement materials manufactured from virgin rock, shown on the drawings as necessary):
 304.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the placement of gravel, sand, soft or ripped rock, crushed rock, crushed scoria or crushed concrete pavement materials, for the construction of unbound flexible pavement layers.
 304.02 DEFINITIONS
 Unbound Flexible Pavement A pavement consisting of an unbound granular base and subbase materials, with a thin asphalt or sprayed bituminous seal surfacing.
 Pavement Course For the purpose of this specification, the pavement base, upper subbase and lower subbase shall each be termed a pavement course. A pavement course may comprise one or more layers.
 Base One or more layers of material usually constituting the uppermost structural element of a pavement on which the surfacing may be placed, which may be composed of crushed rock, or other materials as specified in Clause 304.03. Typically, base is the top 200 mm of the pavement or the pavement base thickness as specified or shown on the drawings.
 Subbase The pavement material constructed on the subgrade to the underside of the base either for the purpose of making up the additional pavement thickness required, or to provide a working platform. The subbase may be constructed of the same material type or may comprise two different material types as follows: (a) Upper Subbase - the better quality material immediately below the base; and (b) Lower Subbase - the lower quality material immediately above the subgrade. If only a single layer of subbase is specified or shown on the drawings, the specified requirements for subbase material shall conform to the requirements of an upper subbase material.
 Subgrade Subgrade is the trimmed or prepared portion of the formation on which the pavement including shoulders is constructed.
 Segregated Area An area of a pavement layer, which does not comply with the grading requirements of Clause 304.10. Typically this is where the finer material is either not present or has settled to the bottom of the layer leaving the coarser materials at the surface.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 304.03 MATERIALS
 *** The Contractor shall be responsible for the procurement of sufficient specified material to complete the work. The Contractor shall supply details demonstrating compliance of the materials with Section 801 and the following sections as relevant: ##(strikethrough whichever is not relevant): Section 811 Gravel, Sand and Soft or Ripped Rock for Pavement Base and Subbase Section 812 Crushed Rock for Pavement Base and Subbase Section 818 Crushed Scoria for Pavement Base and Subbase Section 820 Crushed Concrete for Pavement Subbase and Light Duty Base.
 Where a crushed product is specified in accordance with Sections 811, 812, 818 and 820, mixes registered by the Department of State Growth as `General' may be used in the construction of roadworks. Mixes registered as `Conditional' may be used provided the conditions are complied with. Mixes registered as `Experimental' shall only be used with the written permission of the Superintendent.
 Water added to the pavement material shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils, salts, acids, alkalis and vegetable substances. Water shall contain a maximum of 1000 mg/L of suspended solids. Water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are known or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use. The electrical conductivity shall not be more than 3500 S/cm. Water sources classified by the relevant Water Authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement.
 304.04 SUBGRADE PREPARATION
 Prior to placing subbase material, the subgrade shall meet the requirements of Section 204.
 304.05 DELIVERY DOCKETS
 Where material is scheduled for measurement by loose volume in delivery vehicles or by mass, a delivery docket for each load shall be issued to the Superintendent at the point of delivery.
 Where material is measured by other means and for Lump Sum Contracts, the Contractor shall make delivery dockets available for inspection on request by the Superintendent.
 Delivery dockets shall show: (a) name of the supplier, and location of quarry, pit or plant; (b) docket number; (c) name of user; (d) project name and location (or contract number); (e) registered number or fleet number of the vehicle; (f) date and time of loading; (g) nature and source of material; (h) empty and loaded masses of the vehicle (where material is scheduled for measurement by
 mass); (i) loose volume in delivery vehicle (where material is scheduled for measurement by loose
 volume); (j) supplier's stockpile identification number if applicable; and (k) legible signature of person receiving the material at the point of delivery.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 2 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 304.06 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 All pavement courses shall, after compaction, be finished to smooth and uniform surfaces, free of segregated areas, and conforming to the limits for level, line, grade, thickness and cross section shown on the drawings or as specified.
 Any material that has been compacted and then trimmed from the compacted surface to conform to the correct level or thickness as shown on the drawings shall not be re-used in the pavement construction without the approval of the Superintendent.
 (a) Width and Alignment
 The width of each side of the pavement shall not be less than the specified offset width or more than 50 mm outside the specified offset width when measured at right angles from the centre line or design line.
 (b) Surface Level of Pavement Courses
 The surface level of the pavement courses shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of Section 173 and every test lot shall meet either Scale A, B or C requirements as specified in Clause 304.12.
 The maximum lot size for measurement and assessment of surface level shall be 4000 m2 but may be increased to match the maximum lot size for assessment of compaction specified in Table 304.111.
 Where pavement is to be constructed to the lip level of kerb and channel, it shall be constructed flush with the lip of the channel or not more than 5 mm above.
 (i) Scale A and B Surface Level Requirements
 Each level measurement shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method and the number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in Table 304.061.
 The mean and standard deviation of the departures from the design surface level for the pavement courses at their respective levels within each lot shall meet the requirements of Table 304.062.
 Table 304.061 Minimum Number of Level Measurements per Lot
 
 Scale of Surface Level Measurement
 Scale A
 Scale B
 
 Minimum Number of Measurements
 Per Lot
 80
 40
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 304.062 Surface Level Tolerances for the Pavement Courses
 
 Scale of Level Measurement
 
 Lower Subbase
 
 x Range Max. S
 
 (mm)
 
 (mm)
 
 Upper Subbase
 
 x Range Max. S
 
 (mm)
 
 (mm)
 
 Base
 
 x Range Max. S
 
 (mm)
 
 (mm)
 
 Scale A
 
 +6 to 10
 
 10
 
 +4 to -8
 
 8
 
 5
 
 8
 
 Scale B
 
 +8 to 16
 
 15
 
 + 6 to -12
 
 13
 
 8
 
 10
 
 Notes: 1. x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot 2. S is the standard deviation of all level readings taken in the lot 3. A negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive
 value designates a surface level above the design level
 
 Where the surface does not meet the relevant surface tolerance in Table 304.062, the Contractor shall undertake further work to bring the surface into the specified tolerance and shall re-survey the test lot in accordance with this clause. The Contractor shall accept all costs associated with the necessary additional works and survey.
 For Scale A and Scale B level requirements, the Superintendent may agree to accept a lot which does not conform with the limits of Table 304.062 at a reduced payment subject to the lot not exceeding either of the limits specified in Table 304.063. Where the Superintendent agrees to accept the lot, payment for the work will be reduced as shown in Table 304.063. The value of the lot of work shall be reduced as calculated from the percentages specified in Table 304.063 and the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in Clause 304.12(b).
 
 Table 304.063 Payment Deduction for Surface Level
 
 Variation
 
 Payment Reduction
 
 Mean ( x ) exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum of 25% of the permitted range
 
 8% plus 4% reduction for each 1 mm of x outside the tabulated limit
 
 Standard Deviation (S) exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum of 35% of the permitted range
 
 8% plus 4% reduction for each 1 mm of S greater than the tabulated limit
 
 If both x and S vary by more than the specified limit, the payment reduction shall be the sum of the payment reductions for both x and S.
 
 (ii) Scale C Surface Level Requirements
 Surface level measurement shall be undertaken in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 173.
 The surface level of the pavement courses shall comply with the requirements of Table 304.064.
 Table 304.064 Level Tolerances at the Surface of Pavement Courses
 
 Lower Subbase (mm)
 + 15 to  25
 
 Upper Subbase (mm)
 + 10 to - 25
 
 Base (mm)
  15
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Thickness of Pavement Layers In addition to complying with pavement layer surface tolerances specified in Clause 304.06(b), the following tolerances shall apply to the thickness of any pavement layer: (i) the subbase course shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than 15 mm; (ii) the base course shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than 10 mm and the average thickness of base over every 100 m section, over the full carriageway width, shall be not less than the specified thickness; (iii) the combined thickness of subbase and base courses shall be not less than the specified thickness by more than 15 mm. Where the Contract does not require design finished surface level control but specifies a pavement composition or a minimum resheet thickness only, the Contractor shall construct the pavement to comply with the requirements of thickness of each pavement layer as specified in this sub-clause. The tolerance requirements of Clause 304.06(b) shall not apply.
 (d) Shape No point on the surface of any pavement layer shall vary by more than 8 mm from a 3 m straight edge, or 10 mm from a 6 m straight edge, placed in any direction. At no location shall water pond on the surface of any pavement layer.
 *** (e) Rideability ##(Note to specification author - include this clause and Section 180 where Rideability targets are required - Note that if a rideability requirement is included, the tolerance requirements of Clause 304.06(b) may not apply and can be struck out): In addition to the above requirements for surface tolerance, the finished surface shall satisfy the requirements specified in Section 180.
 304.07 JOINTING
 The layout of joints shall conform to the following requirements: (a) material shall be spread in such a manner as to minimize the number of joints; (b) for all pavement layers, transverse joints in adjoining paver runs shall be offset by not less
 than 2 m; (c) transverse joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than 2 m; (d) longitudinal joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than 150 mm; (e) longitudinal joints shall be located within 300 mm of the planned position of traffic lanes lines
 or within 300 mm of the centre of a traffic lane.
 The exposed end of each lot and the exposed edges of any part width construction shall be kept moist until spreading and compaction has been completed over the entire layer.
 304.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF COMPACTION
 (a) General Pavement lots shall be tested for compliance with the specified compaction scale at the frequency specified in Clause 304.11, using the appropriate test methods listed in Section 175 and VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.05.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Material during compaction shall have a moisture content of not less than 85% of optimum. After completion of compaction of a layer, the moisture content of the material in the layer shall be maintained at a moisture content of not less than 85% of optimum until test rolling has been completed. All segregated areas shall be rectified as construction proceeds, prior to the completion of compaction and in such a way as to mitigate the potential for segregation to re-occur.
 (b) Material of Nominal Size 40 mm or Less
 Material shall be spread and compacted such that the material is properly mixed both transversely and longitudinally to produce a homogeneous material for each lot.
 Material having a nominal size after compaction of 40 mm or less shall be compacted to comply with the following requirements:
 (i) The calculation of density ratio shall be based on tests performed using Modified compactive effort. The work shall be assessed for compliance with Scale A, Scale B or Scale C requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as specified in Clause 304.12 and as provided in Tables 304.081 and 304.082.
 (ii) A lot shall consist of a single layer of work and its size shall not exceed that given in Table 304.111.
 (iii) For work to be tested for compliance with Scale A or Scale B requirements, the number of tests per lot shall be six. For work to be tested for compliance with Scale C requirements, the number of tests per lot shall be three.
 (iv) All pavement layers shall be compacted to withstand rolling and shall be test rolled in accordance with Section 173, prior to acceptance of the layer. For pavement construction, any lot that has a surface area less than 500 m2 may be treated as a small area and tested in accordance with Section 173.
 The Contractor shall provide for the Superintendent to be present during all test rolling.
 (v) The maximum thickness of any pavement base layer shall not exceed 150 mm and the maximum thickness of any subbase layer shall not exceed 200 mm.
 (vi) The minimum thickness of any pavement layer shall be 4 times the nominal size of the material.
 Table 304.081 Acceptance Limits for Scale A and Scale B Standards of Compaction
 
 Characteristic Density Ratio % (six tests)
 
 Compaction Scale
 
 Lower Subbase Layers
 
 Upper Subbase Layers
 
 Base Layers
 
 Layer directly beneath the Bituminous
 Surfacing
 
 Other Layers
 
 A
 
 Not less than 98.0 Not less than 98.0 Not less than 100.0
 
 Not less than 99.0
 
 B
 
 Not less than 97.0 Not less than 97.0 Not less than 98.0
 
 Not Less than 98.0
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 304.082 Acceptance Limits for Scale C Standard of Compaction
 
 Compaction Scale
 
 Mean Value of Density Ratio % (three tests)
 
 Subbase Layers
 
 Base Layers
 
 C
 
 Not less than 98.0
 
 Not less than 100.0
 
 (c) Material of Nominal Size Greater than 40 mm
 
 The first lot shall be placed as a trial section. Following acceptance of the trial section, the Contractor shall then confirm the moisture control and compaction procedure and submit the procedure to the Superintendent for review and record.
 
 The Superintendent may require that further trial sections be constructed to verify that the proposed compaction routine is acceptable. No additional payment will be made for any such request.
 
 Acceptance of work as far as compaction is concerned will be based on compliance with the accepted moisture control, compaction procedure and test rolling carried out in accordance with Section 173.
 
 HP
 
 The Contractor shall provide for the Superintendent to be present during all test
 
 rolling.
 
 Unstable areas identified by test rolling shall be rectified by the Contractor.
 
 Prior to any layer being covered by a successive layer, the Superintendent may require further test rolling to confirm that the layer is sound.
 
 304.09 MAINTENANCE OF COMPACTED LAYERS
 The surface of any compacted pavement layer or prepared subgrade shall be maintained in such a way as to minimise dust, prevent ravelling, erosion, deformation or any other damage to the layer resulting from environmental conditions, traffic or construction activities. The layer shall be kept free from contamination until any subsequent pavement work under the Contract is commenced or the Superintendent accepts and takes responsibility for that part of the Works.
 
 304.10 POST COMPACTION REQUIREMENTS FOR PAVEMENT MATERIAL
 If specified in Clause 304.10(c) or Clause 304.10(d), following completion of compaction, material shall be tested for post-compaction grading or Plasticity Index (PI) at the frequency specified in Clause 304.11 for the appropriate Scale of Testing specified in Clause 304.12(a).
 The test samples to be used for post-compaction grading and PI tests shall be a combined sample made up from six randomly selected increments extracted from the lot of pavement construction being assessed.
 (a) Assessment of Post-compaction Grading
 Assessment of post-compaction grading shall be based on a sieve analysis on a sub-sample of the combined sample. The post-compaction grading shall comply with the requirements of Tables 304.101 or 304.102.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (b) Assessment of Post-compaction Plasticity Index (PI)
 The assessment of post-compaction PI shall be based on the mean value of a pair of test results determined from two single results from separate sub-samples taken from the combined sample. The mean PI shall comply with the limits on PI specified in Table 304.103 or such value as approved by the Superintendent to meet the permeability requirement specified in Section 812. ## in (c) and (d) below, delete # symbols and strikethrough inappropriate phrases: *** (c) Post-compaction grading testing ##is required: ##is not required: (refer to Clause 304.11(c))
 Where post-compaction grading testing is required, the sample shall be taken from the same sample site as the compaction testing.
 *** (d) Post-compaction Plasticity Index testing ##is required: ##is not required: (refer to Clause 304.11(c))
 Where post-compaction Plasticity Index testing is required, the sample shall be taken from the same sample site as the compaction testing and the post-compaction grading testing (if required).
 Table 304.101 Post-Compaction Grading Requirements for Crushed Materials
 
 Sieve Size (mm)
 53.0 37.5 26.5 19.0 13.2
 9.5 4.75 2.36 0.425 0.075
 
 Post-Compaction Grading Limits (% Passing by Mass)
 
 Class 1 or Class 2 Crushed Rock Crushed Scoria Base
 Class CC2 Crushed Concrete
 
 Class 3 Crushed Rock Crushed Scoria Upper Subbase
 Crushed Concrete Class CC3
 
 Nominal Size (mm)
 
 Nominal Size (mm)
 
 20
 
 20
 
 40
 
 -
 
 -
 
 100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 95 - 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 75 - 95
 
 95  100
 
 95  100
 
 64 - 90
 
 78  92
 
 75 - 95
 
 -
 
 63  83
 
 60  90
 
 42 - 78
 
 44  64
 
 42  76
 
 27 - 64
 
 30  49
 
 28  61
 
 20 - 51
 
 14  23
 
 14  29
 
 10 - 24
 
 6  12
 
 6  14
 
 6 - 13
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** Table 304.102 Post-compaction Grading Requirements for Gravel, Sand, and Soft or Ripped Rock Base and Subbase Materials
 
 ## in the table below, delete all # symbols, even where no value is to be specified:
 
 Post-compaction Grading Limits (% Passing by Mass)
 
 Sieve Size (mm)
 
 Base
 
 Natural Sands or Gravel
 
 Ripped Rock
 
 Upper Subbase
 
 Natural Sands or Gravel
 
 Ripped Rock
 
 75.0
 
 ##:
 
 53.0
 
 -
 
 37.5
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 26.5
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 19.5
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 9.5
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 4.75
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 2.36
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 1.18
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 ##:
 
 -
 
 0.425
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 0.075
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 *** Table 304.103 Post-Compaction Requirements for Plasticity Index
 
 ## in the table below, delete all # symbols - Limits after # symbols may be changed if required:
 
 Material
 
 Plasticity Index Minimum Maximum
 
 Class 1 Crushed Rock
 
 0
 
 6
 
 Class 2 Crushed Rock
 
 0
 
 6
 
 Class 3 Crushed Rock
 
 0
 
 10
 
 Gravel, Sand or Ripped Rock Base Material
 
 2
 
 ##:6
 
 Gravel, Sand or Ripped Rock Upper Sub-base Material
 
 2
 
 ##:12
 
 304.11 MINIMUM FREQUENCY OF TESTING
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall carry out compaction density testing and post-compaction grading and PI testing at a frequency sufficient to ensure that work performed under the Contract complies with the specified requirements but shall not be less than that shown in Table 304.111.
 The minimum test frequency specified in Table 304.111 shall not apply to small areas as defined in Section 173. In this case, every lot shall be tested separately for compliance with the specified requirements.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 If the nature of material in any lot being placed has visibly altered when compared to previous lots placed, the Superintendent may require additional testing to be undertaken to confirm that the lot complies with the specified requirements for post-compaction grading and PI. No additional payment will be made for this testing.
 (b) Compaction
 The Contractor shall initially test every lot for acceptance of compaction in accordance with the requirements of the Specification. Testing of every lot shall continue until three consecutive lots of like material and/or work have achieved the standards specified in Clauses 304.08 and 304.10 when tested for the first time. The Contractor may reduce the frequency of compaction testing to the minimum test frequency as specified in Table 304.111 after satisfying this requirement.
 The Contractor may continue to test at the minimum frequency until such time as a lot fails to achieve the specified requirements. All subsequent lots shall be tested until three consecutive lots of like material and work have achieved the specified standard, at which time the frequency of testing may revert to the minimum test frequency.
 If the Contractor is testing at the minimum frequency and any test lot does not meet specification requirements, the Superintendent may require any previous untested lots between the last lot to be tested and the failed lot to be tested. This testing shall be carried out at no additional cost to theState Growth.
 (c) Post-compaction Grading and Plasticity Index (PI)
 (i) Scale A Requirements for Post Compaction Grading and PI Testing
 Where testing is specified in Clause 304.10(c) or (d) and Clause 304.12 requires it to be Scale A, all pavement layers shall be tested for post-compaction grading and PI at the frequency specified in Table 304.111.
 The first lot of each pavement layer shall be tested for post-compaction grading and PI. If the lot satisfies the requirements specified in Clause 304.10(a) and (b) as applicable, the Contractor may test at the minimum frequency as specified in Table 304.111. The Contractor shall immediately notify the Superintendent of any lot that does not meet the specified requirements and any subsequent lot shall be tested as if it were the initial lot. If any lot meets the specified requirements but is reworked to comply with the specified compaction requirements, it shall be retested for compliance with specified requirements.
 If the Contractor is testing at the minimum frequency and any test lot does not meet specification requirements, the Superintendent may require the testing of the postcompaction grading and PI of all lots constructed after the last tested lot. This testing shall be carried out at no additional cost to State Growth.
 (ii) Scale B Requirements for Post Compaction Grading and PI Testing
 Where testing is specified in Clause 304.10(c) or (d) and Clause 304.12 requires it to be Scale B, the first lot of each pavement course shall be tested for post-compaction grading and PI.
 If the first lot each pavement course satisfies the specified post compaction requirements in Clause 304.10(a) and (b), as applicable, no further post-compaction testing will be required for that pavement course.
 If the first lot does not meet the requirements specified in Clause 304.10(a) and (b), the Contractor shall then seek approval from the Superintendent before work proceeds.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (iii) Scale C Requirements for Post Compaction Grading and PI Testing Post compaction grading and PI testing is not required.
 
 *** Table 304.111 Maximum Lot Size and Minimum Frequency of Testing for Compaction, Post-compaction Grading and PI (after passing the minimum number of qualifying lots)
 ## in the table below, the limit after # symbol may be changed if required :## in the table below, at the * symbol, strikethrough if further PI testing is not required after the first lot is accepted for PI:
 
 Maximum Allowable Pavement Layer Lot Size for a Single
 Layer of Work
 
 Minimum Frequency of
 Testing for Compaction
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing for Scale A Post-compaction
 Grading
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing for Scale A
 Post-compaction PI
 
 Upper Base Layer The lesser of ##:4000 m2 or one day's production
 
 One per ##:2 lots
 
 One per ##:2 lots One pair per ##:4 lots
 
 Lower Base Layer The lesser of ##:4000 m2 or one day's production
 
 One per ##:2 lots
 
 One per ##:2 lots * One pair per ##:8 lots
 
 Upper Subbase
 
 The lesser of ##:4000 m2 or one day's production
 
 One per ##:2 lots
 
 One per ##:4 lots * One pair per ##:8 lots
 
 Lower Subbase
 
 The lesser of ##:4000 m2 or one day's production
 
 One per ##:2 lots
 
 304.12 SCHEDULES OF DETAILS
 *** (a) Requirements for Testing and Acceptance of Surface Level Measurement, Compaction and Post-compaction Gradings and PIs (Clauses 304.06, 304.08, 304.10 and 304.11)
 ## in the table below, delete all # symbols and insert required information:
 Table 304.121 Testing Levels
 
 Roadway ##:
 
 Road Chainage / Location
 
 Scale of Surface Level Measurement
 (A, B or C)
 
 Scale for Assessment
 of Compaction (A, B or C)
 
 Scale for Assessment of Post-Compaction Grading and PI
 (A, B or C)
 
 ## to ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Where for any location a specific scale has not been nominated, Scale A shall apply.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** (b) Basis for Price Reduction for Departure from Specified Surface Level (Clause 304.06(b)(i)) ## in the table below delete all # symbols and insert required information:
 
 Table 304.122 Rates for Price Reduction
 
 ##: ##:
 
 Location
 
 Pavement Course
 Upper Subbase Lower Subbase Base Upper Subbase Lower Subbase Base
 
 Unit Price $/m2 ##: ##: ##: ##: ##: ##:
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 304 (Page 12 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 306 - CEMENTITIOUS TREATED PAVEMENT SUBBASE
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 175, 815 and 821. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent. DELETE THIS NOTE FROM FINAL DOCUMENT. :##Include the option to use crushed concrete as a specified alternative to the use of Class 3 or Class 4 pavement materials manufactured from crushed rock. Show on the drawings as necessary. DELETE THIS NOTE FROM FINAL DOCUMENT:
 306.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the delivery, spreading and compaction of plant mixed crushed rock and recycled crushed concrete for the construction of pavement subbase, treated with cementitious binder to produce a modified or bound subbase. This section is to be read in conjunction with the following sections:  Section 815 - Cementitious Treated Crushed Rock for Pavement Subbase  Section 821 - Cementitious Treated Crushed Concrete for Pavement Subbase.
 306.02 DEFINITIONS
 Cementitious Binder
 A cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength. Cementitious binders include Portland cement Type GP or blended cement Type GB, hydrated lime, quicklime, or a blend of ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS), hydrated lime, fly ash, alkali activated slag or other pozzolanic material supplied in accordance with this specification.
 Maximum Allowable Working Time
 The maximum allowable working time for the cementitious binder as specified or as determined in accordance with the relevant Test Method or Code of Practice.
 Pavement Design Modulus
 The presumptive modulus used as the basis for the mechanistic design of a bound pavement with a bound cementitious treated crushed rock or crushed concrete subbase.
 Working Time
 The time required to transport, place, compact and trim the pavement layer after the cementitious binder is added at the mixing plant.
 306.03 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 Pavement subbase shall be finished to a smooth and uniform surface and shall, after compaction, conform within the following limits to the levels, lines, grades, thicknesses and cross sections as specified or shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 1 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (a) Width and Alignment
 
 The width of pavement measured on each side of the centreline or design line shall not deviate by more than 50 mm from the designed offset when measured at a right angle.
 
 (b) Surface Level of Subgrade and Pavement
 The surface level of the subgrade and pavement courses shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of Section 173 and every test lot shall meet either Scale A, B or C requirements as specified in Clause 306.12.
 The maximum lot size for measurement and assessment of surface level shall be 4000 m2.
 (i) Scale A and B Surface Level Requirements
 Each level measurement shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method and the number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in Table 306.031.
 The mean surface level and the variation in surface level for the subgrade, and pavement courses within each lot shall meet the requirements of Table 306.032.
 Table 306.031 - Minimum Number of Level Measurements per Lot
 
 Scale of Surface
 
 Minimum Number of
 
 Level Measurement Measurements Per Lot
 
 Scale A
 
 80
 
 Scale B
 
 40
 
 Table 306.032 - Average Surface Level Tolerances for the Subgrade and Cementitious Treated Subbase
 
 Scale of Level Measurement
 
 Subgrade
 
 x Range (mm)
 
 Max. S (mm)
 
 Cementitious Treated Subbase
 
 x Range (mm)
 
 Max. S (mm)
 
 Scale A
 
 +5 to 15
 
 12
 
 +4 to -8
 
 8
 
 Scale B
 
 +5 to 25
 
 15
 
 +6 to -12
 
 13
 
 Notes:
 1. x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot
 2. S is the standard deviation of all level readings taken in the lot
 3. A negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive value designates a surface level above the design level.
 
 For Scale A and Scale B level requirements, the Superintendent may accept a lot which does not conform with the limits of Table 306.032 at a reduced payment, in which case payment for the work will be reduced as shown in Table 306.033. The value of the lot of work shall be calculated from the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in Clause 306.12(b).
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 2 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 306.033 - Payment Deduction for Surface Level
 
 Variation
 
 Payment reduction
 
 Mean ( x ) exceeding the specified limit 8% plus 4% reduction for each 1 mm
 
 up to a maximum of 25%
 
 of x outside the tabulated limit
 
 Standard Deviation (S) exceeding the 8% plus 4% reduction for each 1 mm specified limit up to a maximum of 35% of S greater than the tabulated limit
 
 Note: If both x and S vary by more than the specified limit, the payment reduction shall be the sum of the payment reductions for both x and S.
 
 (ii) Scale C Surface Level and Thickness Requirements
 Surface level measurement shall be undertaken in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 173 - Examination and Testing of Materials and Work (Roadworks).
 The surface level of the subgrade and subbase shall comply with the requirements of Table 306.034.
 Table 306.034 - Level Tolerances at the Surface of Subgrade and Subbase
 
 Subgrade (mm)
 + 15 to  25
 
 Subbase (mm)
 + 10 to - 25
 
 (c) Shape
 No point on the prepared surface of the subgrade shall lie more than 12 mm below a 3 metre straight edge placed on the pavement in any direction.
 No point on the surface of the cementitious treated subbase layer shall vary by more than 8 mm from a 3 metre straight edge, or 10 mm from a 6 metre straight edge, placed in any direction.
 Water shall not pond on the surface of the cementitious treated subbase.
 306.04 MATERIALS
 The Contractor shall supply all materials required to construct the cementitious treated pavement subbase. The supply of Cementitious Treated Crushed Rock or Cementitious Treated Crushed Concrete shall comply with the requirements of Sections 815 and 821 respectively.
 306.05 MOISTURE CONTENT
 The moisture content of the material at the time of spreading and compaction, expressed as a percentage by mass, shall be within plus 0.5% and minus 1.0 % from the Modified optimum moisture content.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 3 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 306.06 WATER
 Except for the purpose of curing, no water shall be added to the cementitious treated material.
 Water shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils, salts, acids, alkalis and vegetable substances. Water sources shall be tested for electrical conductivity and pH, in accordance with the current Australian Standards as listed in Section 175 Referenced Documents for Standard Specifications for Roadworks and Bridgeworks prior to use. The electrical conductivity shall not be more than 3500 S/cm and pH within the range of 6 to 10 unless otherwise approved. Water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement. Water sources shall be tested at a maximum of twelve monthly intervals or when the nature of the water source has changed. The use of reclaimed water will require the approval of the Superintendent and shall conform to the VicRoads guidelines for reclaimed water as listed under other referenced documents in Section 175.
 306.07 DELIVERY
 (a) Delivery Vehicles
 Delivery vehicles shall have bodies fitted with covers of a suitable material to prevent loss of moisture during transport. Vehicles used for delivery of material to the hoppers of pavers shall have bodies or discharge equipment which will enable the load to be discharged direct into the hopper without spillage and in such a way that segregation will be minimised.
 (b) Delivery Dockets
 Delivery dockets shall show: (i) name of the supplier, and location of plant; (ii) docket number;
 (iii) name of user; (iv) project name and location (or contract number); (v) registered number or fleet number of the vehicle; (vi) date and time of loading; (vii) nature and source of material; (viii) empty and loaded masses of the vehicle (where material is scheduled for measurement
 by mass); (ix) loose volume in delivery vehicle.
 Where material is scheduled for measurement by loose volume in delivery vehicles or by mass, a delivery docket for each load shall be issued at the point of delivery.
 Where material is measured by other means and for Lump Sum Contracts, the Contractor shall make delivery dockets available for inspection on request.
 306.08 JOINTING
 The layout of joints shall conform to the following requirements unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent:
 (a) material shall be spread in such a manner as to minimise the number of joints;
 (b) in any layer, transverse joints in adjoining paver runs shall be offset by not less than 2 m;
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 4 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) transverse joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than 2 m; (d) longitudinal joints shall be offset from one layer to the next by not less than 150 mm; (e) longitudinal joints shall be located within 300 mm of the planned position of traffic lane lines
 or within 300 mm of the centre of a traffic lane. If approval is given to depart from the joint location specified in 306.08(a) to (e), the Contractor shall record of the location of these joints. The edge of any paver run shall be kept moist until spreading and compaction have been completed in adjacent paver runs. Longitudinal and transverse joints shall be made where specified, or at the end of each day's work, or where spreading operations have been halted for a period in excess of the maximum allowable working time for the binder as specified in Clause 306.09 and Table 306.091. If the binder is not one of the binders listed in Table 306.091 the allowable working time for the binder shall be determined in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method. Joints shall be made in a careful manner and shall be prepared immediately prior to the recommencement of spreading operations by cutting back the edge of previously laid material to a clean vertical face in compacted material of the full specified layer thickness. Longitudinal joints shall be constructed parallel to the centre line of the carriageway and transverse joints at right angles to the centre line. Material cut during the preparation of joints shall be removed from site. The faces of all joints shall be thoroughly wetted immediately before spreading new material. The level and shape of the surface at all joints shall be within the limits specified in Clause 306.03.
 306.09 COMPACTION PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE
 (a) General The cementitious treated subbase material shall be placed, trimmed to level and fully compacted within the maximum allowable working time specified in Table 306.091 depending on the binder type and the time of year the subbase is being placed.
 HP If the Contractor proposes to use an alternative cementitous binder to those included in Table 306.091, laboratory test results shall be produced to the Superintendent showing that the binder satisfies the required working time determined in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method. In addition, the cementitious treated material using the alternative binder shall meet specified strength requirements.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 5 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 306.091 - Maximum Allowable Working Time after Mixing for Common Cementitious Binders
 
 Maximum Allowable Working Time (hours)
 
 Cementitious Binder
 
 Construction between
 October and April (1)
 
 Construction between May
 and September
 
 Rapid Setting Type GP Cement
 
 2
 
 3
 
 Medium Setting
 
 Type GB Cements
 
 Cement/Slag blend (50% to 60% cement content)
 
 3
 
 5
 
 Cement/Fly ash blend (70% to 80% cement content)
 
 Cement/Slag/Fly ash blend (55% to 65% cement content)
 
 Slow Setting
 
 Slag/Lime Blend and other slow setting Supplementary
 
 8
 
 12
 
 Cementitous Blends
 
 Note 1: If the ambient temperature within the period from October to April on any day is less than 15C, the May to September maximum allowable working times may be applied.
 
 On completion of compaction, any segregated areas shall be rectified.
 The calculation of density ratio shall be based on Modified compactive effort.
 The work shall be assessed for compliance with Scale A or Scale B requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as specified in Clause 306.12 and as provided in Clauses 306.09(b) and (c).
 For work to be tested for compliance with Scale A requirements, the number of tests per lot shall be six.
 For work to be tested for compliance with Scale B requirements, the number of tests per lot shall be three.
 A lot shall consist of a single layer of pavement material placed on the same day and all lots shall be tested for compliance with the requirements of this section. The maximum lot size shall not exceed 4000 m2.
 (b) Scale A Requirements for Testing and Acceptance of Compaction
 The work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is not less than 96% .
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 6 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 If the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is less than 96.0% but greater than or equal to 92% the work represented by the lot may be accepted but the method of rectification or redesign of the pavement shall be approved by the Superintendent. Alternatively, the Superintendent may accept the work at a reduced payment calculated using the formula:
 P = 4Rc - 284
 in which Rc is the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot and P is the percentage of the value of work represented by the lot that will be paid provided that the value of P shall not exceed 100. For the application of this formula, the value of work represented by the lot shall be calculated from the unit rate of payment specified in Clause 306.12(b). If any small lot less than 500 m2 is to be assessed under Section 173 of this specification where only three tests are required to be undertaken and assessed on the basis of meeting a Mean Density Ratio of 98%, the reduced payment shall be calculated using the formula:
 P = 4Rm - 292
 (c) Scale B Requirements for Testing and Acceptance of Compaction The work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean density ratio for the lot is not less than 96.0%. If the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot is less than 96.0%, but greater than or equal to 92% the work represented by the lot may be accepted but the method of rectification and/or redesign of the pavement shall be approved by the Superintendent. Alternatively, the Superintendent may accept the work at a reduced rate calculated using the formula:
 P = 4Rm - 284
 in which Rm is the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot and P is percentage of the value of work represented by the lot that will be paid provided the value of P shall not exceed 100. For the application of this formula the value of work represented by the lot shall be calculated from the unit rate of payment specified in Clause 306.12(b).
 306.10 TEST ROLLING
 Test rolling may be carried out in accordance with the requirements of Section 173 on the cementitious treated pavement subbase layer within the maximum allowable working time for the relevant binder and time of year as specified in Table 306.091.
 306.11 CURING AND PROTECTION OF COMPACTED LAYERS
 Unless there are special design and construction conditions specified for placing of multiple layers, cementitious treated subbase with a pavement design modulus exceeding 500 MPa shall be placed in a single layer. The minimum compacted thickness shall be not less than 100 mm and the maximum compacted thickness shall be no more than 180 mm and constructed within the tolerances specified in Clause 306.03.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 7 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (a) Pavement Design Modulus of 500 MPa or where no Pavement Design Modulus is Specified
 
 The surface of each compacted layer shall be kept moist for a period of seven days unless covered at an earlier stage with the succeeding layer or with an approved curing membrane.
 
 Construction or other traffic shall not use a compacted layer within 24 hours of placement without the approval of the Superintendent.
 
 The subbase shall be kept in good order and condition and free from contamination.
 
 (b) Pavement Design Modulus of 2000 MPa
 
 In addition to meeting the requirements of Clause 306.11(a) above, the Contractor shall:
 (i) cure the cementitious treated subbase by maintaining the surface in a moist condition for seven days;
 (ii) prevent construction plant from using the pavement during the seven day curing period apart from that required to maintain and cure the surface; and
 (iii) after the seven day curing period, restrict all construction traffic to vehicles with a maximum axle group load of 4 tonnes until asphalt base and intermediate courses are placed (priming, primersealing and asphalt placement activities excepted).
 
 (c) Pavement Design Modulus of 3500 MPa
 
 In addition to meeting the requirements of Clause 306.11(a) above, the Contractor shall:
 
 (i) apply a size 7 CRS standard grade emulsion primerseal at a rate of application of 1.5 litres per square metre (0.9 litres per square metre of residual binder) to the cementitious treated subbase within 12 to 24 hours after completion of compaction. If after 24 hours ambient conditions are such the material has not dried back to less than 80% of the modified optimum moisture content, the primerseal shall be delayed until such time as the moisture content has reduced below 80% of optimum.
 
 Subject to approval by the Superintendent and if weather conditions during the period from October to April inclusive suit priming, a light or very light cut back bitumen primer may be applied to the surface of the of the cementitious treated material in lieu of the emulsion primerseal. The rate of application of primer shall be a minimum of 0.6 litres per square metre and shall deliver a minimum of 0.3 to 0.4 litres per square metre of residual bitumen to the surface.
 
 HP
 
 Requests by the Contractor to vary the rates of application shall be submitted in
 
 writing to the Superintendent for review.
 
 Primersealing shall not be carried out within 12 hours of forecast rain and priming, if approved for use, shall not be carried out within 24 hours of forecast rain.
 
 HP
 
 The Contractor's Environmental Management Plan shall include procedures to
 
 minimise all risks of damage to the environment associated with priming and
 
 primersealing.
 
 (ii) allow the cementitious treated subbase to cure for seven days without trafficking (except for the application of a prime or primerseal);
 
 (iii) prevent construction plant from using the pavement during the seven day curing period apart from that required to maintain and cure the surface; and
 
 (iii) after the seven days curing period, restrict construction traffic to vehicles with a maximum axle group load of 4 tonnes until asphalt base and intermediate courses are placed (priming, primersealing and asphalt placement activities excepted).
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 8 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 306.12 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 *** (a) Requirements for Testing and Acceptance of Compaction (Clause 306.09)
 
 Location and Chainage ##:
 
 Pavement Design Modulus (MPa)
 ##:
 
 Scale of Surface Level
 Measurement (A, B or C)
 
 Compaction Scale
 (A or B)
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 *** (b) Unit rate of payment to be used to calculate the value of the work represented by the lot for application of payment deduction formulae specified in Clauses 306.03(b)(i), 306.09(b) and 306.09(c) shall be $##:/m3.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 306 (Page 9 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 307 - IN SITU STABILISATION OF PAVEMENTS WITH CEMENTITIOUS BINDERS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 290, 304 and 407. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 307.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for in situ stabilisation of existing pavements by addition of cement, blended cement, lime, or other supplementary cementitious materials. The requirements relate to mix design, preparation of existing pavement materials, lime pre-treatment of pavement materials with high plasticity, supply of cementitious binders, construction plant, and spreading, mixing, and compaction of pavement layers.
 Refer to Section 290 for Lime Stabilisation of Earthworks Materials in cases where lime stabilisation is required to improve the strength or reduce the swell potential of an earthworks material.
 307.02 DEFINITIONS
 Available Lime
 The amount of Calcium Oxide (CaO2) or Calcium Hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) contained in Quicklime or Hydrated Lime respectively.
 Available Lime Index (ALI)
 The Calcium Oxide or Calcium Hydroxide content of quick lime or hydrated lime respectively, expressed as a percentage of the total mass of lime determined in accordance with AS 4489.6.1.
 Cementitious Binder
 A cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength. Cementitious binders include Portland cement (AS3972) Type GP or blended cement Type GB, or a blend of ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS, AS3582.2), hydrated lime (AS1672.1), fly ash (AS3582.1), alkali activated slag or other pozzolanic material supplied in accordance with this specification.
 Deep-Lift Stabilisation
 Pavement stabilisation carried out in a single layer in excess of 250 mm thick. Typically, deep lift stabilisation requires a high spread rate of slow setting cementitious binder and heavy compaction equipment to produce a fully bound pavement layer.
 Density Decay Correction Factor
 A factor derived to calculate the field density ratio from a laboratory determined reference density where compaction of the test sample has occurred after the maximum allowable working time has expired.
 Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime
 The spread rate of pure Calcium Oxide or Calcium Hydroxide.
 Fly Ash
 A fine powder of pozzolanic material extracted from the flue emissions produced from the burning of black coal.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 1 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Hydrated Lime Hydrated lime is a powdered form of lime consisting primarily of calcium hydroxide, also referred to as slaked lime.
 Lime Lime is either Hydrated Lime (Calcium Hydroxide) or Quick Lime (Calcium Oxide). Lime Spreading Rate The required spread rate of lime determined from the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime corrected for the ALI of the lime to be used. Maximum Allowable Working Time The maximum allowable working time for the cementitious binder as specified or as determined in accordance with the relevant Test Method or Code of Practice. Pozzolan A siliceous or alumino-siliceous material when finely ground can be mixed with lime or Portland cement to form a cementitious material. Quicklime Quicklime is a fine granulated powder consisting primarily of Calcium Oxide that can be readily slaked by the application of water after it has been evenly spread to form Calcium Hydroxide. Reference Density The reference density is the maximum dry density or the peak converted wet density determined in accordance with the appropriate test method, but adjusted for oversize material as appropriate. Slag (Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag) Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS) is a pozzolan produced by fine grinding of slag produced as a by-product from the smelting of iron ore. Working Time The time required to mix, fully compact and trim the stabilised pavement layer after the addition of cementitious binder.
 307.03 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 Completed stabilised base and subbase layers shall conform within the following limits to the levels, lines, grades, thicknesses and cross sections shown on the drawings, or specified, or directed by the Superintendent.
 (a) Surface Level Base Surface level measurement shall be undertaken in lots not exceeding 4000 m2 in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 173 - Examination and Testing of Materials and Work (Roadworks). Unless otherwise specified in other Standard Sections or elsewhere, the surface level of the stabilised layer at subgrade level at any point shall not differ by more than 15 mm above or 25 mm below the specified level.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 2 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Subbase If the cementitious stabilised material forms a subbase for an unbound flexible pavement or an asphalt pavement, the requirements for surface level of the subbase layer shall be as specified in Sections 304 or 407 unless specified otherwise. (b) Depth of Stabilisation The depth of cementitiously stabilised material as specified in Clause 307.16(a) shall not at any point be less than the specified thickness by more than 15 mm and the average thickness of the lot shall be not be less than the specified thickness.
 (c) Alignment The edges of the stabilised layer shall be not more than 50 mm inside, and not more than 100 mm outside, the specified offset from centreline or design line.
 (d) Width The width of the stabilised material shall not be less than the specified width by more than 50 mm.
 (e) Shape No point on the surface of the stabilised layer shall lie below a 3 m straightedge placed in any direction on the surface by more than 10 mm for the base and 15 mm for subbase.
 307.04 MATERIALS
 (a) Cementitious Binders (i) Cement Blended cement Type GB or for special purposes, General Purpose Portland Cement Type GP complying with AS 3972 shall be supplied by the Contractor. The Contractor shall nominate the type, brand and source of cement proposed.
 HP If Type GP is proposed, the Superintendent shall be first notified and evidence provided to show that the in situ stabilised material can be mixed and compacted to the specified density within the Maximum Allowable Working Time for Type GP Cement.
 HP The use of any additive to the cement to change its properties shall be subject to prior approval by the Superintendent.
 (ii) Lime Quicklime and hydrated lime shall meet the requirements of AS 1672. All quicklime and hydrated lime supplied to the job shall be provided with delivery docket showing the manufacturers reference number for the production lot and an Assigned ALI for each production week. The Assigned ALI shall be determined by averaging the six most recent test results for ALI. Test certificates for determination of the ALI shall be made available on request. Lime shall be stored in a moisture free environment and shall be retested for compliance with AS 1672.1 if stored more than 14 days after receipt from the manufacturer.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 3 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iii) Slag / Lime Blends Slag and hydrated lime may be used in blended combination to produce a slow setting cementitious binder. The requirements for hydrated lime shall be as specified in Clause 307.04(a)(ii) above. Slag used shall be Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS) meeting the requirements of AS 3582.2. The Contractor shall nominate the type, brand and source of the GGBFS to be used. Unless otherwise specified, slag/lime shall be blended uniformly in the ratio of 85% slag to 15% hydrated lime. If the blend is to be varied, the proportion of lime shall not be less than 10% but may be increased above 15% for materials with high plasticity provided that the minimum UCS requirements are met as specified in Table 307.053. The Contractor shall provide evidence that the blend ratio has been met for all material supplied to the job. An 85% slag to 15% lime blend shall have a mortar bar 7 day compressive strength of 10 MPa and 28 day mortar bar compressive strength of 16 MPa. The test shall be the same test specified in AS 3972 except that the cement to water ratio shall be adjusted to match the consistency of mortar produced for the compressive strength test for GB cement in accordance with the relevant Australian Standard Test Method.
 (iv) Slow Cementitious Blends Incorporating Alkali-activated Slag or Fly Ash Special blends of slow setting cementitious stabilising agents incorporating alkali-activated slag or fly ash which are not produced to meet the requirements of a GB cement may be used subject to the blend satisfying the mortar bar test requirement specified in Clause 307.04(iii) above and the specified mix requirements. The maximum binder working time shall be determined in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method to confirm that the binder is a slow setting binder as defined by Table 307.052. Fly ash shall be supplied to meet the requirements of AS 3582.1.
 (b) Water Water added to the material shall be clear and substantially free from sediments and detrimental impurities such as oils, salts, acids, alkalis and vegetable substances. Water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are unknown or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use. The electrical conductivity shall not be more than 3500 S/cm and the amount of chloride and sulphate in any water used shall each be no greater than 300 ppm. Water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement.
 (c) Pavement The in situ pavement material to be stabilised shall be the existing surfacing and pavement material and any additional material placed over the existing pavement for mixing with the pavement below.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 4 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 307.05 PAVEMENT MATERIALS INVESTIGATION AND MIX DESIGN
 
 (a) General
 
 Unless otherwise specified in Clause 307.16(d) and (e), the Contractor shall produce a mix design for the in situ stabilised pavement material in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice 500.16 and referenced VicRoads Test Methods. The aim of the mix design procedure is to improve the material grading if necessary, reduce the plasticity and to optimise the type and amount of cementitious binder required having regard to the chemical and physical properties of the in situ material. The in situ stabilised pavement material is required to meet the specified grading, plasticity and strength requirements, and contain a cementitious binder which will allow sufficient working time to mix, place, compact and trim the material before the initial set takes place.
 
 (b) Grading and Plasticity Index
 
 The final grading of the material to be stabilised after addition of any additional granular material, to correct the grading or to increase the thickness of the pavement shall be within the limits specified in Table 307.051.
 If the Plasticity Index (PI) exceeds the limits specified in Table 307.051 the material shall be pre-treated with lime or modified with additional granular material using the design procedure described in the Test Method. If the material is to be pre-treated with lime to lower the PI, the quantity of lime additive used shall not be less than 1.5% by mass.
 
 Table 307.051 - Grading and Plasticity Index Requirements
 
 Sieve Size (mm)
 
 53
 
 Base (% passing by mass) 100
 
 Subbase and Sealed Shoulders (% passing by mass)
 
 90 100
 
 37.5
 85 100 75 100
 
 19
 60 100 50 100
 
 4.75
 40 70 30 80
 
 0.425 0.075
 
 20 40
 15 45
 
 5 - 25 3 - 30
 
 PI (Max)
 10
 15
 
 (c) Maximum Allowable Working Time
 The type of cementitious binder added shall be selected on the basis of the maximum allowable working times specified in Table 307.052 and the minimum working time considered necessary to properly mix the material, trim and shape the surface to level and fully compact the layer to the specified density ratio.
 HP If the Contractor proposes to use an alternative cementitous binder to those included in Table 307.052, laboratory test results shall be produced to the Superintendent showing that the maximum allowable working time for the cementitious binder as determined in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method satisfies the required working time and the cement stabilised material using the alternative binder meets specified strength requirements.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 5 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 307.052 - Maximum Allowable Working Times after Mixing for Various Cementitious Binders
 
 Maximum Allowable Working Time (hours)
 
 Cementitious Binder
 
 Construction between
 October and April (1)
 
 Construction between May and September
 
 Slow Setting
 
 Slag/Lime blends, Alkali Activated Slag and
 
 8
 
 12
 
 other Supplementary Cementitious Blends
 
 Medium Setting
 
 Type GB Cements
 
 Cement/Slag blend (50% to 60% cement
 
 content) Cement/Fly Ash blend (70% to 80% cement
 
 3
 
 5
 
 content)
 
 Cement/Slag/Fly Ash blend (55% to 65%
 
 cement content)
 
 Rapid Setting Type GP Cement
 
 2
 
 3
 
 Lime
 
 Hydrated Lime and Quicklime
 
 12
 
 24
 
 (d) Cementitious Binder Content and Unconfined Compressive Strength (UCS)
 
 Table 307.053 specifies the limits for the minimum and maximum content of cementitious binder and the target UCS to be used to select the optimum cementitious binder content from test specimens prepared at a minimum of three different binder contents varying by not less than 0.5% by mass in accordance with referenced test methods.
 
 Table 307.053 - Target UCS to be used to Select the Optimum Content of Cementitious Binder (7 days)
 
 Type of Work
 
 Cementitious Binder Content
 (% by mass)
 
 Min
 
 Max
 
 Target 7 day UCS at modified compactive effort (MPa)
 Slow Medium Rapid Setting Setting Setting
 
 Material Modification
 Fully bound (Deep-lift Stabilisation)
 Bound Subbase for Deep Strength Asphalt Pavements where Assigned Design Modulus is not more than 500 MPa
 
 1.5 * 3.5
 
 1.0
 
 4.0
 
 5.5
 
 2.5
 
 Not
 
 3.0 Applicabl
 
 2.5
 
 e
 
 1.5
 
 2.0
 
 Not 3.5 Applicabl
 e
 
 3.5
 
 5.0
 
 * The Superintendent may agree to a cementitious binder content of less than 1.5% but at least 1% by mass if the UCS requirement at a binder content of 1.5% is more than 50% above the target UCS. If less than 1.5% by mass of cementitious binder is permitted, a minimum of two mixing runs shall be undertaken after spreading of cementitious binder and the minimum density ratio specified in Clause 307.13 shall be increased by one percentage point.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 6 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 307.06 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
 HP The Contractor shall not commence work until all mix design details have been presented to the Superintendent showing compliance with the requirements of Clause 307.05 and approval has been given for stabilisation work to proceed.
 307.07 CONSTRUCTION PLANT
 The Contractor shall provide construction plant meeting the following requirements and capability.
 (a) Spreader for Cementitious Binder
 Mechanical equipment specifically designed for the spreading of cementitious binder directly on to the prepared roadbed shall be used. The spreader shall be capable of accurately regulating the discharge of the cementitious binder such that the requirements of Clause 307.14 are met.
 (b) Mixing Machine
 A purpose built mixing machine designed for in situ stabilisation of roadworks shall be used to pulverise the existing pavement material and uniformly mix the material together with water and cementitious binder to the specified depth of stabilisation. Rotary hoes and other types of agricultural machinery shall not be used.
 After pulverisation and mixing, all base material shall be capable of passing a 37.5 mm sieve and all subbase material shall be capable of passing a 53 mm sieve.
 (c) Watering Plant
 Watering plant or any purpose designed watering system incorporated within the mixing machine shall be capable of uniformly distributing sufficient water to hydrate any quicklime used for lime pre-treatment and if required, add more water to increase the moisture content to aid compaction.
 (d) Compaction Plant
 Compaction plant shall be of such mass as to be capable of compacting the stabilised layer to the minimum density ratio throughout the depth of the layer.
 Where compaction is to be accepted on a procedural basis rather than by lot testing, the Superintendent and the Contractor shall agree on the number and minimum mass of rollers and the compaction routine to be used. If the compacted depth of layer exceeds 150 mm, the following items of compaction plant shall be used as a minimum requirement:
 - a vibrating pad foot roller for initial compaction; - a vibrating steel flat roller for densification; - a multi wheel roller for finishing and sealing off the surface prior to trafficking.
 307.08 CONSTRUCTION
 (a) General
 Construction includes the pulverisation of any seal or asphalt surfacing, premixing of in situ materials, supply and spreading of any additional granular material, supply, spreading and mixing of cementitious binder into the in situ pavement material, and compaction, trimming and curing of the stabilised layer.
 Unless otherwise specified, stabilisation work undertaken each day shall be completed across the full pavement width.
 Stabilisation operations may continue during light rainfall if the moisture content of the in situ pavement material can be maintained below modified optimum moisture content.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 7 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Only sufficient area of pavement is to be pulverised that can be mixed and fully compacted in one day. For stabilised patching work which is to be trafficked or sealed immediately after completion of compaction, only sufficient pavement area shall be opened up to enable work to be completed within the maximum allowable working time specified in Table 307.052.
 (b) Preparation of the Existing Pavement
 The existing pavement shall be pulverised and mixed to the proposed depth of stabilisation prior to spreading of the cementitious binder. If significantly different in situ materials are present across the width of pavement to be stabilised, the Contractor shall use a system for cross blending materials as necessary, to produce a uniform material prior to addition of cementitious binder.
 In locations where a pavement has been pre-treated with lime to dry the material out or lower the Plasticity Index, addition of further cementitious binder and remixing shall not commence until the following day.
 The Contractor shall remove or re-pulverise lumps of asphalt or seal which would otherwise be retained on a 53 mm sieve. The volume any large size material removed from the site shall be replaced with an equivalent volume of suitable granular pavement material.
 
 (c) Lime Pre-treatment
 If the material to be stabilised is to be first pre-treated with lime to lower its plasticity, lime shall be spread uniformly over the prepared surface at the Lime Spreading Rate calculated using formula (i) or (ii) below.
 (i) Where hydrated lime has been used in the laboratory testing to determine the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime and it is proposed to use quicklime at the job site, the Lime Spreading Rate shall be determined from:
 
 Lime Spreading Rate = 0.76 X
 
 Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime
 ALI of Lime to be Used (%)
 
 (ii) Where the same type of lime (hydrated lime or quicklime) is to be used at the job site as has been used in the laboratory tests to determine the Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime, the Lime Spreading Rate shall be determined from:
 
 Lime Spreading Rate =
 
 Design Distribution Rate of Available Lime
 ALI of Lime to be Used (%)
 
 If quicklime is used it shall be slaked with sufficient water to allow full slaking to take place prior to mixing. Full slaking will be deemed to have been achieved when all quicklime that has been spread has changed from a cream coloured granulate to a fine white powder and there is a cessation of rising vapours.
 Mixing of quicklime into the pavement material shall not commence until full slaking has been achieved.
 
 (d) Spreading of Lime or Cementitious Binder
 Spreading shall not be carried out at times when lime or cementitious binder could become air borne or dispersed in such a way as to become a nuisance or a hazard to persons, property or livestock.
 Immediately following completion of spreading, the Contractor shall check and record the Average Spreading Rates and the Uniformity of Spread in accordance with Clause 307.15. If the required Spreading Rate for lime or cementitious binder exceeds 15 kg/m2, it shall be spread in two equal spreading runs with material from the first spread run being fully mixed into the pavement material prior to the second spreading run being undertaken.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 8 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The prepared pavement shall not be trafficked until the cementitious binder has been mixed into the pavement material.
 (e) Mixing in Cementitious Binder
 Mixing shall commence as soon as practical after spreading of the cementitious binder and shall continue until all pavement materials and cementitious binder are uniformly blended throughout the full depth of the stabilised layer.
 The moisture content of the pavement material prior to addition of the cementitious binder shall be within the range 80% to 100% of the Modified optimum moisture content. Additional water shall be added to hydrate the cementitious binder.
 For modified or deep-lift stabilisation, a minimum of two mixing runs shall be carried out. For deep-lift stabilisation, approximately half of the cementitious binder shall be spread in advance of each run. Unless otherwise specified, the depth of stabilisation or compacted layer thickness for stabilisation shall not exceed 350 mm.
 (f) Compaction
 Compaction of the stabilised layer shall commence immediately after mixing. Compaction equipment shall work as close as practicable behind the mixer to maximise the time available for compaction. Compaction and trimming shall be carried out in a continuous operation.
 All compaction shall be completed within the times specified in Table 307.052 after addition of the cementitious binder.
 Where necessary during compaction, the Contractor shall water the material to maintain the moisture content within 80% to 100% Modified optimum moisture content.
 (g) Trimming
 On completion of initial rolling, the stabilised material shall be trimmed to the specified surface tolerances. Light applications of water may be applied during this operation to replace evaporated moisture and to assist in rapid achievement of a tightly knit surface.
 All surface irregularities which do not conform to the requirements of Clause 307.03 shall be rectified by the Contractor within the maximum working time for the cementitious binder used as specified in Table 307.052. Rectification beyond the maximum working time for the cementitious binder shall be carried out by replacing material with freshly stabilised material as necessary.
 The material trimmed off shall be either cut to waste and if necessary, removed from site or, alternatively it may be transported to another location to be incorporated into a stabilised layer.
 307.09 JOINTING
 Longitudinal joints shall be avoided by completing a full carriageway width each day. If a longitudinal joint is required, because of rain or traffic control requirements, it shall be located at a lane line or in the centre of the carriageway. Transverse joints shall be formed where stabilisation operations have been halted for more than the time specified in Table 307.052 and at the end of each day's work.
 Joints shall be formed by cutting back into the fully compacted previously stabilised material by a minimum of 300 mm which shall be remixed into the new work. Additional stabilising agent shall be added to the area of previously stabilised material to be remixed. Placement of additional cementitious binder shall be deemed to be part of the joint construction.
 The level and shape of the surface at all joints shall be within the limits specified in Clause 307.03.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 9 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 307.10 TEST ROLLING
 Stabilised layers shall pass test rolling in accordance with Section 173, prior to acceptance of the layer.
 Any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified.
 307.11 MAINTENANCE OF THE STABILISED SURFACE PRIOR TO SURFACING OR OVERLAY
 The Contractor shall keep the stabilised pavement surface moist and protected from damage by traffic or construction activities until either a further pavement layer or the bituminous surfacing is applied.
 307.12 PRELIMINARY TRIAL
 If directed by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall carry out a preliminary trial of the proposed stabilising operation.
 The trial shall determine: (a) the effectiveness of the construction plant; (b) the number of passes of the stabilisation machine necessary to achieve uniform pulverisation
 and mixing; (c) the field moisture content required to achieve specified compaction requirements; (d) the rolling routine required to meet specified compaction requirements.
 The trial section shall be located within the Works area.
 The length of the trial section shall be between 100 and 200 metres over the full width of the area proposed for stabilisation.
 HP Stabilisation work shall not proceed outside the trial section until the Superintendent has reviewed all aspects of the stabilising operation. The Superintendent's review of the stabilising plant and procedures will be provided to the Contractor by the end of the next working week day after the trial's completion. If the Specification requirements are not met for this trial section, the Superintendent may direct that another trial section be stabilised or the rejected section be re-stabilised and presented for re-assessment.
 307.13 REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF COMPACTION AND STRENGTH
 (a) General
 (i) Lot Testing Requirements
 Where a Scale A1, A2 or Scale B compaction standard is specified in Table 307.161, compaction is to be accepted by density testing in lots of similar material and work. Unless otherwise specified, the maximum lot size shall be the area of work completed on the same day up to 4,000 m2 provided that the whole of the lot is essentially a uniform material similar to material used for the relevant mix design applicable to the lot. If the maximum binder working time requires the area or work to be completed in one day to split into sub-sections, each sub-section shall be treated as a separate lot. If the material is too variable to be able to assign a single maximum dry density for the lot, a separate reference density shall be determined for each test site.
 If a compaction Scale is not specified in Table 307.161, the Scale C compaction procedure shall be adopted.
 DeDpeaprtamrtemnet notf oSftaStteatGeroGwrotwh th AuAguugstus2t0210616 SeScteioctnio3n0370(7Pa(gPaeg1e01o0f o1f51) 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The calculation of density ratio shall be based on Modified compactive effort of the laboratory prepared sample containing the design rate of cementitious binder.
 
 The work shall be assessed for compliance with Scale A1 or A2, Scale B or Scale C requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as specified in Clauses 307.13(b), (c) and (d) and Clause 307.16.
 
 (ii) Determination of the Density Ratio
 
 If it is not possible to transport extracted samples of mixed material to an established laboratory for determination of the reference density within the maximum working time of the cementitious binder, and the Superintendent agrees that establishment of a site laboratory for this purpose is not warranted, the following procedure shall be used to determine the Density Ratio:
 
 1. measure field density on completion of compaction;
 
 2. extract samples and transport to an offsite laboratory;
 
 3. determine the reference density for the laboratory compacted samples as soon as practicable but not exceeding 24 hours;
 
 4. determine the Density Ratio (DR) from -
 
 DR = DRt x DDCF
 
 Where:
 
 DRt =
 
 Density Ratio calculated using the reference density
 
 determined at time (t)
 
 DDCF = Density Decay Correction Factor determined from Table 307.131
 
 corresponding to time (t), the binder type and the time of year
 
 construction is being undertaken.
 
 Table 307.131 - Density Decay Correction Factors
 
 Time (t) from Addition of Binder to
 Completion of Laboratory Compaction (hours)
 
 Cementitious Binder (construction between October
 and April)
 
 Slow Setting
 
 Medium Setting
 
 Rapid Setting
 
 Cementitious Binder (construction between May and
 September)
 
 Slow Setting
 
 Medium Setting
 
 Rapid Setting
 
 1 to 2 2 to 4 4 to 6 6 to 8 8 to 12 12 to 18 18 to 24
 
 1 1 1 1 0.998 0.993 0.987
 
 1 1 0.994 0.991 0.988 0.981 0.973
 
 1 0.994 0.990 0.985 0.978 0.965 0.951
 
 1 1 1 1 1 0.996 0.990
 
 1 1 1 0.993 0.990 0.983 0.977
 
 1 1 0.991 0.987 0.981 0.971 0.958
 
 For individual jobs more than 10000 m2 where the material to be stabilised is of a similar nature throughout, the Contractor shall determine and apply a job specific DDCF determined in accordance with the relevant Test Method specified in VicRoads Code of Practice 500.16.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 11 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Scale A1 and A2 Requirements for Testing and Acceptance of Compaction
 (i) Scale A1assessment shall be used where the in situ material is sufficiently consistent to be assigned a Maximum Dry Density for the lot.
 If a single maximum dry density can be assigned to the lot the work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the characteristic value of density ratio obtained from six randomly selected test sites within the lot is not less than 95.0%.
 If the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot is less than 95.0%, but greater than or equal to 90.0% the work represented by the lot may be accepted as far as compaction is concerned but payment for the whole of such work will be made at a rate calculated using the formula:
 P = 6Rc  470
 where Rc is the characteristic value of density ratio of the lot and P is the rate of payment expressed as a percentage of the value of work represented by the lot provided that the value of P shall not exceed 100. For the application of this formula, the value of the work represented by the lot shall be calculated using the unit rate specified in Clause 307.16(b).
 (ii) Scale A2 assessment shall be used where in situ material is too variable to assign a Maximum Dry Density to the lot.
 If the material is too variable to assign a single maximum dry density to the lot and requires separate maximum dry densities to be determined for each test site, the work represented by the lot will be accepted, as far as compaction is concerned, if the mean value of the density ratio obtained from three randomly selected test sites within the lot is not less than 97% with no individual value being less than 90%.
 If the mean value of density ratio of the lot is less than 97%, but greater than or equal to 92%, the work represented by the lot may be accepted but payment for the whole of such work will be made at a rate calculated using the formula:
 P = 6Rm - 482
 where Rm is the mean value of density ratio of the lot and P is the rate of payment expressed as a percentage of the value of work represented by the lot provided that the value of P shall not exceed 100. For the application of this formula, the value of the work represented by the lot shall be calculated using the unit rate specified in Clause 307.16(b).
 Work which has a mean value of density ratio of less than 92% shall be rejected and the Contractor shall submit a proposal to rectify the work to the Superintendent for approval.
 (c) Scale B Requirements for Testing and Acceptance of Compaction
 The work represented by the lot will be accepted as far as compaction is concerned if the mean of the individual density ratio test values from three randomly selected test sites for the lot is not less than 95.0%.
 If the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot is less than 95.0% but greater than or equal to 90.0%, the work represented by the lot may be accepted as far as compaction is concerned but payment for the whole of such work will be made at a rate calculated using the formula:
 P = 6Rm - 470
 where Rm is the mean of the individual density ratio test values for the lot and P is the rate of payment expressed as a percentage of the value of work represented by the lot provided that the value of P shall not exceed 100. For the application of this formula, the value of the work represented by the lot shall be calculated using the unit rate specified in Clause 307.16(b).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 12 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Scale C Requirements for Acceptance of Compaction The Superintendent may direct the Contractor to construct a trial section of stabilised pavement as specified in Clause 307.10. Acceptance of work will be based upon on compaction plant to be used, compaction routine and a density monitoring procedure using a nuclear gauge and proof rolling as specified or agreed between the Superintendent and the Contractor. Any unstable areas within limits of work and depth of stabilisation detected by test rolling shall be rectified by the Contractor and re-presented for test rolling.
 (e) Assessment of Compaction for Thick Layers For compacted layers in excess of 200 mm thick, the Contractor shall measure the field density of the layer in two sub-layers of equal thickness in accordance with the relevant Test Method. At each test site the sub-layer with the lower of the two density test results shall be used in the calculation of the Characteristic or Mean Density Ratio for assessment of compaction in accordance with Clause 307.13.
 307.14 REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF SPREADING RATES
 (a) Mat or Tray System The average spreading rate of lime or cementitious binder shall be ascertained by dividing the mass of cementitious binder spreading by the area over which the cementitious binder has been spread. Where the average spreading rate is less than the specified or design spread rate, additional cementitious binder shall be spread to bring the average rate up to at least the design spread rate. The Contractor shall check the uniformity of spreading rate of lime or cementitious binder at the frequency specified in Clause 307.15 by placing a minimum of three mats or trays with a plan area not less than 1 m2 in the path of the spreading vehicle at an equal spacing of not less than 25% of the length of the spreading run. The spreading rate over each mat or tray shall be calculated by dividing the mass of lime or cementitious binder deposited on each mat or tray by the plan area of the mat or tray. Where the spread rate so determined for any mat or tray is less than the specified rate by more than 10%, additional cementitious binder shall be spread over the part or all of the area over which the lime or cementitious binder has been spread.
 (b) Continuous Weighing System The mass of lime or cementitious binder spread over the pavement surface may be measured and recorded by a spreader fitted with a fully calibrated electronic weigh scale system capable of continuously measuring and recording the mass of lime or cementitious binder at intervals of not more than 100 m of forward travel. The Contractor shall have a current certificate of calibration for the computerised spreading equipment and shall produce evidence of the actual running spread rate when requested by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 13 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 307.15 MINIMUM TESTING FREQUENCY
 
 The Contractor shall test the materials and the stabilised pavement layer at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the materials and work under the Contract comply with the specified requirements but not less than the frequency specified in Table 307.151.
 
 Table 307.151
 
 Test
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Available Lime / Available Lime Index
 
 One test per production day at the point of manufacture.
 
 Uniformity of Spreading Rate of Lime or Cementitious Binder
 
 A mat or tray test (minimum of 3 mats or trays as specified in Clause 307.14(a)) for each separate continuous spreading run except where calibrated load cell computerised spreading devices are fitted with a system to continuously monitor the spread rate every 100 m.
 
 Average Spread Rate of Lime or Cementitious Binder
 
 Each continuous spreader run. Based on the total tonnage used for the run (kg) divided by the area covered (m).
 
 Uniformity of Mixing
 
 For each compaction lot  Visual inspection of six random test holes excavated for the full depth of the loose material after mixing of the binder and prior to commencement of compaction.
 
 Characteristic or Mean Density Ratio Every lot as defined in Clause 307.13(a).
 
 307.16 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 *** (a) Job Details
 
 Table 307.161
 
 Road
 
 Location From To
 
 Layer
 
 1 Type of Work
 (Modification, Bound
 Subbase or Deep Lift)
 
 Compacted Thickness
 of Stabilised
 Layer (mm)
 
 2 Depth of Additional Granular
 Material (mm)
 
 Requirements for
 Acceptance of Compaction
 (Scale A1, A2, B or C)
 
 ##:
 
 ##: ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Notes on Table 307.161 1. Describe as:
 Modification (material modification) Bound Subbase (fully bound subbase for a Deep Strength Asphalt Pavement) Deep Lift (fully bound deep lift stabilisation)
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 307 (Page 14 of 15)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 2. The amount of additional granular material to be spread and mixed in with the in situ material expressed as an equivalent compacted depth.
 
 *** (b) Unit rate for Assessment of Payment Deduction
 The unit rate to be used to calculate the value of the work represented by the lot for application of payment deduction formulae specified in Clauses 307.13(b) and (c) shall be $##:/sq m (refer to Guide Notes).
 *** (c) Stabilised Mixture Design ##(strikethrough this clause if the design of the stabilised mixture has already been undertaken and spread rates for binder and any additional granular material is to be specified in Clauses 307.16(d) and (e) below):
 
 The Determination of the Design Distribution Rate of Cementitious Binder and the grading of any additional granular material required to correct the grading of the material to be stabilised shall be determined in accordance with Clause 307.05.
 
 *** (d) Details of Stabilised Mix Design and Spreading Rates ##(strikethrough this clause if the Contractor is required to design the stabilised mixture and determine spread rates under Clause 307.16(c) above):
 Table 307.162
 
 Road
 
 Location From To
 
 Design Distribution Rate for Lime Pre-treatment
 (kg/m2)
 
 Type of Cementitious
 Binder
 
 Spread Spread Rate for Rate for Cementit Additional
 ious Granular Binder Material (kg/m2) (kg/m2)
 
 ##:
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 *** (e) Grading and Plasticity Requirements for Additional Granular Material ##(strikethrough this clause if additional granular material is not required or the Contractor is to determine the grading of additional granular material to satisfy mix design requirements):
 Table 307.163
 
 Material
 
 26.5
 
 Percentage passing by mass
 
 PI
 
 19 13.2 9.5 4.75 2.36 0.425 0.075 (max)
 
 ##:
 
 ##: ##: ##: ##: ##: ##: ##: ##: ##:
 
 Department of StateGVriocwRothads ADuecgeumsbter22001068 SectioSnec3ti0o7n 3(0P7a(gPeag1e512oof f1153))
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 310 - PREPARATION OF GRANULAR PAVEMENTS FOR BITUMINOUS SURFACING
 ##This section cross-references Section 175. If Section 175 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 175 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 310.01 DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for preparation of unbound granular pavements, including in situ cementitious and bituminous stabilised pavements, for sprayed bituminous surfacing or asphalt surfacing.
 310.02 PAVEMENT PREPARATION The Contractor shall prepare for bituminous surfacing the lengths, widths and areas specified or shown on the drawings for bituminous surfacing plus an additional 0.3 m on sides where there is no concrete edging. The surface of the shoulders and verges shall be matched to the finished surface of the prepared pavement. Construction practices that produce a slurry or pasting of fine material at the surface are not permitted. The addition of fine material to the surface is not permitted. Where the Superintendent considers the prepared surface to have excessive fines, the pavement layer shall be rectified to a condition acceptable to the Superintendent. The pavement shall be prepared to produce a surface that is: (a) constructed to meet specified shape and level requirements; (b) homogenous and consistent with the material in the pavement base layer; (c) uniform in texture; (d) free of tearing and scabbing; (e) free of lamination on or within 75 mm of the finished surface; (f) level with adjacent sealed areas and edgings at the joints; (g) a hard dense and tight surface capable of being swept with a rotary road broom or similar; (h) free of loose and foreign materials; (i) dried back to the moisture content and embedded requirements specified in Clause 310.03. Any imperfections as listed above shall be corrected in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent. Where this involves the re-working of the material, the full layer depth shall be re-worked. The total area of the work shall be presented to the Superintendent for acceptance for surfacing as one lot.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 310 (Page 1 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 310.03 DRYING BACK OF PAVEMENT BASE PRIOR TO BITUMINOUS SURFACING
 
 (a) Pavement Dryback
 The uppermost pavement layer after preparation of the surface and prior to priming or primersealing shall be allowed to dry back so the moisture content of the layer meets the requirements of Table 310.031 for each test lot.
 The mean Moisture Ratio shall be determined from six randomly selected sites as a percentage of the optimum moisture content based on Modified compactive effort, and determined in accordance with VicRoads Test Method RC 316.14 - Moisture Ratio Determination for Assessment of Dry-Back of Granular Pavement Materials, as listed in Section 175.
 
 (b) Pavement Embedment
 
 Pavement embedment shall be assessed by Ball Penetration testing when required as detailed in Table 310.031. Ball Penetration testing shall be undertaken on the prepared surface in accordance with Austroads test method AG:PT/T251 - Ball Penetration Test at six randomly selected sites. No individual test result shall exceed the maximum penetration detailed in Table 310.031.
 
 Table 310.031 Requirements for Pavement Dryback and Embedment
 
 Testing Scale
 
 Pavement Dryback
 
 Mean Moisture Ratio
 
 Maximum of any individual
 result
 
 Pavement Embedment
 Ball Penetration Maximum individual
 result
 
 A
 
 Less than 60%
 
 70%
 
 3 mm
 
 Less than 60% B
 Less than 65%
 
 70% 70%
 
 Not required 3 mm
 
 C
 
 Less than 65%
 
 70%
 
 Not required
 
 (c) Testing Schedule
 The Contractor shall carry out testing for pavement dryback and embedment in accordance with Table 310.032.
 The maximum lot size to be presented for testing under this provision shall be 4000 m, and testing shall be undertaken no more than 24 hours before priming or primersealing. Test sites for assessing conformance with Table 310.031 shall be selected in accordance with VicRoads Test Method RC316.10  Selection of Test Sites as listed in Section 175. Where both dryback and embedment testing are required, both tests shall be undertaken at the same test site within the same square metre.
 Where the pavement moisture content has increased during the period between dryback testing and the proposed time of bituminous surfacing, the Superintendent may require pavement dryback and embedment to be reassessed in accordance with this clause.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 310 (Page 2 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** Table 310.032 Testing Schedule for Pavement Dryback and Embedment ## complete table below and delete all # symbols - refer to guide notes for appropriate levels:
 
 Road
 
 Location/Chainage
 
 Testing Scale
 
 ##:
 
 ##: to ##:
 
 ##:
 
 310.04 MAINTENANCE PRIOR TO BITUMINOUS SURFACING
 Following the acceptance of the prepared surface and until bituminous surfacing is completed, the Contractor shall maintain the pavement in the accepted condition until surfacing works are completed. Should the pavement condition deteriorate before surfacing works are completed, the Contractor shall re-prepare the pavement and re-present the pavement for acceptance.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 310 (Page 3 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 402 - REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT BY COLD PLANING
 ##This section cross-references Section 407. If Section 407 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 407 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 402.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for removal of pavement by cold planing including the cleaning up, removal and disposal of the excavated materials.
 402.02 COLD PLANING
 Cold planing shall be carried out in a manner as to leave a uniform surface on a plane parallel with the ultimate finished surface of the pavement as shown on the drawings.
 Cold planing machines have the following cutting drum characteristics:  standard cutting drum with cutting tool spacing of 15 mm horizontally; and  fine tooth drum with a cutting tool spacing of 8 mm (or less) horizontally.
 The nominal depth and width of pavement to be removed shall be as specified in Clause 402.06. After planing, no point on the planed surface shall lie more than 15 mm below a 3 m straightedge placed on the planed surface in any direction.
 In locations where removal and replacement of asphalt or pavement is required on the same day, the rate of cold planing including clean up shall be at a rate consistent with the asphalt replacement process to minimise the pavement area closed to traffic.
 402.03 CLEANING UP AND DISPOSAL OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL
 The planed surface shall be swept clean of all loose material prior to either diverting traffic onto the planed surface or placing asphalt.
 The excavated material removed from the road shall either become the property of the Department of State Growth, or the property of the Contractor, as specified in Clause 402.06.
 If the material becomes the property of the Department of State Growth, the Contractor shall load, transport and stockpile material into a neat pile at the nominated stockpile area as specified in Clause 402.06(d).
 If the material becomes the property of the Contractor, the Contractor shall remove all such material from the site.
 Prior to opening to traffic, placing asphalt, or leaving the site, the Contractor shall present a clean planed surface.
 402.04 ASPHALT REPLACEMENT
 Where work under the Contract includes replacement of excavated material with asphalt supplied and placed under Section 407, the following requirements shall apply: (a) Exposed granular pavement material shall be watered, re-compacted and, where
 specified, primed or heavily tack coated, or for larger areas, given a bitumen emulsion primerseal prior to placing asphalt.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 402 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (b) Prior to opening to traffic, excavated areas shall be filled with hotmix asphalt. All transverse and longitudinal joints shall be constructed as cold joints in accordance with Clause 407.17 and new asphalt shall be compacted flush with the existing pavement in accordance with the requirements of Clause 407.22(a).
 (c) In the event of a breakdown in the supply or placing of asphalt in areas to be opened to traffic, the Contractor shall temporarily backfill or ramp down the cold planed area with cold mix asphalt or other suitable material which will support traffic loading and provide for the safe passage of traffic. Material so placed shall be removed prior to placing new asphalt as specified and the placing and removal of temporary backfilling shall be at the expense of the Contractor. Temporary ramping shall be carried out to the standards specified in Clause 402.05.
 
 402.05 TEMPORARY RAMPING
 (a) Longitudinal Edges
 Any exposed longitudinal edges within the trafficked area shall be ramped down at a slope no steeper than 5 horizontal to 1 vertical by constructing a temporary wedge of hot mixed or cold mix asphalt.
 (b) Transverse Edges
 Any exposed transverse edges within the trafficked area shall be ramped down by constructing a temporary wedge of hot or cold mix asphalt. Temporary ramping shall not be steeper than 20 horizontal to 1 vertical for traffic speeds of more than 75 km/h or 10 horizontal to 1 vertical for traffic speeds of 75 km/h or less.
 (c) Removal of Temporary Ramping
 Before asphalt replacement, all temporary ramping shall be removed by cutting back along a straight line to expose a vertical face of fully compacted asphalt at the specified layer depth.
 
 402.06 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS ##[strikethrough items below which are not applicable]:
 
 (a) Type of Work
 (i) Removal of asphalt with a ##standard/fine tooth(strikethrough inappropriate option): cold planer
 (ii) Cutting of tapered longitudinal chases against kerb and channel, median openings, and side streets
 (iii) Cutting of tapered transverse chases
 (iv) Excavation of granular pavement material
 (v) Profiling of concrete pavement
 (vi) Removal and replacement of asphalt in accordance with Section 407 of this specification
 
 *** (b) Nominal area and depth of removal: ##: m2
 
 ##: mm (Clause 402.02)
 
 *** (c) Nominal width of removal:
 
 ##: m (Clause 402.02)
 
 *** (d) Planed material shall become the property of the Department of State Growth and be
 
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 402 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth stockpiled at ##: (Clause 402.03). *** (e) Planed material shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the site (Clause 402.03).
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 402 (Page 3 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 404 - STONE MASTIC ASPHALT
 ##This section cross-references Section 407. If Section 407 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 407 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 404.01 GENERAL
 This section shall be read in conjunction with Section 407 - Hot Mix Asphalt and covers special requirements for Size 10 mm Stone Mastic Asphalt (SMA) that are in addition to or override the requirements of Section 407. The section covers two types of SMA mixes; Normal Duty Size 10 mm (SMAN), and Heavy Duty Size 10 mm (SMAH).
 SMA is a coarse graded asphalt containing a high proportion of binder and added filler with the addition of cellulose fibre.
 404.02 CELLULOSE FIBRE ADDITIVE
 Cellulose fibre additive shall be non toxic, and supplied in a powdered, fine fibrilled long fibred form manufactured from raw cellulose.
 Cellulose fibre shall be supplied in bags of equal mass suitable for metered plant mixing, and shall be handled in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
 Cellulose fibre additive may be supplied in loose or pelletised form, and may be incorporated with a binding agent. The binding agent can be either bituminous or non-bituminous.
 404.03 AGGREGATES
 Unless otherwise specified, properties of the aggregates used in SMA shall comply with the requirements for Type H asphalt as specified in Clause 407.03. Further to Clauses 407.03 and 407.09, no Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) shall be added to SMA.
 404.04 BINDER
 Binder used in SMAN shall be either Class A15E PMB or Class A20E PMB or Class A25E PMB, and binder used in SMAH shall be Class A10E PMB all complying with the requirements specified in Clause 407.05(b).
 404.05 MIX DESIGN
 The mix to be used shall be a State Growth registered mix and shall comply with the requirements of Clause 407.06.
 HP The Contractor shall only use asphalt mixes that are registered by State Growth as `General' mixes at the time of placement, unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall also provide the following information: (a) Marshall Stability
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 404 (Page 1 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) The results of the Binder Paste Drain Off tests meeting the requirements of Clause 404.06(e) and the selected maximum mixing temperature to avoid excess binder drain off.
 (c) The Indirect Tensile Modulus of the mix is required to be submitted. The sample shall be prepared at 5% air voids.
 
 404.06 MIX DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
 (a) The grading limits in the job mix shall lie within the limits specified in Table 404.061 below:
 
 Table 404.061 - Grading Limits for Aggregates (including any filler)
 
 Sieve Size Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 AS (mm)
 
 SMAN
 
 SMAH
 
 19.0
 
 100
 
 100
 
 13.2
 
 100
 
 100
 
 9.5
 
 90-100
 
 90-100
 
 6.70
 
 45-65
 
 25-45
 
 4.75
 
 30-50
 
 18-32
 
 2.36
 
 21-31
 
 15-30
 
 1.18
 
 16-25
 
 13-24
 
 0.600
 
 14-22
 
 12-21
 
 0.300
 
 12-19
 
 10-18
 
 0.150
 
 9-15
 
 9-15
 
 0.075
 
 8-12
 
 8-12
 
 (b) The proportions of mineral matter, bitumen and cellulose fibre additive shall lie within the limits shown in Table 404.062 below:
 
 Table 404.062  Proportions of Mineral Matter, Binder and Cellulose Fibres
 
 Material
 Mineral Matter Bitumen Cellulose Additive
 
 Percentage (by total mass of mix)
 
 SMAN
 
 SMAH
 
 93.4 - 92.4 93.7  92.7
 
 6.5 - 7.5
 
 6.0 - 7.0
 
 0.3
 
 0.3
 
 (c) Further to the requirements of 407.04 and 407.06, the mix shall contain a minimum of 8% added filler for SMAN. The minimum proportion of added filler shall be 6% for SMAH.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 404 (Page 2 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 d) The Marshall cylinder test properties (50 blows each face compacted at 1503 and using Class 170 binder) shall comply with Table 404.063.
 
 Table 404.063  Marshall Properties and Voids in Mineral Aggregate
 
 Mix Size (mm)
 SMAN SMAH
 
 Stability (kN)
 Minimum
 5.5
 5.5
 
 Air Voids (%)
 
 Minimum Maximum
 
 3.5
 
 5.0
 
 4.8
 
 5.2
 
 Voids in Mineral Aggregates Minimum
 18
 18
 
 (e) The Asphalt Binder Paste Drain-off test shall be performed at the design binder content to confirm that excessive binder drainage will not occur. The mass of binder paste drain off shall not exceed 0.3% of the total mass of the sample of mix tested.
 404.07 STORAGE OF CELLULOSE FIBRE AT THE MIXING PLANT
 Packaged cellulose fibre products shall not be stored in the open or exposed to direct sunlight unless protected by a waterproof UV resistant covering. Any product that has become wet shall not be used.
 404.08 MIXING PLANT
 Batch pug mill type mixing plant may be used to produce SMA. Pressed packs of cellulose fibre shall only be used in batch mixing plants.
 The Superintendent may allow drum type mixing plants to produce SMA where the drum plant is capable of incorporating the filler and fibre in a dedicated mixing chamber remote from the burner and the flow of exhaust gases from the plant. The Contractor shall provide information to show the asphalt plant is able to produce a well-mixed and uniform SMA that can be successfully placed, and produces a material comparable to SMA from batch plants.
 Where any mixing plant has not yet proven its ability to produce conforming and consistent SMA, the Superintendent may require a trial of about 50 tonnes to assess the SMA.
 404.09 MIXING SEQUENCE
 Batch Mixing Plants
 Cellulose Fibre press packs shall be added to the mixer during the metered addition of the hot aggregates. Cellulose Fibre press packs shall not be added to the mixer before the aggregates are added.
 Cellulose Fibre press packs shall be added to the aggregates unopened. Dry mixing shall continue for a maximum of 15 seconds after the last Cellulose Fibre press pack has been added.
 Binder shall be added after completion of the dry mixing as specified and mixing shall continue for a minimum of 20 seconds or longeDreppaerrtimodenrteoqfuSirteadtetGo roewnsthure Atuhgaut stco2a0r1s6e
 Section 404 (Page 3 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 aggregate particles are fully coated with bitumen and the Cellulose fibres are distributed homogeneously through the mix.
 Drum Mixing Plants The mixing sequence shall be determined by the Contractor and in accordance with fibre manufacturer's recommendations.
 404.10 MIXING AND MIXING TEMPERATURES The temperature of aggregates before mixing shall not exceed 190C.
 404.11 FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION AND TESTING AT THE MIXING PLANT The production tolerances on the grading aim of the mix before compaction shall be as specified for Size 10 mm in Table 407.071. Notwithstanding the requirements of Clause 407.11, a reduced frequency is not permitted.
 Further to Table 407.111 the minimum frequency for Binder Content and Full Sieve Analysis of Asphalt (full extraction test) shall be one test per 150 tonnes or part thereof of the asphalt plant production on a representative sample taken from a delivery truck. The Binder Content and Full Sieve Analysis of Asphalt and fibre content results shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 404.12 CONDITIONS FOR PLACING STONE MASTIC ASPHALT The Contractor should note SMA may be adversely affected by traffic during hot weather, and within 48 hours of placement. It is the Contractor's responsibility to ensure SMA is placed at such times that hot weather and traffic shall not affect the SMA by reducing the texture of the surface, or cause rutting of the surface. Detouring traffic shall not be used a method of managing risk of damage to the new surface.
 404.13 COMMENCEMENT OF PLACING HP The placement of SMA shall not commence until approval is obtained from the
 Superintendent.
 404.14 REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF COMPACTION After placement, the SMA shall be immediately compacted to meet the requirements for testing and acceptance of compaction as detailed in Clause 407.21, except:  work shall be tested for compaction density on a lot basis regardless of the quantity of
 material placed  work represented by a lot of six tests shall be assessed as shown in Table 404.141  work represented by either four or five cores shall be assessed as shown in Table 404.142.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 404 (Page 4 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 404.141 - Limits for Characteristic Density Ratio (Six Tests)
 
 For layers less than 50 mm thickness
 
 Characteristic Value
 of the Density Ratio (Rc)
 
 Assessment
 
 96.0% or more
 
 Accept lot
 
 93.0% to 95.9%
 
 Lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by P = 10 Rc - 860
 
 Table 404.142 - Mean Density Ratio (less than six cores)
 
 For layers less than 50 mm thickness
 
 Mean Value of the
 Density Ratio (Rm)
 
 Assessment
 
 97.5% or more
 
 Accept lot
 
 94.5% to 97.4%
 
 Lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by P = 10 Rm - 875
 
 Vibratory rollers may be used for a maximum of two passes only. Use of vibration shall be discontinued immediately if any breakdown of surface aggregate occurs. Pneumatic tyred rollers shall not be used.
 HP The Contractor shall not place traffic on the SMA until the Superintendent has agreed the temperature of the asphalt is less than 40C and is trafficable.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 404 (Page 5 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 407 - HOT MIX ASPHALT
 
 ##Sections 173,175, 409 and 801 must be included in the Specification.
 This section cross-references Sections 402, 404, 405, 410, 417, 421 and 423. If any of these sections are relevant they should also be included in the specification, otherwise all references to these sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 407.01 GENERAL
 
 This section covers the requirements for the manufacture and placement of hot mix asphalt, including quality of materials, mix design, supply and placing of the asphalt.
 
 The following supplementary VicRoads Standard Sections shall be read in conjunction with this section where mixes other than hot mix asphalt and dense graded asphalt are required:
 
 Stone Mastic Asphalt Regulation Gap Graded Asphalt Warm Mix Asphalt Ultra Thin Asphalt Open Graded Asphalt Bitumen Crumb Rubber Asphalt Lean Mix Asphalt
 
 Section 404 Section 405 Section 409 Section 410 Section 417 Section 421 Section 423.
 
 If any cold planing is undertaken in association with placing of asphalt, Section 402 shall apply.
 
 407.02 DEFINITIONS
 Asphalt Base Course Asphalt base course is that part of an asphalt pavement supporting the intermediate and wearing courses. It rests on the subgrade or pavement subbase.
 Asphalt Course An asphalt course comprises one or more layers of a single asphalt type.
 Asphalt Intermediate Course Asphalt intermediate course is that part of the asphalt pavement immediately under the wearing course. It rests on the asphalt base course.
 Asphalt Layer An asphalt layer comprises a single paving run of uniform asphalt.
 Asphalt Pavement Asphalt pavement comprises the combined thickness of all asphalt courses as defined in Clause 407.24.
 Asphalt Regulating Course Asphalt regulating course is an asphalt course of variable thickness applied to the road surface to adjust the shape prior to the wearing course or any other bituminous surfacing or re-surfacing.
 Asphalt Types (Dense Graded) Dense graded asphalt types L, N, V and H series mixes primarily used for wearing and regulation courses, and Type S series mixes are primarily used as structural mixes for intermediate and base courses. A brief description for the various types of dense graded
 
 asphalt is shown in Table 407.021.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 1 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 407.021 Types of Dense Graded Asphalt
 
 Mix Designation
 
 Description
 
 L
 
 A light duty Size 7 or 10 wearing course with low air voids and higher
 
 binder content for use in very lightly trafficked pavements.
 
 N
 
 A light to medium duty Size 7, 10 or 14 wearing course or regulating
 
 course for use in light to moderately trafficked pavements.
 
 H
 
 A heavy duty Size 7, 10 or 14 asphalt wearing course or regulating course
 
 for use in most heavily trafficked pavements.
 
 V
 
 A heavy duty Size 10 or 14 asphalt wearing course for heavily trafficked
 
 intersections.
 
 HG
 
 A multi purpose heavy duty Size 10 or 14 wearing course asphalt
 
 incorporating multigrade binder where a high resistance to deformation is
 
 required, particularly at heavily trafficked intersections.
 
 HP
 
 A high performance Size 10 or 14 heavy to very heavy duty wearing course
 
 asphalt incorporating a Polymer Modified Binder (PMB) where a high
 
 resistance to deformation and flexural cracking is required.
 
 SI
 
 A multi purpose Size 14 or 20 structural asphalt for intermediate course in
 
 heavy duty pavements or base course in medium duty pavements.
 
 SF
 
 A fatigue resistant Size 20 structural base course asphalt for heavy duty
 
 asphalt pavements with a total asphalt thickness in excess of 175 mm.
 
 SP
 
 A high performance heavy to very heavy duty Size 20 structural
 
 intermediate course asphalt incorporating a Polymer Modified Binder (PMB)
 
 for high resistance to deformation and flexural cracking.
 
 SG
 
 A multi purpose heavy duty Size 20 structural intermediate course asphalt
 
 incorporating a multigrade binder for high resistance to deformation
 
 particularly at very heavily trafficked intersections.
 
 SS
 
 A very stiff Size 20 structural intermediate course asphalt sometimes used
 
 to increase pavement stiffness for very large scale heavy duty asphalt
 
 pavements.
 
 Asphalt Wearing Course
 Asphalt wearing course is the final part of the pavement upon which the traffic travels except for Open Graded Asphalt (OGA) where the wearing course is the layer beneath the OGA.
 Assigned Polished Stone Value
 Assigned polished stone value is a friction rating derived from test results and is assigned to each source by VicRoads on the basis of past test data obtained from testing products.
 Binder
 Binder is bitumen, multigrade binder or polymer modified binder (PMB) used to hold a mixture of aggregates together as a cohesive mass.
 Binder Film Index
 Binder film index is an empirical calculation of theoretical thickness of the binder film around each aggregate particle within the asphalt mix having regard to the aggregate grading, surface area of the aggregates and binder content.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 2 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Bulk Density Bulk density is the mass per unit volume of the compacted mix where the volume is the gross volume of the mix including the air voids.
 Coarse Aggregates Coarse aggregates are aggregates retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve.
 Cold Joints Cold joint are where asphalt is placed against the exposed edge of an existing asphalt mat, where the existing mat has cooled to less than 80C for bitumen and multigrade binders or to less than 100C in the case of PMBs.
 Filler Filler is that portion of the aggregates passing the 0.075 mm sieve. It includes the combined mass of crusher dust, any added recycled fines from asphalt plant dust extraction filters and any added filler required to enhance the mix properties.
 Fine Aggregates Fine aggregates are aggregates passing a 4.75 mm AS sieve.
 Glass Fines Glass fines are recycled glass cullet crushed to a cubic shape and passing the 4.75 mm AS sieve.
 Hot Mix Asphalt (Asphalt) Asphalt is a designed and controlled mixture of coarse and fine aggregates, filler and binder which is mixed, spread and compacted to a uniform layer while hot. Asphalt types are designated by the use of symbols.
 In situ Air Voids In situ air voids represents the air voids in the field compacted mix on-site. It is based on a ratio of field density to maximum density.
 Manufactured Sand Manufactured sand is a material passing the 4.75 mm AS sieve produced by crushing igneous or metamorphic rock spalls or washed gravel.
 Maximum Density (Void free density) The maximum density is the density that could be achieved in a sample of asphalt if it were possible to compact it so as to exclude all air voids between coated aggregate particles. Sometimes this is referred to as the voids free bulk density (VFBD).
 Mineral Matter Mineral matter includes coarse and fine aggregates, plus filler.
 Particle Density Particle density is the mass of a dry particle of aggregate in air divided by volume of particle of aggregate excluding permeable voids.
 Placing Placing is the spreading and compacting of asphalt, including operations necessary for preparation of the surface.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 3 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP)
 Reclaimed asphalt pavement is asphalt removed from an existing asphalt pavement, and reprocessed by crushing and/or screening for recycling into new asphalt.
 Registered Mix
 Registered mix is an asphalt mix which has been placed on the State Growth Asphalt Mix Design Register.
 
 407.03 AGGREGATES
 
 (a) General
 The combined aggregate mixture shall consist of crushed rock or a mixture of crushed rock and sand or any RAP permitted under Clause 407.09.
 Aggregates shall consist of clean, hard, durable, angular rock fragments of uniform quality.
 
 (b) Source Rock Source rock shall comply with the requirements of Section 801.
 
 (c) Crushed Aggregate Products
 (i) The Flakiness Index of each separate sized coarse aggregate fraction, with a nominal size of 10 mm or larger, shall comply with Table 407.031.
 (ii) The unsound and marginal rock in that fraction retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve excluding any RAP, shall not exceed the relevant percentages specified in Table 407.031.
 
 Table 407.031 Quality of Coarse Aggregates
 
 Type of Asphalt
 H and V Series L, N, and S Series
 
 Flakiness Index
 (%) (max)
 
 Total of Marginal and Unsound Rock
 (% by mass) (max)
 
 Unsound Rock
 (% by mass) (max)
 
 35
 
 8
 
 3
 
 35
 
 10
 
 5
 
 (iii) The particle density of each separate sized aggregate fraction shall be provided by the source quarry at regular intervals (not exceeding 3 months).
 (d) Crusher Fines and Manufactured Sand
 Crusher fines and manufactured sand shall:
 (i) consist of a uniformly graded product of separate particles from the crushing of rock which complies with the requirements of Clause 407.03(b) appropriate to the asphalt type being produced;
 (ii) be free from lumps and aggregations;
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 4 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (iii) comply with the grading limits specified in Table 407.032.
 
 Table 407.032 Grading of Crusher Fines and Manufactured Sand
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 Crusher Fines
 Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 6.70 4.75 0.600 0.075
 
 100 70  100 20  55
 5  23
 
 Manufactured Sand Percentage Passing
 (by mass)
 100
 80  100
 30  70
 0  10
 
 (iv) comply with the relevant requirements specified in Table 407.033.
 
 Table 407.033 Quality of Crusher Fines and Manufactured Sand
 
 Test Value
 
 Degradation Factor Crusher Fines
 (min)
 
 Plasticity Index (max)
 
 60
 
 3
 
 (e) Natural Sand
 Natural sand extracted from natural sand deposits shall consist of clean, hard, durable grains free from lumps, clay, mica and organic or harmful matter.
 Where natural sand is accepted as washed sand for the registered mix, the Sand Equivalent Value of any such sand supplied for asphalt production shall not be not be less than 45.
 Where natural sand is accepted as unwashed sand for the registered mix, the Plasticity Index of any sand supplied for asphalt production shall not be more than 3.
 
 (f) Glass Fines
 Glass fines shall:
 (i) consist of a uniformly graded product with a maximum particle size of 5 mm, manufactured by crushing of recycled glass cullet
 (ii) be generally free of contaminants such as paper, corks, metals, and other harmful materials (maximum limit of 2% by mass). Glass cullet shall be primarily container glass and shall not include glass from ceramics, cathode ray tubes, fluorescent light fittings and laboratory glassware
 (iii) comply with the grading limits specified in Table 407.032 for manufactured sand
 (iv) be cubical in shape, not sharp edged or elongated.
 The use of glass fines as a replacement for natural sands shall be limited to intermediate and base course layers.
 
 (g) Aggregates for Asphalt Used as Wearing Course
 
 (i) Coarse aggregates shall be a mixture of separate one-sized aggregates blended together.
 
 (ii) Coarse aggregates for Type, H, HG and HP asphalt shall have a minimum assigned
 
 Polished Stone Value (PSV) of 48. a minimum PSV of 54.
 
 Coarse Dagegpraergtmateenst foofr STtyaptee VGraoswpthhalt Ashuaglul shta2v0e16 Section 407 (Page 5 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (iii) Fine aggregates shall be a mixture of one or more sands and crusher fines.
 For mixes designed by the Marshall method, the fraction passing the 4.75 mm AS sieve shall contain not less than 20% of natural sand. For wearing course mixes designed by the Austroads method using gyratory compaction, the quantity of natural sand may be less than 20%.
 No mix shall contain more than 65% by mass of natural sand.
 (h) Aggregates for Asphalt Used as Intermediate or Base Course
 The combined aggregates shall consist either of crushed material or a mixture of crushed material and natural sands. The fraction of the mix passing the 4.75 mm AS sieve shall contain not more than 50% by mass of natural sands.
 
 407.04 FILLER
 Mineral filler shall comply with the requirements of Tables 407.041 and 407.042.
 If any of the following added fillers are specified or required, they shall comply with the corresponding requirements below:
 (a) hydrated lime complying with AS 1672 - Lime and limestones - Lime for building, and the requirements of Table 407.042
 (b) cement kiln dust complying with the requirements of Tables 407.041 and 407.042
 (c) ground limestone complying with the requirements of Tables 407.041 and 407.042
 (d) ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS) complying with AS 3582.2 and the requirements of Table 407.042
 (e) portland cement complying with AS 3972
 (f) fly ash produced from the combustion of black coal complying with Tables 407.041 and 407.042.
 
 Table 407.041
 AS Sieve Size (mm) 0.600 0.300 0.075
 
 Grading Limits (fillers other than Hydrated Lime, Cement and GGBFS)
 Percentage Passing by Mass
 100 95  100 75  100
 
 Table 407.042 Test Requirements for Filler
 
 Filler Type
 
 Test
 
 Total Combined Filler * Dry Compacted Voids
 
 All Added Fillers
 
 Moisture Content
 
 Cement Kiln Dust
 
 Water Soluble Fraction
 
 Test Limit (%) 38 (Min) 3 (Max) 20
 
 Note on Table 407.042 * The total combined filler is the total amount of all filler in the mix including any added
 
 filler.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 6 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 407.05 BITUMINOUS MATERIALS
 
 (a) Binders The class of binder for each asphalt type shall be as specified in Table 407.051.
 
 Table 407.051 Class of Binder
 
 Asphalt Type L and N V, SI and SF HG and SG HP and SP SS
 
 Binder Class C170 C320 M500/170 A10E ** PMB C600
 
 Notes on Table 407.051 * C170 Binder shall be used if the mix contains more than 10% RAP. ** PMB Class A10E shall be used unless otherwise specified in Clause 407.24(e).
 
 Classes 170, 320 and 600 bitumen used for production of asphalt shall comply with
 AS 2008 Bitumen for pavements. Bitumen used for Asphalt Types L, N, V and H shall comply with the additional requirement specified in Table 407.052.
 
 Table 407.052 Durability of Bitumen
 
 Class of Bitumen
 170 320
 
 Durability * Minimum time to reach the specified apparent viscosity
 level (SAVL) days
 9
 Not Applicable
 
 Note on Table 407.052 * Test for resistance to hardening when exposed to heat and air.
 
 The viscosity of bitumen recovered from a sample of mixed asphalt prior to placement or
 from the roadbed after compaction, shall comply with the requirements specified in Table 407.053 and tested at the frequency specified in Table 407.111.
 
 Table 407.053 Viscosity Range of Bitumen Recovered from Mixed Asphalt
 
 Class of Bitumen
 170 320 600
 
 Viscosity Range at 25C kPa.s
 
 Wearing Course
 
 Intermediate Course
 
 Base Course
 
 200 - 600
 
 200 - 1100 200  1600
 
 500 - 1600
 
 500 - 2300 500  3000
 
 -
 
 800 - 5500 800  5500
 
 (b) Polymer Modified Binder (PMB) and Multigrade Binder
 All PMB and multigrade binders shall comply with the test requirements specified in the Austroads Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens as listed in Section 175.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 7 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The Contractor shall comply with the following requirements for supply and handling multigrade binder and PMB:
 (i) material shall be handled in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements
 (ii) a product quality certificate and test report from the manufacturer shall be obtained for each delivery of material
 (iii) material shall be transported and stored in such a manner to avoid contamination and/or deterioration of the product to the extent that it no longer complies with specified test properties.
 (c) Bitumen Emulsion
 Bitumen emulsion used for tack coating shall be a cationic rapid setting type complying with AS 1160, Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavements. Emulsion diluted with water shall have a bitumen content of not less than 30%.
 
 407.06 MIX DESIGN
 
 All asphalt mixes proposed for use on Department of State Growth works shall be registered in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.01.
 
 All mix designs registered with State Growth are issued a status according to compliance as:
 
 General
 
 Complies with the requirements of Code of Practice RC500.01.
 
 Conditional Mixes which do not comply in all respects with the requirements of Code of
 Practice RC500.01 but which are considered appropriate for use subject to conditions attached to the registration.
 
 Expired
 
 Superseded by another registered mix but details are retained for record purposes.
 
 HP No asphalt shall be supplied until the mix has been registered and the
 
 Superintendent approves the mix for use. The Contractor shall only use
 
 asphalt
 
 mixes that are registered by State Growth as `General' mixes.
 
 Approval of a registered mix for use under the Contract does not guarantee the handling
 properties or performance of the mix nor relieve the Contractor from contractual obligations in regards to rectification of defects.
 
 The Superintendent shall be notified of any proposed changes to the components or proportions of components used in the registered mix.
 
 New mix designs shall be carried out:
 (a) where it is proposed to change the source grading or nature of the components or binders; and
 (b) when current registered mix designs are more than three years old.
 
 If a registered mix has unsatisfactory handling or field performance, the Contractor or Superintendent may request the mix be de-registered in accordance with Code of Practice
 RC500.01.
 
 407.07 TOLERANCES ON MIX PRODUCTION
 The production tolerances on the grading aim of the mix before compaction shall be as specified in Table 407.071. The tolerance on the binder content in the mix shall be  0.3% of the total mix by mass.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 8 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 407.071 Production Tolerances for Mix Grading
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 37.5 26.5 19.0 13.2 9.5 6.70 - 4.75 2.36 - 0.600 0.300 - 0.150 0.075
 
 Tolerance on Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 Tolerance for
 Asphalt Types L, N, V, S and H series (% by Mass)
 
 Tolerance for Asphalt Type S
 series (% by Mass)
 
 Size 7
 
 Size 10
 
 Size 14
 
 Size 20
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 6
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 6
 
 6
 
 Nil
 
 6
 
 6
 
 6
 
 6
 
 6
 
 6
 
 6
 
 5
 
 5
 
 5
 
 5
 
 3
 
 3
 
 3
 
 3
 
 1.0
 
 1.0
 
 1.0
 
 1.0
 
 Note on Table 407.071
 If post compaction grading is checked by binder extraction and sieve analysis after placement, the positive tolerances shall be increased by one percentage point.
 
 407.08 PRODUCTION OF ASPHALT
 
 (a) Temperatures
 The temperature of binder and aggregates at the mixing plant and the temperature of the asphalt as it is discharged from the mixing plant shall not exceed the limits specified in Table 407.081. Asphalt manufactured at temperatures in excess of the limits specified in Table 407.081 shall not be used.
 
 Table 407.081 Maximum Mixing Temperatures
 
 Material
 Binder plant storage Aggregates before binder is added Asphalt at discharge from mixing plant
 
 Temperature C (max)
 185 *
 200
 175
 
 Note on Table 407.081 * This limit may vary for PMBs in accordance with the supplier's recommendations.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 9 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Mixing
 The mixing period shall be such that at least 95% of the coarse aggregate particles are fully coated with binder.
 After completion of mixing, the moisture content of the mix shall not exceed 0.5%.
 (c) Hot Storage of Mixed Asphalt
 Asphalt types with PMB, multigrade and C600 binders shall not be stored in hot bins for more than 8 hours prior to use. All other asphalt types shall not be stored in hot bins for more than 18 hours prior to use. Asphalt that is deemed unsuitable for use may be recycled by re processing and adding it to a new mix at a proportion not greater than 5% by mass of the total aggregates. Alternatively, it may be added to the RAP stockpile and re-processed to comply with the requirements of Clause 407.09.
 407.09 ASPHALT RECYCLED FROM RECLAIMED ASPHALT PAVEMENT
 (a) General Requirements
 Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) may be recycled by adding it to new asphalt during the mixing process subject to the following requirements:
 (i) all mixes containing RAP shall be registered mixes (ii) RAP shall consist of milled or excavated asphalt pavement free of foreign material
 such as unbound granular base, broken concrete or other contaminants and shall be crushed and screened to a maximum size not exceeding the size of asphalt produced (iii) the manufacturing process shall provide for addition of RAP to a batch plant pug mill or drum mixer separately from other mix components by a method that avoids damage to the mix by overheating (iv) no RAP shall be added to Asphalt Types V, HP, HG, SS or SP.
 (b) Unconditional use of RAP
 The following mix types may contain the following maximum quantities of RAP provided that all relevant specification requirements are met for each mix type:
 (i) Type L - Up to 20% by mass (ii) Type N - Up to 15% by mass (iii) Types H - Up to 10% by mass (iv) Type SI and SG - Up to 20% by mass (v) Type SF  Up to 30% by mass.
 (c) Higher Percentages of RAP with Additional Performance Testing
 The Superintendent may approve the use of a registered mix containing percentages of RAP up to 10% above the limits specified in Clause 407.09(b).
 Representative samples of production asphalt shall be taken and tested at a frequency not less than that specified in Table 407.091.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 10 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The test results will be assessed on the basis of a `rolling average' where the mean of the last three test results for the mix shall be within the specified range or in the case of asphalt particle loss, the value determined for the same mix without RAP inclusion. Test specimens for each test type shall be compacted to an air voids content as specified in VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.01 for that test type. Test specimens for Asphalt Particle Loss shall be prepared at the air voids content specified for the Moisture Sensitivity test.
 The results shall be presented in such a way that trends can be readily ascertained for each asphalt type so corrective action can be taken when required.
 
 Table 407.091 Frequency of Testing for Mixes with High Percentages of RAP
 
 Check Required
 Indirect Tensile Modulus
 Moisture Sensitivity (Minimum Wet Strength and Tensile Strength Ratio)
 Mix Cohesion (Asphalt Particle Loss Test on moisture conditioned and unconditioned specimens)
 
 Minimum Frequency
 In each production month One per 2,000 tonnes or part thereof.
 In each production quarter  One per 10,000 tonnes or part thereof.
 In each production quarter  One per 10,000 tonnes or part thereof.
 
 (d) RAP Stockpile Management Requirements
 For the use of high RAP content asphalt mixes the asphalt manufacturer's quality plan shall include a RAP stockpile management plan meeting the following requirements:
 (i) all RAP materials used for asphalt production shall be processed by blending, crushing and stockpiling
 (ii) testing of the processed RAP stockpile to ensure uniformity of grading and binder content
 (iii) ensure uniformity of the RAP stockpile properties by matching the registered asphalt mix design RAP gradings and bitumen content data with those RAP gradings and bitumen contents determined from multiple samples taken from the processed RAP stockpile
 (iv) quality control testing of RAP stockpiles including a statistical assessment to measure variability of the product
 (v) once the processed RAP stockpile has been assessed for compliance there shall be no more processed RAP added to that stockpile
 (vi) address issues such as contamination, mixing of various sources of RAP during processing, fractionating of the processed RAP, and storage or stockpiling of the compliant processed RAP in a manner that ensures materials removed are representative of the cross section of the processed RAP stockpile.
 During asphalt production, one sample shall be taken and tested for gradings and bitumen content from the processed RAP stockpile for every 1000 tonnes used.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 11 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 407.10 RED ASPHALT
 
 Not used.
 
 407.11 FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION AND TESTING AT THE MIXING PLANT
 
 The frequency shall not be less than that shown in Table 407.111, except that the Superintendent may agree to a lower frequency where the Contractor has implemented a
 system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that such lower frequency is adequate to assure the quality of the product.
 
 Table 407.111 Frequency of Inspection and Testing
 
 Checks Required
 
 Minimum Frequency
 
 Unsound rock content and particle size distribution of each aggregate and sand component including processed RAP
 
 On each production day: One test on each component unless certification of specification compliance is received for each delivery to the mixing plant.
 
 Degradation Factor of crusher fines
 
 At monthly intervals.
 
 Plasticity Index of crusher fines and natural sand supplied as unwashed
 sand
 
 At monthly intervals.
 
 Sand Equivalent of natural sand supplied as washed sand
 
 At monthly intervals.
 
 Flakiness Index of coarse aggregate 10 mm and larger
 
 At monthly intervals.
 
 Particle Density of all aggregate components
 
 At 3 monthly intervals
 
 Maximum Density
 
 At monthly intervals
 
 Viscosity of bitumen and multigrade binder at 60C
 
 Certification of specification compliance for each delivery of bitumen supplied to the mixing plant.
 At weekly intervals: where bitumen has been stored above 150C for more than 14 days without the storage tank being topped up by more than 50% of its capacity.
 In cases where two or more bitumen classes are blended together to correct the viscosity, a viscosity test at 60C shall be taken prior to use and at weekly intervals thereafter.
 
 Viscosity at 165, Torsional Recovery, and Softening Point of PMB
 
 At weekly intervals: For PMB that has been stored above 165 for more than three days or between
 140C and 165C for more than seven days without the storage tank being topped up by more
 than 50% of its capacity.
 
 Scrutiny for segregation, uncoated particles, separated binder, excess
 binder or overheating before dispatch from the plant
 
 Each loaded truck.
 
 Temperature of asphalt before dispatch from the plant
 
 Each more
 
 ltohaadDneedopnatrerutmtcrkuecnoktr
 
 ioastf
 
 dSiSnitsteapectaretvtiocaGnhlrseo4dow0fi7tn1h5(1P5maAgmiuengiun1utu2esttseo2fsif0.2136)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Checks Required
 
 Minimum Frequency
 
 Binder Content and Full Sieve Analysis On each production day: One test per 250 tonnes
 
 of Asphalt (full extraction test)
 
 or part thereof of the asphalt plant production on a
 
 representative sample taken from a delivery truck.
 
 Moisture Content, Binder Content and
 Full Sieve Analysis of RAP (full extraction test)
 
 At weekly intervals: One test on a representative sample of each 1,000 tonnes of RAP prior to use.
 
 Viscosity of Recovered Bitumen at 25C
 
 As directed by the Superintendent  the average of three tests where asphalt Type V, H or Type SS is reasonably suspected of being over-heated or over-mixed.
 
 The Contractor shall make available all completed work sheets, check lists and test reports for inspection at the mixing plant.
 
 407.12 RATE OF DELIVERY
 Asphalt shall be placed at the highest practicable rate in order to minimise the time traffic is disrupted and to avoid intermittent paving.
 
 407.13
 
 AMBIENT CONDITIONS FOR PLACING
 
 The surface on which asphalt is to be placed shall be essentially dry and free from surface water.
 
 (a) Intermediate and Base Courses
 Asphalt shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature of less than 5C. Asphalt mixes with PMB and Class 600 binder shall not be placed when the majority of area to be paved has a surface temperature less than 10C.
 
 (b) Wearing Course
 Wearing course asphalt shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature of less than 10C. Asphalt mixes with polymer modified binder shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature less than 15C.
 
 407.14 SURFACE PREPARATION AND RAISING OR LOWERING OF MANHOLE AND VALVE COVERS
 
 Where specified in Clause 407.24(d), all manhole and valve covers shall be raised or lowered to the new surface level prior to asphalt work commencing. Temporary ramping around each
 cover shall be provided and removed in accordance with the requirements of Clause 407.17(e) prior to asphalt surfacing being placed.
 
 Prior to tack coating and sweep clean the
 
 and area
 
 pulpaocinngwhoifchasapshpahlta,ltthisetoCDobneetprpaalrcattcmoeredns. ht aolfl
 
 SretamteovGeroawll thharmAfuugl umstat2e0r1ia6l
 
 Section 407 (Page 13 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 407.15 TACK COAT
 A tack coat shall be applied to the cleaned asphalt or sealed surface on which asphalt is to be placed unless the unsealed surface has been primed. Tack coat shall consist of cationic bitumen emulsion and shall be applied only to a clean, essentially dry surface, free from surface water.
 Tack coat shall be sprayed in a uniform film over the entire road surface.
 The application rate for bitumen emulsion tack coat shall be 0.15 to 0.30 litres/m2 (60% Bitumen content) or 0.30 to 0.60 litres/m2 (30% bitumen content), except for joints and chases where rates shall be doubled.
 Before asphalt is placed, sufficient time shall be allowed for the free water to evaporate and for the tack coat to cure and change in colour from brown to black.
 Any tack coat not covered by asphalt shall be covered with clean grit or sand before the road is opened to traffic.
 Where asphalt is to be spread over clean, freshly laid asphalt, or over a clean, primed surface, or where the depth of the layer exceeds 50 mm, the Contractor may omit the tack coat.
 407.16 DELIVERY
 (a) General
 Delivery shall only be made during the hours listed for possession of site. Asphalt delivered to the site, which is segregated, has been overheated, is too cold, contains separated binder or uncoated particles which does not comply with the Specification shall be removed from the site.
 (b) Delivery Dockets
 Delivery dockets shall show: (i) name of supplier and location of plant (ii) docket number
 (iii) name of user (iv) project name and location (or contract number) (v) registered number or fleet number of the vehicle (vi) date and time of loading (vii) size and type of asphalt (viii) empty and loaded mass of the vehicle, or the total of the electronically measured
 batch weights printed on the docket (ix) class of binder, and proprietary name of modified binder (x) temperature of load at mixing plant when measured.
 Where asphalt is scheduled for measurement by mass, a copy of the delivery docket for each load shall be provided at the point of delivery, or delivered to the Superintendent at the end of each day's work.
 Where asphalt is measured by other means and for Lump Sum Contracts, the Contractor shall make delivery dockets available for inspeDcteiopnarotmn erneqt uoef sSttbaytethGeroSwutpherinAtuegnudsetn2t.016
 Section 407 (Page 14 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 407.17 JOINTS AND JUNCTIONS
 (a) General
 The location of all joints shall be planned before work commences to achieve the specified offsets between layers and the final position of joints in the wearing course.
 The number of joints shall be minimised by adopting good asphalt paving practices. If requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall produce drawings showing the location of longitudinal joints of asphalt layers in respect to the traffic lane lines.
 All joints shall be well bonded and sealed and the surface across the joint shall meet the requirements of Clause 407.23.
 All cold joints and abutting concrete edges shall be heavily tack coated.
 Where cold joints are constructed, any loose or poorly compacted existing asphalt on the exposed edge shall be trimmed back to produce a face of fully compacted asphalt along the exposed edge before fresh asphalt is placed.
 (b) Transverse Joints
 All transverse joints shall be offset from layer to layer by not less than 2 m.
 (c) Longitudinal Joints
 (i) Longitudinal joints in the wearing course shall coincide with the location of intended traffic lane lines.
 (ii) Longitudinal joints in intermediate and base courses shall be offset from layer to layer by not less than 150 mm and shall be within 300 mm of the traffic lane line or the centre of traffic lane. Where new pavement abuts an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be removed in steps to achieve an offset from layer to layer of not less than 150 mm.
 (iii) Longitudinal joints shall be parallel to the traffic lanes.
 (iv) Cold joints shall be avoided either by matching up all longitudinal joints over the full width of the carriageway each day or such lesser period depending on the rate of cooling of asphalt placed in the preceding run or by paving with two or more pavers in echelon.
 Subject to approval by the Superintendent, a longitudinal joint in the wearing course may be located up to 300 mm from the traffic lane line, or 300 mm from the centre of a traffic lane.
 (d) Junctions
 At junctions where the new asphalt mat is required to match the level of existing pavement surface at the limits of work, chases shall be cut into the existing pavement by cold planing as specified in Section 402.
 The chase shall be cut by removal of a wedge of asphalt tapering from zero to a depth of 2.5 times the nominal size of the asphalt from the existing pavement to the minimum width as follows:
 (i) at side streets and median openings - 600 mm (ii) on through carriageways with a speed limit of 80 km/h or less - 3 m (iii) on through carriageways with a speed limDiteDpoeafprmatmrotemrenettnhotafonSfSt8SeaS0cteaetkictomeGtnior/Gon4hrw0o47t-w0ht7(6hP(amAPgaue.Aggu1eug5s1ut5os2fto022f13026)136)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (e) Treatment of Exposed Edges under Traffic
 On completion of each day's work and prior to opening to traffic, the following treatment of exposed edges shall be adopted for asphalt work.
 (i) Longitudinal Edges
 All longitudinal joints within the trafficked area shall be matched up between paver runs except for a short section required to achieve the minimum offset between transverse joints. Any exposed longitudinal edges within the trafficked area shall be ramped down at a slope of not steeper than 5 horizontal to 1 vertical by constructing a temporary wedge of hot mixed or cold mixed asphalt. In unusual situations such as the sudden onset of inclement weather, a longer length of longitudinal joint may be exposed provided it is ramped down as specified.
 (ii) Transverse Edges
 At the end of the paving run in the transverse direction, the new asphalt mat shall be squared up to a straight line and ramped down by constructing a temporary wedge of hot mixed or cold mixed asphalt. Temporary ramping shall not be steeper than shown in Table 407.171.
 Table 407.171 Maximum Grade of Temporary Ramping
 
 40 60 80 > 80
 
 Maximum Ramp Grade (Horizontal to Vertical )
 20 to 1 30 to 1 40 to 1 50 to 1
 
 (iii) Removal of Temporary Ramping
 Before commencement of each day's work, all temporary ramping shall be removed by cutting back along a straight line to expose a vertical face of fully compacted asphalt at the specified layer depth.
 
 407.18 COMMENCEMENT OF PLACING
 
 HP The placement of asphalt on the sub-base or granular base for a new
 
 pavement or
 
 for an overlay of an existing bituminous surfaced pavement shall
 
 not commence
 
 until approval to proceed is obtained from the Superintendent.
 
 407.19 REGULATING COURSE Alfoinnrigsehigteuudldaitsniunarglfaaccnoedu.rtsreanosfvearsspehaplat voefmtheenttyshpaepaensdostizheDatespptaherectimfrieeesdnutslthoinfaglSlStsbeauectretfipoaGlncareco4ewi0ds7thpfo(aPrraacAglolueerglr1uew6csitttoiho2fn02t1h3oe6)f
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 407.20 SPREADING
 (a) General
 Asphalt shall be spread in layers at the compacted thicknesses shown on the drawings or specified.
 All asphalt shall be spread with an asphalt paver except for small areas where use of a paver is not practicable.
 (b) Level Control
 Asphalt paver screed levels shall be controlled by a suitable combination of manual and automatic controls operating from fixed or moving references.
 (c) Spreading
 All asphalt shall be spread with a purpose designed asphalt paving machine to form a uniformly smooth asphalt mat complying with the requirements of Clause 407.23 without segregation, tearing or gouging.
 The Contractor shall conduct spreading operations to ensure that the paver speed matches the rate of supply so that stoppages are minimised.
 If the paver is required to stop and asphalt in front of the screed cools to below 120C, a transverse joint shall be constructed.
 
 For asphalt work carried out on a road to be opened for traffic at the completion of work each day, each layer of asphalt shall cover the full width of the trafficked area. The
 requirements of Clause 407.17(e) shall be followed in respect of the treatment required for exposed edges.
 
 (d) Spreading by Hand Hand spreading shall only be used for small areas where it is not practical to use a paver.
 
 (e) Echelon Paving
 Where specified in Clause 407.24(g) two pavers in echelon shall be used in locations where a full carriageway wider than 6 m is available clear of traffic.
 The width of a single paving run shall not exceed 6 metres unless paving in echelon is proposed.
 
 (f) Trafficking of Type SF Asphalt
 
 Trafficking or placement of asphalt over Type SF asphalt is not permitted unless the majority of the Type SF asphalt has a surface temperature of 50C or less and falling.
 
 Where trafficking of the Type SF results in deformation of the asphalt, further trafficking
 
 shall cease until such time that the Type SF asDpehpaaltrthmaesnatdoefqSutaatteelyGcroowlethd toAaulglouwstw2o0r1k6s
 
 to proceed without further damage.
 
 Section 407 (Page 17 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 407.21 COMPACTION Asphalt shall be uniformly compacted to the standards specified in Clause 407.22 as soon as the asphalt has cooled sufficiently to support the rollers without undue displacement.
 
 407.22 REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF COMPACTION
 
 (a) General
 Work shall be tested and accepted for compaction on either a test lot basis as provided in Clause 407.22(b) or on an approved procedural basis as provided in Clause 407.22(c). Where the total quantity of the particular size and/or type of asphalt supplied under the contract exceeds 300 tonnes, compaction shall be tested and accepted on a test lot basis. Acceptance of compaction for all other asphalt work will be on a procedural basis.
 
 (b) Testing and Acceptance of Compaction on a Lot Basis
 For small lots, the test procedure specified in Section 173 shall apply.
 The density of extracted cores for the purposes of determining the bulk density for acceptance purposes or to check or assign offsets to a nuclear gauge shall be undertaken in accordance with VicRoads Codes of Practice 500.05 and 500.16.
 A lot presented for testing consists of that part of a particular layer of asphalt which is placed in one day under uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous in respect to material and appearance.
 
 Sites for density testing shall be selected on an essentially random basis provided that no site shall be selected within 200 mm of a joint constructed against a cold edge.
 For core sample tests, the layer thickness is the mean thickness of the core samples and for nuclear gauge tests, the layer thickness is the nominal layer thickness.
 Asphalt Density Ratio is defined as the percentage ratio of the field bulk density to the assigned bulk density of the approved laboratory mix design.
 The assigned maximum density of the asphalt shall be calculated from the 6 point rolling average maximum density of the production mix. Should a single maximum density of the production mix vary by more than 0.5% of its rolling average then a check design or redesign should be initiated.
 The Characteristic Value of Density Ratio is the calculated value of  x - 0.92S for six tests per lot where  x and S are respectively the mean and standard deviation of the individual density ratio test values for the lot.
 The work represented by a lot of six tests shall be assessed as shown in Table 407.221.
 
 Table 407.221 Limits for Characteristic Density Ratio (Six Tests)
 
 For layers less than 50 mm thickness
 
 Characteristic Value of the Density Ratio (Rc)
 
 Assessment
 
 For layers 50 mm thickness or greater
 Characteristic DepDVaearntlmusieetynotfRotafhtSieotate GrowthAssAesusgmusetn2t016
 (Rc) Section 407 (Page 18 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 94.0% or more 91.0% to 93.9%
 
 Accept lot
 Lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by P = 10 Rc - 840
 
 96.0% or more 91.0% to 95.9%
 
 Accept lot
 Lot may be accepted at a reduced rate calculated by P = 6 Rc - 476
 
 (Rc) is the Characteristic Value of the density ratio for the lot and (P) is the percentage of the relevant scheduled rate to be paid which shall not be greater than 100%.
 Where the Contract is a lump sum Contract the relevant scheduled rate will be that shown in the `Rates for Variation Purposes' schedule accompanying the lump sum tender. If no such rate is provided a variation will be considered in accordance with Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract - Valuation of Variations.
 Where one or more individual core thicknesses are less than the relevant values shown in Table 407.222, they shall be discarded and the acceptance assessment modified in accordance with Table 407.223 provided that there remain at least four test values.
 
 Table 407.222 Minimum Thickness of Cores Extracted from the Pavement
 
 Size of Asphalt
 7 10 14 20
 
 Individual Core Thickness (mm)
 min
 14
 20
 28
 40
 
 Table 407.223 Mean Density Ratio (less than six cores)
 
 For layers less than 50 mm thickness
 
 For layers 50 mm thickness or greater
 
 Mean Value of the Density Ratio (Rm)
 
 Assessment
 
 Mean Value of
 the Density Ratio (Rm)
 
 Assessment
 
 95.5% or more
 
 Accept lot
 
 97.0% or more
 
 Accept lot
 
 92.5% to 95.4%
 
 Lot may be accepted at a
 reduced rate calculated by P = 10 Rm - 855
 
 92.0% to 96.9%
 
 Lot may be accepted at a
 reduced rate calculated by P = 6 Rm - 482
 
 (Rm) is the mean of the individual density ratios for the lot and (P) is the percentage of the relevant scheduled rate to be paid which shall not be greater than 100%.
 In situ Air Voids and Characteristic In situ Air Voids shall be reported for each lot.
 Percentage In situ Air Voids is defined as the ratio of In situ Air Voids to the Maximum Density of asphalt. Percentage In situ Air Voids represents the Air Voids of the compacted asphalt as placed onsite, and shall be determined as follows:
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 In situ Air Voids = Maximum density  field bulk dSeencstiitoyn 4x0710(0Page 19 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Maximum density
 The Characteristic Value of In situ Air Voids is the calculated value of  x + 0.92S for six tests per lot where x and S are the mean and standard deviation of the individual In situ Air Void test values for the lot, respectively.
 
 (c) Acceptance of Compaction on a Procedural Basis
 Acceptance of work as far as compaction is concerned shall be based on the adoption of approved placing procedures and a density test check plan that provides for a minimum test frequency of 5% of relevant lots to be tested. The test check plan shall provide for additional testing to demonstrate correction of non-conformance. Placing procedures shall be in accordance with AS 2150  Hot mix asphalt.
 
 407.23 SURFACE FINISH AND CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 
 (a) General
 For all asphalt works the following requirements shall apply for conformance with location, shape, alignment, and width.
 (i) Surface Finish
 The finished surface of asphalt wearing course shall be of uniform appearance, free of dragged areas, cracks, open textured patches and roller marks.
 (ii) Kerb and Channel
 Where asphalt is placed against kerb and channel the surface at the edge of the wearing course shall be either flush with or not more than 5 mm above the lip of the channel.
 
 (iii) Shape
 No point on the finished surface of the wearing course shall lie more than 4 mm below a 3 m straight edge laid either parallel to the centreline of the pavement or, except on crowned sections, at right angles to the centreline. For intermediate and base course layers, the distance below the straight edge shall not exceed 6 mm and 10 mm respectively.
 
 (iv) Alignment
 Where asphalt pavement is not +placed against a concrete edging, the edge of asphalt layers shall not be more than 50 mm inside nor more than 100 mm outside, the designed offset from centreline or design line. Within these tolerances, the rate of change of offset of the edge of layer shall not be greater than 25 mm in 10 m.
 
 (v) Width
 
 Where asphalt pavement is not placed against a concrete edging, the width of
 
 asphalt layers shall not be less than the design or specified width of layer by more
 
 than 50 mm The average
 width.
 
 or greater than width over any
 
 the 300
 
 dmessighnalloDrneosptpaerbtcemifieleendstswotfidhStaShtneactbtetyhioeGnmrdo4oewr0se7tihgt(nhPaaoAngrue1gs20up00setcomi2ffi0me21d3.6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Conformity with Drawings for New Pavements and Major Pavement Rehabilitation Projects
 For pavement works where design drawings show the finished surface level and thickness of each pavement course, the surface level of each asphalt course shall be measured in accordance with the requirements of Section 173. Every test lot shall meet either a Scale A, B or C requirement as specified in Clause 407.24.
 
 Unless otherwise specified in Clause 407.24(f), the maximum lot size for measurement and assessment of surface level shall be 4000 m.
 (i) Scale A and B Surface Level Requirements
 Each level measurement shall be taken at random locations over the area of the lot in accordance with the relevant Test Method and the number of measurements taken within each lot shall not be less than the number specified in Table 407.231.
 The mean surface level and the variation in surface level for the base, intermediate and wearing courses within each lot shall meet the requirements of Table 407.232.
 
 Table 407.231 Minimum Number of Level Measurements per Lot
 
 Scale of Surface Level Measurement
 Scale A
 Scale B
 
 Minimum Number of Measurements Per Lot
 80 40
 
 Table 407.232 Average Surface Level Tolerances for the Sub-base and Pavement Courses
 
 Scale of Surface Level Measurement
 Scale A Scale B
 
 Granular or Cement Treated Subbase
 
  x Range (mm)
 
 Max. S (mm)
 
 +4 to 8
 
 8
 
 +6 to -12
 
 13
 
 Asphalt Layers
 
  x Range (mm)
 5
 8
 
 Max. S (mm)
 8
 10
 
 Notes on Table 407.232
  x is the mean value of all level readings taken in the lot (a negative value designates a measured departure below the design level and positive value designates a surface level above the design level)
 S is the standard deviation of all level reaDdienpgasrttmakeennt ionf tShteatleotG. rowth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 21 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 For Scale A and Scale B level requirements, the Superintendent may agree to
 accept a lot which does not conform with the limits of Table 407.232 at a reduced payment, in accordance with Table 407.233. The value of the lot of work shall be
 calculated from the unit rates for pavement construction as specified in Clause 407.24(c).
 
 Table 407.233 Payment Deduction for Surface Level
 
 Variation
 
 Payment reduction
 
 Mean ( x ) outside the specified limit up to a maximum of 25% of the limit.
 
 8% plus 4% reduction for each 1 mm the
 mean value extends outside the tabulated limit
 
 Standard Deviation (S) exceeding the specified limit up to a maximum
 of 35% of the limit.
 
 8% plus 4% reduction for each 1 mm the Standard Deviation extends outside the
 tabulated limit
 
 Note to Table 407.233 If both ( x ) and (S) vary by more than the specified limit, the payment reduction shall be the sum of the payment reductions for both ( x ) and (S).
 
 (ii) Scale C Surface Level and Thickness Requirements
 
 Surface level and thickness measurements shall be taken in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 173.
 
 The level of the top of each asphalt course shall not differ from the specified level by more than 15 mm for intermediate and base courses and 10 mm for wearing course.
 Where a uniform thickness of new asphalt pavement construction is specified, the mean thickness of a lot of asphalt shall be not less than the combined thickness of all asphalt courses specified in Clause 407.24 or shown on the drawings. For the purpose of this clause, the maximum lot size shall be not more than 4,000 m2 of pavement area.
 (c) Asphalt Overlays
 
 Where a minimum average or nominal thickness of overlay is specified, and no existing
 pavement or finished levels are available, the average thickness of the overlay shall be calculated by:
 
 T =
 
 M Dx A
 
 x 1000
 
 Where: T is the thickness of overlay in millimetres A is the area of the job in square metres D is the mean field density of placed asphalt in tonnes/m3. M is the mass of asphalt used in tonnes
 
 The average thickness of the overlay shall not be less than the specified thickness.
 
 407.24 SCHEDULES OF DETAILS
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 22 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** (a) Asphalt Requirements (Clause 407.06)
 
 Course
 
 Layer
 
 Nominal Size of Asphalt (mm)
 
 Thickness of
 
 Type of Asphalt
 
 Layer
 
 (mm)
 
 Wearing and Regulation
 
 Open Graded (Section 417)
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Wearing
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Regulation
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Intermediate
 
 Intermediate 1
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Intermediate 2
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Intermediate 3
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Base
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Combined Thickness of Asphalt Pavement (less the Open Graded Asphalt Wearing Course Layer)
 
 ##:
 
 *** (b) Scales Compaction and Level/Thickness Control (Clause 407.23)
 
 Road Name ##:
 
 Location
 
 Scale for Level / Thickness Control
 
 *** (c) Basis for Determining the Value of the Lot to be used for Price Deduction for Departure from Specified Surface Level and Density Requirements (Clauses 407.22 and 407.23).
 
 ##:
 
 Location
 
 ##:
 
 Layer
 
 Unit Price $/m2
 ##:
 
 *** (d) Schedule of Manhole and Valve Covers to be Raised or Lowered to the New Finished Level Prior to Asphalt Overlay
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 407 (Page 23 of 23)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Location or Chainage
 
 Direction or Carriageway
 
 ##:
 
 Lane
 
 Cover Type
 (Manhole or Valve)
 
 (e) Polymer Modified Binder if different to Class A10E (Clauses 407.05(a) and (b)) ##[strikethrough if `default' Class A10E is to be used]:
 
 ***
 
 The class of PMB required in the ##: course shall be Grade ##:.
 
 (f) Maximum Size of Test Lots if different to 4,000 m2 (Clause 407.23(c)) ##[strikethrough if the maximum lot size is to be 4,000 m2]:
 
 ***
 
 The maximum size of test lot for assessment of compaction under Clause 407.22 and if
 
 applicable, compliance drawings under Clause 407.23 shall be ##: m2.
 
 (g) Paving in Echelon (Clause 407.20(e))
 
 ***
 
 Two pavers in echelon shall be used on the through carriageways from ##: to ##:.
 
 VicRoads
 SECTION 408 SPRAYED BITUMINOUS SURFACINGS GUIDE NOTES FOR THE USE OF THE STANDARD SPECIFICATION
 This section is used for sprayed bituminous surfacing treatments including priming, primersealing and sealing of road pavements.
 This section may be used for a separate sprayed bituminous surfacing contract or may be included in a construction contract where sprayed bituminous surfacing is only part of the work.
 A checklist has been prepared to help contract administrators and/or surveillance officers make a determination on the release of the HP under Clause 408.03 (Contractor and Superintendent agree that the pavement surface is fit and ready for surfacing). Refer to "Checklist for the Construction and Preparation of Granular Pavements" available under "Other Templates & Checklists" located within the VicRoads Microsoft Word  "Procurement Services" drop down menu.
 SUMMARY OF ACTION TO BE TAKEN IN PREPARATION OF SPECIFICATIONS INVOLVING SPRAYED BITUMINOUS SURFACING WORK
 General
 The following steps should be followed in preparing a contract specification for sprayed sealing:
 1. Obtain or determine the two-way AADT and percentage equivalent heavy vehicles (EHV) for all roads to be sealed.
 2. For each job item halve the two-way AADT to determine the directional AADT then apportion the directional AADT to each traffic lane in the same direction.
 3. Inspect each site and select the treatment type and aggregate size having regard to the condition of the existing surface, the traffic volume, location and environment. (Poorly selected treatments will markedly reduce the success rate of the treatment and specialist advice should be sought where necessary to assist in selection of an appropriate treatment.)
 4. Mark out the Limits of Work at each job site.
 5. Measure up and calculate the area of each job element that has either a different traffic volume or requires different treatment.
 6. Determine the default rates of application for each job element based on past history or by using Tables E1, E2 and E3 as a guide.
 7. Fill out information in Tables 408.161 and 408.162 as per Guide Notes provided for Clause 408.16 below.
 8. Insert and delete special clauses in the contract specific clauses section of the specification shell document.
 Standard Sections Required
 Cross-references are made to the following sections which may also be required to be included in the specification documents:
 Section 175  Referenced Documents for Standard Specifications for Roadworks and Bridgeworks Section 801  Source Rock for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates Section 831  Aggregate for Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing Section 832  Sands for Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing.
 It is quite common to include the initial linemarking (for new works) or reinstatement of linemarking (for resurfacing works) as part of a sealing and line marking contract in which case the following sections should also be included:
 Section 710  Fixing Raised Pavement Markers Section 721  Pavement Markings Section 853  Hot Melt Bitumen Adhesive for Raised Pavement Marker Installation.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 1 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 Standard sections normally required in a sprayed bituminous surfacing contract are: Section 161 Bituminous Surfacing and Cold Planing - General Section 166 Traffic Management Section 168 Occupational Health and Safety Management Section 173 Examination and Testing or Materials and Work (Roadworks) Section 176 Environmental Management (minor) Section 199 Provision for Adjustment of Contract Sum
 Shell Document
 Shell Document C3 is used for sprayed sealing contracts.
 Insertions:
  Table 408.161  Schedule of Details. All job items to be undertaken as part of the Contract need to be inserted into this table.
  Table 408.162  Stacksite Locations. All stacksites to be used under the Contract need to be inserted into this table.
  Table 161.A41  Special Processes. Standard Section 161 covers the quality management system requirements and there are a number of special processes that should be listed to ensure that the contractor has appropriate processes in place should problems occur. The following special processes should be included in this table:  treatment of emulsified seals due to rain  treatment of bleeding/slick/fatty seals  rectification of urgent defects within specified timeframe  measurement of actual aggregate application rate.
 Contract Specific Clauses
 The contract Shell Document contains certain `standardised' contract specific clauses as listed below. Contract specific clauses are used for additional requirements that are not adequately covered in the shell document or the standard sections. Standardised contract specific clauses must be carefully reviewed to delete any that do not apply. Further additional contract specific clauses may also be added to the relevant section as noted below.
 SECTION 100 - CONTRACT SPECIFIC CLAUSES  GENERAL
 Clauses of a general nature that may be inserted in Section 100 include:
 Standard Contract Specific Clauses  Location and Detail  Scope of Works  Work by Others  Cooperation with Others on Site  Possession of Site  Restrictions and Delays to Traffic  Goods and Service Tax  Payment of Sub Contractors  24 hour Contact Details  Notification of abutting land owners of impending work  Damage to Vehicles and Complaints
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 2 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 Other Contract Specific Clauses  Application of the Defects Liability Period  Conditions for sealing during fire danger period  Program and sequence of works  Separable parts of the works (separate completion dates for areas of different climate or for heavily
 trafficked roads and light trafficked roads, timing of asphalt regulation and works to be performed by others under a separate contract)  Permitted traffic detour routes  Restrictions to operations undertaken at stack sites and site restoration that is not adequately covered in Table 408.162  Matters to be addressed in the Environmental Management Plan  Waiting Time. If it is proposed to include a schedule item(s) for waiting time to cover situations where the Contractor is prevented from working within the period specified in the contract for any reason the following special clause should be considered -
 `Where the Contractor is directed to wait or cease work for reasons such as abnormal traffic congestion or if the job not ready for sealing as specified, the Contractor shall be allowed waiting time for all time lost within the specified hours of possession of site specified in Clause 161.C5(b) to the nearest half hour paid at the relevant scheduled rate(s).'
 SECTION 400 - CONTRACT SPECIFIC CLAUSES FOR SPRAYED SEALING ACTIVITIES
 Clauses of a technical nature, not adequately covered in Section 408, that may be inserted in this section include:  Accuracy of areas- refer Notes to Clause 408.04  Use of Flux Oil  refer Notes to Clause 408.07(g)  Gritting  Repair of poor workmanship and minor defects  Sampling of binders supplied. Samples should be taken prior to addition of cutter, adhesion agent or
 other additives. The proportions of any blended products and additives, as well as binder temperature and digestion time must be clearly stated on the label. Samples must be suitably labelled. A typical example showing the information required is attached to these notes. Note: Arrangements have been made for the ARRB Group to receive these samples for storage (free of cost), and to undertake future testing (at VicRoads cost) should it become necessary due to defects becoming apparent in a seal or some other reason. Samples should be labelled (see overleaf) and forwarded to Technical Consulting who will then forward them on to ARRB.  Special proprietary or experimental treatments not specifically covered under Section 408  Details of any special primers, primerbinders, binders not covered by the specification  Details of the location and type of bitumen emulsion required if emulsion is preferred over cutback bitumen binders for certain areas or jobs  Use of specialised plant when it is considered that the methods of assessment provided by the specification are inadequate to ensure a satisfactory outcome (e.g. use of an aggregate loader to prescreen and pre-coat aggregate prior to use, particularly for seals carried out on high trafficked roads).
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 3 of 24)
 
 TYPICAL BINDER SAMPLE LABEL Contract Number Contract Item Number Sample Number Date and time of sampling Road and location (kms)
 
 VicRoads
 of ____/____/______ at _______ a.m. / p.m.
 
 Binder Type and Source and Manufacturer
 
 Other Comments
 
 GENERAL INFORMATION
 Basic Sprayed Seal Treatment Types
 Sprayed sealing comprises three basic treatment types as follows:
 (a) Priming
 Priming is a type of initial treatment carried out on a dry pavement as part of an initial treatment prime and seal or, in some cases, beneath asphalt surfacing (usually where the asphalt surfacing is less than 60 mm in thickness). Initial treatments constructed as a prime and seal are generally regarded as a superior treatment, and more economical, than primerseal/final seal treatments. Priming, however, is generally restricted to the months of October to April and to roads constructed clear of traffic, although it can be used in a half width sequence for roads with less than 500 vehicles per day.
 A prime normally has no cover aggregate but may be gritted or sanded after about 2 hours in locations where traffic detours are not possible or to allow access to properties. Priming is also used on concrete surfaces prior to sealing or placing of asphalt surfacing.
 A prime consists of a light grade of cut back bitumen with a low viscosity which enables it to penetrate the surface of most dry pavements and, if applied at the correct rate of application, it will leave a thin skin of bitumen on the pavement surface. The prime tends to bind the fine particles of pavement together to form a clean, dust free surface promoting a strong bond between the pavement and the following seal (or asphalt surfacing). The primed surface can be lightly trafficked for one to two weeks prior to sealing if required. In warm dry conditions a prime can cure in 48 hours but can take up to a week in cooler conditions.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 4 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 Bitumen emulsion may be used as an alternative to cutback bitumen and is particularly suited to applications where the subsequent seal is required to be placed within a short period of time or where works need to be undertaken in less favourable weather conditions.
 (b) Primersealing
 A primerseal is an initial treatment used to provide a temporary seal over new construction. Primersealing is used in preference to priming at sites constructed under traffic or where priming is not practicable due to damp cold conditions. A final seal must be applied to the primerseal within 1 to 2 years.
 A primerbinder consists of a medium grade of cut back bitumen having a viscosity low enough to provide some penetration of the granular pavement surface, but high enough to sufficiently wet and retain a small to medium sized aggregate. Primerseals constructed with cutback bitumen should not be resealed until after a reasonable period of curing (typically a minimum of 1 to 2 years), as any residual volatile oil can affect the subsequent treatment. Primerseals typically achieve significantly less penetration when compared to primes and generally rely predominantly on adhesion to the pavement hence the condition of the surface prior to sealing is critical.
 Bitumen emulsion may be used as an alternative to cutback bitumen and is particularly suited to applications where the final seal or asphalt surfacing is required to be placed within a short period of time because it does not contain any cutter.
 (c) Sealing
 Sealing is the application of binder and aggregate to a primed or primersealed surface (initial treatment seal or final seal) or to an existing sealed surface (reseal). A seal binder may comprise either cut back bitumen or bitumen emulsions which can be modified to enhance performance. The most common aggregate sizes used are 7, 10 or 14, with the occasional use of Size 20 in conjunction with Sizes 5 or 7 as part of a double application treatment.
 Traditionally, the vast majority of sealing and re-sealing works are undertaken with cut back bitumen, however bitumen emulsions can be used as an alternative but have different handling and placement characteristics.
 Additional notes on selection of aggregate size and sprayed seal type are provided below.
 Selection of Aggregate Size
 (a) Sealing
 The choice of aggregate size for sealing can be an important factor in the success or otherwise of a seal. If the surface to be resealed is highly textured, a Size 5 or 7 aggregate is normally used; whereas if the surface has low surface texture, a Size 10 or 14 aggregate may be appropriate. It is generally not economical to use an aggregate larger than Size 10 for roads with less than 500 vpd and for sealed shoulders. A Size 14 aggregate or larger should not be used in urban areas where increased traffic noise could be a problem. A number of Austroads guides are also available to assist in treatment selection.
 (b) Primersealing
 The choice of aggregate size for primersealing is usually related to traffic volume and expected life. As a general guide, a Size 7 primerseal is suitable for roads with a traffic volume of generally less than 1000 vpd whereas a Size 10 primerseal is suitable for roads with more than 1000 vpd.
 Above 2500 vpd more robust primerseal may be required including double/double applications and/or the use of polymer modified binders.
 A primerseal has an average life of between one and two years although longer may be achievable from more robust primerseal treatments
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 5 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 Choice of Seal Type
 Conventional Seal (C)
 A conventional seal using Class 170 bitumen binder should generally provide a satisfactory result for sound pavements without steep grades, sharp curves and large numbers of truck turning movements, and where the Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT) over a 24 hour period does not exceed around 4000 vpd.
 High Stress Seal (HSS)
 HSS seals can be divided up into two types  HSS1 and HSS2. HSS1 is used to designate a single/single seal, while a HSS2 designates a double/double seal.
 Both types of HSS are used for improved aggregate retention in high stress areas such as areas of turning traffic, steep grades, sharp curves and high speed roads. HSS1 seals are suitable for roads up to 2000 vpd/lane, but can also provide good performance on straight or undulating roads with up to 5000 vpd/lane with low proportions of commercial vehicles (<15%). HSS2 seals are more appropriate for roads with higher traffic volumes and more stressed locations such as steeper grades, smaller radius curves and higher proportions of commercial vehicles.
 Both HSS1 and HSS2 use a lightly modified Polymer Modified Binder (PMB) such as Class S10E, Class S35E or C170 bitumen modified in the field with 10 parts crumb rubber per 100 parts of bitumen. A slightly higher rate of application is used for an HSS as consistency of the modified binder is greater than a conventional binder. In the case of a HSS2 the default practice is to use the same modified binder in both applications, but in some cases where a double/double seal is necessary but lesser levels of performance are required, conventional binders can also be used for the second binder application.
 An HSS usually produces a more consistent surface than conventional seals for surfaces with variable surface texture. Similar spraying practices are used for an HSS as for a conventional seal.
 Extreme Stress Seal (XSS)
 XSS seals are a variation to the HSS2 seals designed to cope with higher stress situations imposed by parameters such as heavy traffic volumes (>5000 vpd/lane), high proportions of commercial vehicles, steep grades and tight radius curves. Such treatments are generally appropriate for major freeways and highways, heavily trafficked arterial roads as well as lesser roads in mountainous areas where high shear loading may be present and a sprayed seal treatment is considered appropriate.
 These are always placed as a double/double application, most commonly with a 14/7 mm aggregate combination. A highly modified binder such as S20E, S45R or S15RF is used in both binder applications. Like HSS seals these usually produce a more consistent surface than conventional seals for surfaces with variable texture.
 Strain Alleviating Membrane (SAM)
 SAM seals are used where there is a need for enhanced performance waterproofing properties or to delay the propagation of cracks on moderately cracked pavements. SAM seals incorporate about 5% of elastomeric PMB or about 18 parts of crumbed rubber per 100 parts of bitumen (equivalent to 15%). Typical binder classes include S45R, S20E and S15RF. The increased consistency and elasticity of the binder allow heavier binder application rates and provide greater resistance to reflective cracking.
 S15E or S35E binder classes can also be used as binders in SAM applications although they offer a lower level of modification and should be reserved for lesser cracked pavements.
 A minimum binder application rate of 1.5 l/m2 is deemed necessary for a SAM treatment to be effective.
 Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer (SAMI)
 SAMI treatments are used as an interlayer under asphalt surfacing to provide increased waterproofing and/or resistance to reflective cracking when placed over a cracked pavement. A SAMI treatment used in conjunction with a thin or ultra-thin asphalt surfacing is sometimes referred to as a `combination' or `composite' surfacing treatment.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 6 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 A SAMI comprises a heavy application of a very highly modified binder such as S25E or S18RF with a very light cover of Size 10 aggregate to allow the passage of traffic until the asphalt surfacing is placed. SAMI treatments are generally not trafficked hence use a lighter application of aggregate relative to other seals to allow for construction traffic. In some circumstances a SAMI may need to be trafficked for a short period of time in which case it should be designed to be closer to a SAM treatment. It is important that there is no loose aggregate remaining on the surface at the time of asphalt placement to ensure a strong bond between the SAMI and the asphalt surfacing.
 A minimum binder application rate of 1.8 l/m2 is deemed necessary for a SAMI treatment to be effective.
 Geotextile Reinforced Seal (GRS)
 A GRS is a seal incorporating a non-woven needle punched paving fabric to reinforce the seal and allow a significantly higher rate of binder application (an additional 0.8-1.0 l/m of binder is soaked up by the fabric). A GRS is normally used to waterproof and extend pavement life of severely cracked pavements or as a SAMI treatment under a thin asphalt surfacing. Double application seals are preferred to single application seals as they provide a more robust treatment with better resistance to turning traffic and are less prone to stripping. Aggregate sizes for double application seals are commonly 14/7.
 A GRS can be also used as a SAMI treatment as an alternative to a highly modified binder over severely cracked pavements and will provide a higher level of resistance to cracking. In this circumstance they are placed with a single layer of aggregate, usually a size 10 mm to allow for construction traffic.
 The binder used is usually C170 bitumen although bitumen emulsions and PMBs may be used for specific purposes and need to be specified in Table 408.161. PMBs, however, should not be used in the bond coat.
 Fibre Reinforced Seal (FRS)
 An FRS is a proprietary sprayed sealing treatment consisting of a layer of glass fibre strands sandwiched between two coats of a polymer modified bituminous emulsion. The fibres are applied randomly to form a mat that resists the onset of reflective cracking. Finally, a layer of aggregate is spread and rolled in the conventional manner. An FRS is also used for severely cracked pavements in a similar manner to a SAM seal or GRS. FRS is reported to be superior to a SAM seal but less so than a GRS.
 An FRS is more suitable than GRS for sharp curves where placement of the geotextile fabric is likely to develop kinks and creases. This specification does not specifically cover FRS product requirements but the acceptance criteria specified in Clause 408.12 still apply.
 Similarly, an FRS can also be used as an alternative to a geotextile as a SAMI treatment.
 Surface Enrichment (SE)
 An SE is a low cost seal treatment for highly textured surfaces with little or no traffic. The process involves the spraying of a light application of cut back bitumen or bitumen emulsion to the surface without application of additional aggregate. An SE is particularly suited to sealed shoulders that can be closed to traffic for 1 or 2 days. It is most important that an SE is applied in good weather conditions to ensure that it cures rapidly and minimise the risk of bituminous material washing off after heavy rain and damaging the environment.
 Double Application Treatments
 For high stress areas, double application (Double/Double) seal treatments provide a stronger surfacing capable of withstanding abrasive forces caused by turning and braking traffic. A double application seal usually consists of a Size 14 first coat followed by a Size 7 top coat. Other combinations such as 10/5 or 20/7 can be considered for special applications but should not be used without prior consultation with VicRoads Technical Consulting. The size of aggregate used for the second application should not be more than half the nominal size of aggregate used for the first application.
 Double/Double application treatments are commonly used for initial treatments on rural freeways or in GRS applications. A slightly different design process applies to double application seals where the second application is applied immediately, compared to double application seals where the second application is delayed until after a period of trafficking.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 7 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 
 A further form of double application seal is that of a Single/Double. It involves a single application of binder with two applications of aggregate. The first application of larger size aggregate is followed by a second application of aggregate about half the size of the first. This process is often termed `racking in' where the fine aggregate penetrates into voids between the coarse aggregate particles `locking' the coarse aggregate particles in place. The procedure is also often used for moderately trafficked intersections and at private entrances with large heavy vehicles.
 
 Programming of Sealing Works
 Ensuring sprayed bituminous surfacing works are undertaken at an appropriate time of year is a key factor in the long term success of treatments.
 Generally the more elaborate treatments, (i.e. use of highly modified binders or geotextiles) the greater risk of failure if they are applied in less favourable conditions. As such these types of treatments should be prioritised for the best weather conditions (i.e. typically December to February), particularly on high risk or high profile sites.
 Guidance as to the suggested sealing periods for various treatments is provided below. However some Regions with areas in the northern parts of the state which are generally warmer for longer may be able to further extend when their treatments are undertaken. Similarly some of the alpine and southern, cooler areas of the state (such as the Otway Ranges for example) may need to shorten the periods when more complex treatments can be undertaken. Local knowledge and judgement should also be used.
 
 Month July August September October November December January February March April May June
 
 Suggested good practice Preparation works Preparation works Preparation works and size 7 seals at low risk sites Size 7 and 10 seals Size 7, 10, 14, 14/7 seals Size 7, 10, 14, 14/7, HSS, SAM, GRS Size 7, 10, 14, 14/7, HSS, SAM, GRS Size 7, 10, 14, 14/7, HSS, SAM, GRS Size 7, 10, 14, 14/7, HSS seals Size 7 and 10 seals at low risk sites Preparation works and size 7 seals at low risk sites Preparation works
 
 Primes and Primerseals
 It is preferable to place these types of treatments in the warmer weather conditions but sometimes it is unavoidable or impractical to delay placing primes or primerseals due to various reasons.
 With careful treatment selection and application, initial treatments can generally be placed in less favourable conditions, particularly with the use of emulsions as long as all other specification requirements can be met e.g. pavement dryback. Guidance as to the appropriate treatment selection and timeframes for placement on pavements constructed clear of traffic is provided in VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.22  Code of Practice for Selection and Design of Pavements and Surfacings, Appendix C Table C1.
 In some cases, it may be necessary to undertake bituminous surfacing work outside the optimum conditions. In some cases this can still achieve a satisfactory outcome with careful treatment selection and planning however advice should be sought from VicRoads Technical Consulting.
 Specifying Restrictions on Work
 Consideration needs to be given to the potential programming inefficiencies that may result from restrictions which may increase the costs of sealing works. This should however be weighed up against the reduced risks for VicRoads and Contractors of treatments failing and requiring costly re-work of defects.
 
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 8 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 Restrictions on works in specific locations due to special events, tourist holiday periods etc. may also need to be considered. Care needs to be taken to not be over prescriptive and ensure that works can still be reasonably and economically programmed.
 Restrictions for programming works can be done in a number of ways depending on the extent of works that need to be restricted.
  Restrictions can be included in the comments column of Table 408.161 and is most suited to where restrictions need to be applied only a small number of job items.
  Separable portions of contracts can be set up in Section 161, Table 161.C5. This approach is more suited to where there are a reasonably large number of job items in geographical area where restrictions need to be applied, so that works are completed within a certain timeframe or before a certain date.
  Contract specific clauses can be used to restrict when particular treatments or works in specific areas can be undertaken.
 Attachment A
 The Job Completion Report includes a column for information to be provided on Pre-treatment Work. This information is required as specified in the Measurement and Payment section; refer to Contract Specific Clause 1000.3 in Shell C3.
 SECTION 700 - CONTRACT SPECIFIC CLAUSES FOR REINSTATEMENT OF PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 `Standard' contract specific clauses that are not appropriate should be deleted.
 SECTION 1000  CONTRACT SPECIFIC CLAUSES FOR MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
 Clauses relating to measurement and payment that may be inserted in this section include:  clauses clearly identifying the work elements where separate payment is made and those where no
 separate payment will be made  how binder rates of application are to be measured for both full width application and areas of pre-
 treatment  measurement and payment of areas sprayed  calculation of price adjustments for variation in binder rates of application rate from the specified default
 rates  determination and payment of CPI price adjustments in addition to information covered in Section 199  payments to contractors.
 FURTHER INFORMATION
 Further information may be found in the following publications:  Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology - Part F Bituminous Binders  Austroads Guide to Pavement Technology - Part K Seals  Austroads Update of the Austroads Seal Design Method 2006 (AP  T68/06)  Austroads Update of Double/Double design for Austroads Seal Design Method 2013 (AP-T236/13)  Austroads Guide to the Selection and use of Bitumen Emulsions (2002)  Austroads Guide to the Selection and Use of Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumen
 (AP-T235/13)  Austroads Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens
 (AGPT/T190)  Austroads - Geotextile Reinforced Seals (AP-T37/05)  Austroads - Fibre Reinforced Seals (AP-T38/05)  VicRoads Bituminous Surfacing Manual (Technical Bulletin 45)  Road Management Act 2004  Code of Practice for Operational Responsibility for Public Roads  Austroads / Australian Asphalt Paving Association Work Tips available at www.aapa.asn.au.  VicRoads Technical Consulting Manual of Technical Notes available at www.vicroads.vic.gov.au
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 9 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 NOTES TO SPECIFICATION CLAUSES
 408.03 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK A Hold Point applies to commencement of work being subject to agreement between the Contractor and the Superintendent that the road surface is fit and ready for surfacing. This particularly applies to initial treatments where excessively damp or poorly prepared unbound pavements can be detrimental to the performance of priming and primersealing. It can also refer to adequacy of pre-treatment for resealing. Cold, wet weather is a further factor that can increase the risk of failure (typically stripping) of sprayed seal treatments, particularly special treatments such as Strain Alleviating Membrane (SAM) seals and Geotextile Reinforced Seals (GRS). Generally, sprayed sealing work should be programmed to be undertaken in the warmer months (October to May) to minimise the risks associated with cold, damp conditions.
 408.04 LIMITS OF WORK Nearly all VicRoads sealing contracts are Lump Sum Contracts that require the limits of work to be marked on the main carriageways and at side roads. For existing sealed pavements this is normally done using hand sprayed painted arrows on the pavement. For new pavements, not yet constructed, drawings need to be available in sufficient detail to enable the areas of various elements of the job to be accurately determined to enable the Schedule of Details (Clause 408.16) to be completed. Unless otherwise specified, scheduled areas of work are normally required to be measured and calculated to an accuracy of  5% or of the actual area sprayed, otherwise a Contract Variation to the Lump Sum is applicable. Where the area of work cannot be marked out to an accuracy of  5%, the relevant level of accuracy should be included in a Contract Specific Clause. However the appropriate level of accuracy is usually readily calculated as part of the VicRoads process of marking out the limits of work. Reference should be made to the `Road Management Act 2004  Code of Practice for Operational Responsibility for Public Roads' for assistance in defining the job limits for reseals that extend on to side streets and intersecting roads.
 408.05 INCLUSION AND DELETION OF JOB ITEMS When preparing the contract schedule, it is important not to include too many `uncertain' jobs that may be removed from the contract by way of variation, as reductions in the total value of the contract by more than 20% may lead to a claim for additional payment. If there is uncertainty about the number of jobs that may be deducted from the contract, consideration could be given to developing a list of unscheduled jobs that may be added to the contract to offset the value of deductions.
 408.06 CALIBRATION OF BITUMEN SPRAYERS All bitumen sprayers must have a current calibration certificate, valid for 12 months from the date of testing, which should be located within the vehicle. Certificates of Calibration are acceptable from any testing organisation suitably qualified to undertake the relevant tests, including test facilities located in other states of Australia. A listing of current calibrated sprayers is maintained on the Australian Asphalt Pavement Association (AAPA)
 website (www.aapa.asn.au) under the heading of Technical.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 10 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 408.07 BITUMINOUS MATERIALS
 Most of the bituminous and other materials required for sprayed sealing are manufactured to meet an Australian Standard or Austroads Specification Framework. However, if new or alternative products are offered or tendered, the advice of VicRoads Technical Consulting should be obtained. Generally, the Contractor is required to provide evidence of satisfactory field performance of alternative products for a period of at least three years, although new and untried products may also be allowed on a trial basis under certain conditions.
 (a) Adhesion Agent Adhesion agent is chemical agent that is added to either the binder or aggregate precoating material to improve the adhesion of bitumen to aggregate. Adhesion agent is usually more effective if added to the aggregate precoating material, particularly if aggregate is being field precoated as part of the aggregate screening and loading operation. For wet aggregates (including wet plant precoated aggregate), adhesion agent is also added to the binder. Advice should be provided by the manufacturers in regard to the concentration of adhesion agent required to be added the binder or precoating material which must be supported by evidence of satisfactory field performance. This evidence should include results of testing for effectiveness of adhesion of binder on a range of aggregate types using VicRoads Test Method 112.03.
 (b) Aggregate Precoating Material Guidance on selection of aggregate precoating material is provided in the notes to Clause 408.08(b).
 (c) Bitumen Class 170 bitumen complying with AS 2008 is used for all conventional seals. Conventional seals make up the large majority of seals on sound pavements for roads with relatively low traffic and low stress locations.
 (d) Bitumen Emulsion Bitumen emulsion comprises around 60 to 80% bitumen in an aqueous solution of bitumen colloids, water and a small volume of emulsifier. Basic grades comply with AS 1160. Cationic Rapid Setting (CRS) emulsion is generally preferred for sealing work. Various proprietary grades of emulsion are also available, offering benefits in terms of higher viscosity for retention of larger aggregate sizes or the incorporation of polymer modified binders for enhanced performance. Bitumen emulsion seals can be up to 30% more costly than conventional cut back bitumen seals but may be considered for a range of applications including:  a light primer seal prior to an asphalt surfacing in lieu of a cutback bitumen prime or primerseal (essential where asphalt is to be placed within 12 months)  primes and primer seals on new works  a second application of a two application primerseal  an emergency reseal during cool weather to prevent further deterioration of a failing seal or primerseal  for 5 mm and 7 mm reseals, particularly in cooler months where conventional C170 bitumen seals would require an excessive amount of cutting oil and an increased risk of bleeding or flushing problems the following summer.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 11 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 
 (e) Cutback Bitumen
 Cutback bitumen used for sealing is usually field produced by the addition of cutter (cutting oil) at the site, immediately prior to sealing. Cutter is used to temporarily reduce the viscosity of a binder in cooler weather to achieve an even distribution of binder across the pavement and, more importantly, to achieve initial adhesion to, and proper embedment, of aggregate into the binder. The proportion of cutter is dependent on the specific pavement temperature and ambient conditions. Austroads APT39/05 - Sprayed Seal Cutting Practice and the Austroads/AAPA Work Tips Nos. 14 and 21 provide useful information on this subject. Cutter should not be added at a central depot as the amount is dependent on temperature conditions at the time of day the spraying of each sprayer load commences. Excessive cutter can lead to bleeding or flushing of the completed seal during hot weather whereas insufficient cutter can result poor distribution of binder to the pavement and poor initial aggregate adhesion.
 Cutback bitumen used for priming and primersealing may be field produced on the day but is mostly produced in a central location to either AS 2157 (Standard Grades) or to a proprietary specification (Proprietary Grades). Proprietary grades may differ slightly from Standard grades but may be accepted on the basis of previous demonstrated satisfactory performance.
 (f) Cutter (Cutting Oil)
 The most common type of cutter used is High Flash Point (HFP) cutter, which has been specifically developed for sprayed sealing work. HFP cutters are less costly and are safer to transport and handle than lower flash point cutters such as aviation fuel or normal kerosene. There are numerous proprietary grades of cutting oil available.
 (g) Flux Oil  Not to be used
 The role of Flux Oil is to achieve a longer term softening of the binder for lightly trafficked roads (AADT <300 vehicles per lane) to assist in aggregate embedment over a longer period and to delay the onset of age hardening of the bitumen binder.
 AS 3568 provides for two grades of Flux Oil.
 1. Light Flux Oil  Distillate or distillate based product
 2. Heavy Flux Oil  Heavy Fuel Oil
 In practice it has been found that there is little difference in the long term softening effects of light Flux Oils, such as distillate, and that of HFP cutter. Recent practice, therefore, has been to use a further 2 or 4 parts cutter for low trafficked roads (in addition to requirements for pavement temperature) in place of Flux Oil.
 If Flux Oil is required in preference to additional cutter, it must be specified in the `Other Requirements' column of Table 408.161 or by use of a special clause. Table A below should also be inserted into the special clause. Note that Clause 408.08(g) provides for the use of Heavy Flux Oil only.
 Table A  Addition of Flux Oil
 
 Traffic Volume AADT/lane
 < 100
 100 - 300
 > 300
 
 Volume of Flux Oil Parts /100 of Binder
 4 Parts
 2 Parts
 Nil
 
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 12 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 (h) Geotextile Fabric
 Two grades of fabric are available. The most commonly used fabric for general applications has a minimum mass of 135 g/m2 but a 175 g/m2 fabric is available for special applications such as large aggregate sizes (greater than 14 mm) or for use as an initial treatment on unbound granular pavements. Geotextile fabrics are manufactured from polyester or polypropylene. Polyester fabric is preferred for use with hot binders as it has a much higher melting point. Polypropylene fabric is generally restricted to bitumen emulsion treatments. The manufacturer is required to provide advice on the absorption characteristics of the fabric so that an appropriate allowance can be made in the design procedure. Normally, geotextile fabrics have a binder absorption rate ranging from 0.9 to 1.1 litres/m2.
 Geotextile fabrics are usually available from the manufacturer in a standard widths of up to 6.0 m by up to 450 m long but can also be ordered in custom widths and lengths if a non-standard size are required. It is preferable to not trim widths on site and the correct widths for the job should be ordered from the manufacturer.
 It is important for rolls of geotextile fabric to be stored in a dry location and out of direct sunlight.
 (i) Polymer Modified Binder (PMB)
 Clause 408.07(i) provides nominated classes of PMB for various treatments. If a different or particular class PMB is required, it must be specified in the `Other Requirements' column of Table 408.161.
 The Austroads Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders and Multigrade Bitumens (AGPT/T190) lists a wide range of PMB classes, it is not practical for the manufacturers to make all classes of PMB available at all times. The default grades are generally regarded as the most commonly used PMBs, with the crumb rubber classes being the most common. If another type of PMB is required other than one of the default grades, PMB suppliers should be contacted to ensure that it can be made available in sufficient quantities.
 Some PMBs may not meet all the specified requirements of AGPT/T190 and are regarded as unclassified, many of which are often proprietary products. If an unclassified PMB is proposed for use, evidence is required to show that it has produced seal treatments with a satisfactory history of performance over a period of at least 3 years.
 If in doubt regarding the selection of different classes of PMBs, or the use of unclassified PMBs, advice should be sought from the VicRoads Technical Consulting.
 (j) Prime
 The Contractor is required to select a grade of prime depending on the porosity of the pavement and how tightly bound the surface is after preparation. Heavy and very heavy grades of prime are required for porous types of materials, such as sandstone and limestone, and for surfaces lacking in fines or natural cementation. Some types of crushed rock, particularly those that are paver laid, can lack sufficient fines to provide a tightly bound surface and may also require the use of a heavier grade of primer or primerbinder.
 If local knowledge and experience has shown that a specific grade of prime produces the desired result it may be specified in the `Other Requirements' column of Table 408.161.
 Table B below provides some typical standard grades of prime that may be considered.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 13 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 
 Table B  Typical Standard Grades of Primer
 Application
 Concrete Pavements and Bridge Decks Tightly bonded with good retention of fines after sweeping Surfaces of medium porosity Moderately bonded with some loss of surface fines after brooming (e.g. paver laid pavement) Porous pavements materials such as sandstone, limestone and scoria.
 
 Generic Description Very Light
 Light
 Medium
 Heavy
 
 Viscosity Range at 600C (PaS) 0.010  0.020
 0.025  0.05
 0.05  0.08
 0.08  0.20
 
 Very Heavy
 
 0.20  0.40
 
 (k) Primerbinder
 As for selection of a prime, the Contractor is required to select a suitable grade of primerbinder for a primerseal based on the type, porosity and condition of the pavement materials to be treated.
 If local knowledge and experience has shown that a specific grade of primerbinder consistently produces as satisfactory result it may be specified in the `Other Requirements' column of Table 408.161. Table C provides some typical standard grades of primerbinder.
 Table C  Typical Standard Grades of Primerbinder
 
 Application
 
 Generic Description
 
 Viscosity Range at 600C (PaS)
 
 Cold and/or damp conditions. Tightly bonded or medium porosity pavements.
 
 Light  Medium
 
 1.0  3.0
 
 Warmer and/or dry conditions. Porous pavements materials such as sandstone and limestone.
 
 Heavy
 
 4.0  7.0
 
 Various Austroads documents also provide additional guidance on grades of primer for priming and primer sealing along with the relevant AS 2157 Cutback Bitumen AMC grades.
 
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 14 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 
 408.08 AGGREGATE
 
 (a) Aggregate Specification
 The Size and Class of aggregate are to be specified in Table 408.161.
 Table D below, which is reproduced from the Guide Notes for Section 831, provides a guide to selection of aggregate class. Further guidance on selection of aggregates is provided in the notes to Section 831.
 Table D  Selection of Aggregate Class
 
 Traffic Volume AADT
 
 Aggregate Class
 
 Assigned Polished Stone Value (min)*
 
 More than 3,000 vehicles or more than 300 commercial
 
 A
 
 vehicles
 
 48 or 54
 
 All other traffic levels
 
 B
 
 48 or 54
 
 * Assigned PSV to be obtained from Department of State Growth
 Sections 801 and Section 831 must be included in all specifications for sprayed sealing. If sand aggregate is to be specified for any reason, such as for covering of primer at entrances, or as part of `racking in' procedure, Section 832 must also be included.
 Class A aggregate has a minimum Polished Stone Value (PSV) of 48 which is satisfactory in most heavily trafficked situations. For high accident locations on heavily trafficked roads with an AADT in excess of 3000 vehicles/lane/day, a PSV of 54 may be specified provided that a suitable supply is available and economically feasible to transport. If in doubt, advice should be sought from VicRoads Technical Consulting.
 (b) Aggregate Precoat
 Precoating of aggregates is used to assist in overcoming adverse effects of dust and moisture on the adhesion between aggregates and binder.
 All aggregate for sealing must be precoated prior to use but precoating is not generally required for primersealing. Aggregate can be either field precoated with a distillate based precoating material as part of the aggregate loading operation, or plant precoated with a very light cutback bitumen at the aggregate source prior to delivery. Plant precoating with cutback bitumen is preferred to site precoating, particularly for heavy trafficked roads and for roads in high rainfall locations where aggregates becomes wet in stockpiles.
 If plant precoated aggregate is required, it must be specified in Table 408.161 as follows: Y/Plant
 If plant or field applied precoated aggregate is required, it must be specified in Table 408.161 as follows: Y
 If precoated aggregate is not required (e.g. for primerseals), it must be specified in Table 408.161 as follows: N
 
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 15 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 
 408.09 USE OF STACKSITES
 Stacksites are critical for the storage of sealing aggregates and can often also be utilised as a staging area for transferring, mixing and heating binders as well as parking of plant and equipment.
 Generally VicRoads will make nominated stacksites, typically within the road reserve available for the Contractor to utilise to carry out its works. A Contractor may also elect to make its own arrangements to use sites managed by councils or other authorities/property owners and it is the Contractor's responsibility to seek approval and adhere to any associated requirements.
 The management of stacksites across VicRoads has varied from Region to Region however, due to a recent incident and subsequent workcover investigation and resulting Provisional Improvement Notice, VicRoads now has in place a Stacksite Management Procedure (QD 2968781) that requires annual inspection and assessment of stacksites. This procedure also requires all contractors or relevant parties accessing stack sites under their control to have a SWMS in place which should be checked against a provided SWMS checklist.
 
 408.10 APPLICATION OF BITUMINOUS MATERIAL, AGGREGATE AND GEOTEXTILES
 
 (a) Design Rates of Application
 
 The Contractor is required to determine the design rates of application for binder and aggregate in accordance with AP-T68/06  Update of the Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method, and the associated 2013 update to the double/double design method (AP-T236/13) or later version as listed in Section 175. For tendering purposes, VicRoads is required to insert a default rate of application of bituminous material. If the Contractor's design rate of application is different to the default rate, the Lump Sum for that job item can be adjusted in increments of 0.05 litres/m2 above or below the default rate of application. Refer to Section 1000 clauses in the Shell Document for further information.
 
 Default rates of application for aggregate are not specified as the Contractor is required to determine the rate of application to suit the aggregate size and, if applicable, the Average Least Dimension (ALD).
 
 It is important that the correct design rate of application of aggregate is used. If the aggregate spread rate is too heavy it will result a surplus of loose aggregate particles. The combination of surplus aggregate particles and heavy traffic tends to grind and break down the aggregate in the sprayed seal. If the aggregate spread rate is too light, satisfactory aggregate particle interlock may not be achieved, resulting in on-going dislodging of aggregate particles from the binder under heavy traffic (stripping). The Contractor should therefore apply aggregate at, or close to, the design aggregate spread rate, with minimum overlap, to ensure a minimum of surplus aggregate and a spread rate sufficient enough to provide adequate aggregate particle interlock.
 
 Tables E1, E2 and E3 and footnotes are provided as a guide to determination of default rates of application of bituminous materials.
 
 Table E1 Typical Rates of Application for Primer
 
 Pavement Condition
 
 Nominal Rate of Application
 
 Tightly bonded Porous Very Porous
 
 0.8 L/m2
 1.0 L/m2
 0.8 L/m2 (first application) 0.6 L/m2 (second application
 
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 16 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 
 Table E2 Typical Rates of Application for Cutback Bitumen Primerbinder*
 
 Aggregate Size
 
 Primerbinder L/m2
 
 AADT / Lane
 
 Less than 150
 
 150  1200
 
 > 1200
 
 Aggregate (square metres per
 cubic metre)
 
 5 and 7
 
 1.3
 
 1.2
 
 1.1
 
 100
 
 10
 
 1.4
 
 1.3
 
 1.2
 
 90
 
 Table E3 Typical Base Rates of Application for Aggregate and Binder for Sealing
 
 Nominal Size
 
 Estimated Rate of
 Application (m2/m3)
 
 < 50
 
 Traffic Range  AADT /lane 50-200 200-400 400-1000 1000-3000 3000-8000 > 8000
 
 14 (S)
 
 75
 
 2.0
 
 1.8
 
 1.6
 
 1.4
 
 1.2
 
 1.1
 
 0.9
 
 10 (S)
 
 100
 
 1.4
 
 1.3
 
 1.1
 
 1.0
 
 0.9
 
 0.8
 
 0.6
 
 7 (S)
 
 130
 
 0.9
 
 0.8
 
 0.8
 
 0.7
 
 0.6
 
 0.5
 
 0.5
 
 14 / 7 (D) 70 / 130 1.4 / 1.0 1.3 / 0.9 1.1 / 0.8 1.0 / 0.7 1.0 / 0.7 0.9 / 0.7 0.8 / 0.6
 
 Notes on above Tables E1, E2 and E3:
 (1) Typical rates of application for priming and primersealing are based on average grades of primer and primerbinder on average pavements.
 (2) Application rates for prime and primerbinder refer to total volume, including cutter, at 15C. For bitumen emulsion primerbinders the application rates should be increased by approximately 25% for 60% bitumen emulsions and 15% for 67% bitumen emulsions, respectively.
 (3) It is usually more economical to use heavier grades of prime or primerbinder on known porous pavements rather than specifying abnormally high rates of application.
 (4) Typical rates of application for primerbinder and binder do not include any allowances and should be used as a guide only for tendering purposes. Where it is not possible to inspect the site and make an assessment of the surface texture, a default allowance of +0.3 L/m2 may be used.
 (5) Increase base rates given in the Table E3 by 10% for HSS and XSS, and 30% for SAM Seals.
 (6) Add 0.9 L/m2 to the rates given on Table E3 for a Geotextile Reinforced Seal.
 (b) Surface Pre-treatment
 The Contractor is required to nominate the application rate for pre-treatment as part of the design process outlined in Clause 408.10(a). To assist in this requirement, VicRoads has agreed with the industry to list in Table 408.161 where pre-treatment is most likely to be required. Every attempt should be made to comply with this agreement. Typical rates for application of bituminous binder used as pretreatment are: 0.3  0.5 L/m.
 Failure to nominate all pre-treatments, however, does not relieve the Contractor of responsibility for determining the need for pre-treatment in order to meet the specified requirements for surface texture and aggregate loss.
 
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 17 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 Surfaces requiring pre-treatment typically involve wheel paths with significantly less texture depth than areas outside the wheelpaths. The Austroads sprayed seal design method requires binder application rates to be designed for the wheelpath traffic and surface condition. This can result in insufficient binder to hold aggregate in the coarser textured areas outside the wheel paths. A common procedure for correcting this condition is to pre-spray the additional binder required in the coarse textured areas and then apply the design binder application rate across the full lane or road width. Suitable techniques for pre-spraying are described in VicRoads Technical Note 23.
 An alternative to pre-spraying is the use of a specially designed bitumen sprayer that can apply a variable binder distribution across the width of the spray bar. Regardless of the method of application used, the Contractor is required to separately determine the design binder application rate for wheelpaths and the additional binder application rate for the remainder of the spray width. Contractors using variable distribution sprayers must be able to demonstrate the means by which the variation in binder application rate is verified and show both the individual design rates and the total amount of binder sprayed for each run in the Job Completion Report (Clause 408.14).
 Some road surfaces may require more extensive pre-treatment than a simple transverse variation in binder application rate: Specialised treatments include:  a surface voids filling seal consisting of a fine aggregate and binder applied at the base rate of
 application, a few weeks prior to reseal;  solvent and grit treatments to treat flushed areas a few weeks prior to sealing - techniques for
 solvent and grit treatment are described in VicRoads Technical Note 18;  dry matting involving the spreading of a thin layer of loose aggregate in flushed or partially stripped
 areas prior to a further application of binder and aggregate - techniques for the application of dry matting technique to stripped seals are described in VicRoads Technical Note 87.
 These specialised treatments should always be specified as separate schedule items. They require particular care in application and should only be used after consultation with VicRoads Technical Consulting.
 Surface pre-treatment in sprayed sealing contracts is intended only for the correction of variations in surface texture and does not extend to the correction of defects such as pavement weakness, potholes, wide cracks, surface shape or extensive areas of severe surface bleeding. Pavement repair work, if required, should be carried well in advance of any sealing work to allow repair work to properly cure and `prove' in quality by the passage of traffic.
 (d) Minimum Temperature
 The viscosity of bitumen changes with temperature which is an important consideration for the longer term performance of sprayed seals as lower viscosities are required for initial wetting and adhesion to pavements and sealing aggregates. In cool temperatures binders rapidly cool which reduces wetting effects and adhesion.
 Temperatures provided in Table 408.101 are considered the minimum values based on various AAPA and Austroads guides, however undertaking works in such conditions still have a heightened risk of poor performance relative to warmer conditions and does not absolve the contractor of the other seal performance requirements.
 Crumb rubber binders can be used at slightly lower temperature as the surface of the binders do not tend to `skin' on the surface when sprayed like many PMBs when used in lower temperatures. This discourages adhesion of the aggregate and can lead to stripping. The one exception to this is S35E grade PMB where the manufacturer uses a PBD type polymer rather than SBS. These have been found to still provide reasonable adhesion in cooler conditions similar to crumb rubber. PMB specifications are non-specific on the type of polymer (i.e. SBS or PBD) and S35E binders can utilise either to achieve the specification requirements of this grade of binder. As such specialist advice from technical services should be sought if this issue arises.
 It should also be noted that whilst the application of a prime treatment can be undertaken at a relatively low temperature, ongoing low temperatures will result in a prime that will not set up and cure and should generally be avoided during the cooler months (i.e. late autumn and winter).
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 18 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 (e) Forward Aggregate Spreading
 The purpose of the introduction of forward spreading aggregate techniques is to provide a safer work place for the performing of sprayed sealing operations, hence VicRoads is facilitating and encouraging the introduction of forward moving aggregate operations from 1 July 2017.
 (i) Transition period A 5 year transition period to allow the purchase and commissioning of appropriate plant by contractors has been introduced, with a requirement for all aggregate spreading operations to be carried out in the forward direction from 1 July 2022. To complement the introduction of this initiative the following incentives have been adopted: (1) all sealing works delivered prior to 1 July 2022 shall have a value recognition of an additional payment of 50 cents per square metre sealed for the use of forward aggregate spreading techniques above the tendered Schedule 1 amount (2) all sealing works delivered prior to 1 July 2019 shall have an early adopter's incentive of an additional payment of 20 cents per square metre sealed for the use of forward aggregate spreading techniques above the tendered Schedule 1 amount (3) for all sealing works delivered after 1 July 2022, the forward aggregate spreading requirements shall be mandatory for all sprayed sealing works and any additional costs (if determined by the Contractor) shall be included in Schedule 1 of the Tender. It is proposed that an evaluation of the process be undertaken in co-operation with APPA at the end of the first two years of operation.
 (ii) Vehicles qualifying for the incentives (1) Items of plant that qualify for consideration under this agreement include:
  Synchronised sprayers that both spray bituminous binders and spread aggregates as part of the one forward moving operation. These plant items are sometimes referred to as `chipsealers', or `one step' machines.
  Aggregate cover trucks or vehicles that spread aggregate from the front of the vehicle whilst travelling in a forward direction only.
  Self propelled aggregate spreaders that do not have the ability to spread aggregate whilst reversing. NOTE: These machines only qualify whilst being loaded by front or side discharging vehicles, or being loaded by rear discharge vehicles whilst stationary.
  Other plant items may be submitted to the Superintendent for approval subject to meeting all the requirements of the specification.
 (2) Items of plant that do not qualify for consideration under this agreement include:
  All vehicles that discharge aggregate whilst reversing. This includes reversing tip trucks, live bottom trucks that discharge aggregate while operating in reverse and any truck that reverses into a hopper of a machine that in turn spreads aggregate whilst travelling forwards (e.g. self propelled aggregate spreaders).
  Any tipping truck that lifts the top of the tray or any other part of the vehicle above 4.0 m from ground level.
 All plant which the Contractor is proposing to seek incentive payments under the forward spreading aggregate program shall be approved by the Superintendent prior to the plant being used on site. For any item of plant to be approved by the Superintendent for forward spreading aggregate operations, a failsafe device shall be installed on the plant to prevent the discharge of aggregate while the plant is moving in a reverse direction.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 19 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 (iii) Combination or mixed plant operations Where a combination of forward and reverse spreading or discharge plant or devices are used on the same section of road, a pro-rata rate will be used to determine any additional payment (e.g. if one forward spreading vehicle and two reverse spreading vehicles are being used on the same section of road, the additional payment shall be paid on one third of the total square metres sealed for that part of the Contract provided that the forward spreading aggregate plant has undertaken a commensurate amount of aggregate spreading for the works). The term "commensurate" implies that an equal or equivalent amount of operational time has been spent by the forward spreading aggregate plant contributing to the sealing operations but not necessarily the equivalent sealing area. The term "commensurate" does not imply having the forward spreading aggregate plant on the site in either stand by or broken down mode. For the contractor to be eligible for the incentive payments, all items of plant contributing to the forward spreading aggregate sealing operations must be approved by the Superintendent and operating. In regard to the use of combination of forward and reverse spreading techniques on the same section of road, there may be instances where, for example, the main runs of the sealing works are undertaken by forward aggregate spreading techniques and the wings (a significantly small proportion of the works) are undertaken by reverse spreading techniques. In this case the actual area of the works sealed by each technique should be used for payment purposes.
 (iv) Multiple aggregate application seals For sprayed seals consisting of multiple application of aggregates, incentive payments shall only be applicable to the area of the completed seal treatment, i.e. the application of a size 14/7 multiple coat seal shall only receive incentive payments for the application of the initial size 14 seal even if the second coat size 7 seal is undertaken on a subsequent day.
 (v) Multiple year contracts For multiple year contracts the additional payments shall only be applicable to the years as specified in Clause 408.10(f) regardless of when the contract was awarded.
 408.11 REMOVAL OF LOOSE AGGREGATE
 On job items where removal of loose aggregate with a suction sweeper is required, it must be specified in `Other Requirements' column of Table 408.16.1. Use of a suction sweeper is normal practice for all urban roads with kerb and channel and roads with a sealed shoulder. Aggregate may be swept on to unsealed shoulders using a rotary road broom where there is an unsealed shoulder but for job items where this is undesirable, the use of a suction sweeper should be specified. Care needs to be taken to ensure that loose aggregate is not swept onto grass verges or areas that are mowed as it can become dangerous projectiles when ejected from mowers. Alternatively a contract specific clause can be used to specify circumstances where a suction sweeper is required if there are likely to be a large number of sites where this will be required.
 It is also important to ensure that non trafficked areas are swept, particularly in urban areas as loose stone can accumulate on traffic islands, medians, driveways, pram ramps and footpaths which also need to be swept, often by hand.
 Responsibility for removal of loose aggregate applies to the whole of the defects liability period and the Contractor may be required to take action, within 48 hours of notification, to remove measurable loose aggregate arising, for example, from aggregate stripping.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 20 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 408.12 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK
 A change has been made from earlier versions of Section 408 to introduce a maximum texture depth as well as the minimum texture depths previously specified.
 Minimum texture depth requirements are included in the specification to meet VicRoads policy for skid resistance and refer to potential loss of skid resistance through flushing and bleeding.
 Maximum texture depth is used as an indicator of inadequate binder application rate and potential for stripping or reduced service life from the seal.
 Texture depth of primerseals should be assessed after a period of trafficking (10 to 15 weeks) to take into account the influence of aggregate embedment into the underlying pavement.
 408.14 RECORDS
 The Contractor is required to prepare a job completion report for all work including pre-treatments - refer Attachment A of Section 408. If more information is required, a contract specific clause should be inserted requiring additional information.
 408.15 DEFECTS LIABILITY PERIOD
 VicRoads policy now requires a Defects Liability Period of 2 years for sprayed sealing works.
 408.16 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 Table 408.161  Schedule of Details Table 408.161 of the specification is a schedule of details for all sealing jobs under the contract. It is important that all the details in this table are filled out correctly as the information forms the basis of tendering by defining the full extent of the work required. For large contracts, this can be a lengthy task and sufficient time must be allowed for completing this schedule before the planned date of advertising. Due to the amount of detail to be inserted into this table, it is recommended that the table be prepared as an A3 sized Excel spread sheet in landscape mode when preparing tender documents. The notes beneath Table 408.161 of the specification provide summary information. Additional guidance for filling in this table is provided below.
 Job Item No. Job Item Nos. are also listed in Schedule 1 of Tender Documents. For large contracts it may be advantageous to have job items in groups based on the municipal area or road classification e.g. M, A, B and C Arterial Roads. In such cases the job items will require another number (e.g. Item Nos 101, 102 103 etc. as one group, and Item Nos. 201, 202, 203 etc. as another group, etc.). The various job item elements such as the Left Lane, Right Lane, Shoulder etc. with different traffic volumes and/or treatment types can be numbered 101.1, 101.2, 101.3, etc; and 201.1, 201.2, 201.3, etc.
 Road Name It is important to insert the declared name of the road rather than the local road or street name. The first named town of the declared name is usually the start of the road or where the kilometre markers start. For example, on the Birchip-Rainbow Road, the road kilometres would start from Birchip and increase in the Rainbow direction.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 21 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 
 Map Reference
 All VicRoads declared arterial roads have a road reference number which can be obtained from the VicRoads Country Directory or Schedule B of the VicRoads Road Management Plan (Table 4). Listing this number will ensure that correct road is located because the declared name may not be well known in the local area and road name signs may only display the local road name. A further road descriptor required to be used is the Linking Victoria classification of M, A, B and C road classifications. These classifications are shown in the current edition of VicRoads Country Roads directory and on most road direction signs. Current VicRoads maps of the declared road network also show these classifications. Maps can be obtained from the VicRoads bookshop.
 The map reference defines the approximate location of the job and assists greatly in job location. The VicRoads Country Directory map references are preferred, but Melway Street Directory map references may be used in the Melbourne and Geelong Metropolitan areas provided that it is made clear that the reference applies to the Melway Street Directory. Alternatively, Maps 436 to 467 of the VicRoads Country Directory could be used for the Metropolitan areas of Melbourne and Geelong.
 
 Chainage
 The chainage specifies the exact limits of work to the nearest 0.01 km which will not always be the actual length to be treated. In some cases the overall job limits may be broken up into several lengths within the job limits having exactly the same treatment in all respects, e.g. an initial treatment final seal on a shoulder that is broken up by lengths of existing sealed left turn lanes and side roads.
 
 Approximate Length
 This is the measured length of each element of the job regardless of width. Tapered areas are measured to half the length of the taper if the width is to be specified as a constant width (see below).
 
 Approximate Width
 This is the average width measured in at least three locations or at each change in width. On most jobs the width of each element varies slightly and it is important that the average width is determined and specified. If the width varies by more than 1 m the letter V should be inserted after the figure to indicate a variable width. This particularly applies to small irregular shaped areas such as intersection splays chevrons and bus bays etc. For irregular shaped areas, it may also be useful to include a sketched drawing.
 
 Approximate Area
 An electronic spread sheet program is a convenient way to record field measurements and automatically calculate areas. In such cases the area is determined from the length by width (or average width). Irregular shaped areas are manually determined and the area only is inserted (length and width columns may be left blank).
 Tenderers use the calculated area for determination of the Lump Sum price for each item so it is important that the area is determined to an accuracy of  5%. If the area varies by more than 5%, a variation to the Lump Sum for the item is applicable (refer Measurement and Payment section of the Shell Document). On more complex jobs such as intersections it is common practice to produce a sketch to assist with calculation and checking of areas.
 
 Treatment Type Prime Only (PO)
 Primerseal (PS) Prime and Seal (P&S) Final Seal (FS) Reseal (R)
 
 Specified when the sealing contractor is only required to apply a prime to a pavement or bridge deck and the remainder of the work (typically asphalt surfacing) is to be completed by others.
 A temporary initial treatment that is to be followed up by a Final Seal at a later time.
 A permanent initial treatment where a primer is first applied, then followed by a seal one to two weeks later.
 An initial treatment seal that is sprayed over a previously completed primerseal or asphalt patch.
 Maintenance retreatment over an existing sealed surface as part of a periodic maintenance program.
 
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 22 of 24)
 
 VicRoads
 Treatment Description These have been fully covered in detail in the general introductory notes and are not repeated here.
 Single or Two Application Enter whether the treatment is a single application (S) or two (double) applications (D) of binder and aggregate. If a single/double treatment (racking in) procedure is required, it must be specified in the `Other Requirements' column.
 Aggregate Size Enter the nominal size of aggregate required. If sand is to be used; enter `Sealing Sand'.
 Minimum Aggregate Class Enter the Class of Aggregate (A, B or C) to be used (see notes to Clause 408.08). Class A is a premium quality aggregate for high traffic roads. It should not be specified on roads were a Class B or C would suffice in order to conserve the higher quality aggregates where they are most needed.
 Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT) The AADT is the total amount of traffic travelling along a length of road in both directions in an average 24 hour day. The VicRoads annual traffic statistics usually provide separate traffic counts in each direction so the AADT in each direction must be added together to determine the two way AADT for the road. Some traffic counts, particularly those provided by municipalities, are provided as a two way AADT. It is important to establish whether the count is for both directions, or a single direction. If only a 12 hour traffic count is given, the AADT can be approximated by multiplying the 12 hour count by a factor of 1.3, unless better information is available.
 Percentage of Equivalent Heavy Vehicles The VicRoads traffic statistics usually provide the number and percentage of heavy vehicles in each direction for various sections of road. The average percentage of heavy vehicles for the road can be obtained by calculating the mean of the percentage of heavy vehicles in each direction from the VicRoads traffic statistics. The percentage of Equivalent Heavy Vehicles (EHV) is determined using the procedure described in the Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method (APT68/06) which applies an additional factor to very heavy vehicles such as B-Doubles and road trains (Austroads Class 10 and above).
 AADT/Lane This is the traffic volume per traffic lane (or other cross-sectional elements such as turn lanes, bus bays and shoulders etc) that is used to determine the design rate of application for binder (or primerbinder in the case of a primerseal). The AADT for each traffic lane is determined as half the two way AADT for the section of road, apportioned between each of the traffic lanes. The apportioning of the volume of traffic using each lane or cross-sectional element varies and depends on the steepness of the grade, the total traffic volume and the number of heavy vehicles using the route. If possible, field observation of traffic behaviour should be undertaken to assess the split in volume between traffic lanes. If there is no other information such as actual traffic lane counts the Austroads seal design guide provides guidance on traffic splits between lanes.
 Plant Precoating of Aggregate with Bitumen
 Specify whether aggregate is to be supplied as plant precoated with bitumen based precoat (Y/Plant), or field precoated with distillate based precoat (Y), or not precoated (N) (e.g. for primerseals). Plant precoated aggregate with bitumen based precoat should be considered for all urban roads, rural roads with an AADT in excess of 4000 vpd, and for major intersections. Plant precoating should also be considered for all roads to be sealed in late autumn or winter months where aggregate is likely to wet up in stockpile.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 23 of 24)
 
 VicRoads Default Rates of Application Default rate of application may be based on previous experience or guidance given in notes to Clause 408.10. Pre-treatment Guidance to the specification of pre-treatment (Y or N) is provided in the notes to Clause 408.10(b). Other Requirements Other requirements may include specific class of PMB [Notes to Clause 408.08(i)], aggregate PSV > 48 [Notes to Clause 408.09 and Clause 801.03(d)], use of suction sweeper (Notes to Clause 408.11), gritting of trafficked areas of Prime Only (PO) treatments, notification to abutting landowners and placement of variable message boards or other additional advisory signs. Table 408.162  Stacksite Locations Stack Site Number Insert the designated stack site number. Some Regions have erected signs at each stack site with the number shown. Any restrictions for a particular site should also be noted. Map Reference Insert the map reference from VicRoads Country Directory (preferred) or Melway Street Directory. Location and General Description Insert the location using local road name and km or distance from the nearest side road. Additional Restrictions on Use and Cleaning Up of Stack Sites Insert any restrictions on use of stack sites and a time limit on when stack sites are to be cleaned up and surplus aggregate removed.
 May 2017 408 GUIDE NOTES (Page 24 of 24)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 408 - SPRAYED BITUMINOUS SURFACINGS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 801, 831 and 832. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 408.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for materials, design and application of sprayed bituminous surfacings including primes, primers and sprayed seals of various types.
 408.02 DEFINITIONS
 Adhesion Agent A wetting agent designed to promote adhesion of binder or primerbinder to stone.
 Aggregate Retention Retention of aggregate particles by the binder or primerbinder under normal traffic conditions. The degree of aggregate stripping is measured to assess aggregate retention.
 Forward Aggregate Discharge Plant Any item of plant or device approved by the Superintendent that loads aggregate into a vehicle/truck or hopper for the use in the process of forward aggregate spreading.
 Forward Aggregate Spreading Plant Any item of plant or device approved by the Superintendent that uniformly spreads aggregate on to the road surface at a predetermined rate and width while the vehicle is travelling in a forward direction.
 Polymer Modified Binder (PMB) A bituminous binder with modified properties achieved by the addition of a polymer or crumb rubber.
 Prime An initial treatment comprising of the application of a bituminous primer to a prepared granular pavement base or concrete surface without cover aggregate.
 Primerseal An initial treatment comprising of the application of a bituminous primerbinder and covered with sand or aggregate to a prepared basecourse which has not been primed to provide a temporary bituminous surfacing.
 Residual Binder
 The volume of bituminous binder at 15 C including the volume of any polymer, granular rubber and flux oil but does not include the volume of any cutter, water, emulsifier or adhesion agent.
 Reverse Aggregate Spreading Plant Any item of plant or device that uniformly spreads aggregate at a predetermined rate and width while the vehicle is operating in a reverse direction (e.g. tip trucks with box spreaders attached).
 Sprayed Seal The sprayed application of bituminous binder to a previously primed or sealed surface followed by an application of aggregate to form an all-weather skid resistant road surfacing. Types of sprayed seals include:  Conventional (C), where the bituminous binder is Class 170 bitumen.  High Stress Seal (HSS), where the bituminous binder is a lightly modified PMB or has ten parts of
 crumbed rubber added to aid aggregate retention on heavily trafficked roads. HSS seals may be applied as a single/single application (HSS1) or a double/double application (HSS2).
 
 Department of State Growth
  Extreme Stress Seal (XSS), is a double/double treatment where the bituminous binder is a medium to heavily modified binder, to accommodate extreme stresses imposed by heavy traffic volumes and high proportions of heavy vehicles or difficult service conditions.
  Strain Alleviating Membrane (SAM), where the bituminous binder is a heavily modified PMB, or has 18 parts of crumbed rubber added to treat cracked pavements.
  Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer (SAMI), where the bituminous binder is a heavily modified PMB or has 20 parts crumbed rubber added to inhibit cracks reflecting through to an overlying surface.
  A Geotextile Reinforced Seal (GRS) is a type of SAM or SAMI seal where the bituminous binder is reinforced with a geotextile fabric to treat extensively cracked pavements.
  A Fibreglass Reinforced Seal (FRS) is a type of SAM or SAMI seal where the bituminous binder is reinforced by the inclusion of chopped fibreglass strands to treat cracked pavements.
 Surface Enrichment (SE) A light application of cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion to an existing highly textured bituminous surfacing in very low or non-trafficked areas to rejuvenate an existing sprayed seal or asphalt surface.
 Surface Pre-Treatments Surface pre-treatments include any sprayed bitumen, aggregate, combination of sprayed bitumen and aggregate, or other treatment approved by the Superintendent.
 Surface Texture The mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder as determined by the VicRoads' test for surface texture testing as listed in Section 175.
 408.03 COMMENCEMENT OF WORK
 (a) Periodic Resurfacing and Maintenance Works Within 2 weeks of the Date of Award of Contract the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review the sealing program for the whole of the works. During the period of the Contract, the Contractor shall submit by the preceding Thursday a detailed program of planned sealing jobs for the following week for review by the Superintendent, including planned dates for each sealing job.
 (b) Construction Projects The Contractor shall include details of all sprayed bituminous surfacing works on the Construction Program. During the period of the Contract, the Contractor shall submit by the preceding Thursday a detailed program of planned sprayed bituminous surfacing works for the following week for review by the Superintendent, including the planned sprayed bituminous surfacing works for each day.
 On the day prior to the works being carried out, the Contractor shall provide written confirmation of the works that will be undertaken the following day and obtain agreement from the Superintendent to any variation in the design rates of application to those provided under Clause 408.11(a).
 HP Work shall not commence until the Contractor and the Superintendent have agreed that the road or pavement surface is fit and ready for surfacing no more than 24 hours prior to the works occurring.
 408.04 LIMITS OF WORK
 Where the Job Items are detailed in Table 408.171, the limits of work at the start and finish chainages plus the limit in any side road have been marked on the pavement surface.
 The Works shall include all existing tapers, bell mouths at intersecting roads, pavement widenings (turn lanes), traffic lanes and sealed shoulders.
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Superintendent may increase or decrease the limits of work listed in Schedule 1. The Contractor will be notified in writing prior to works commencing of such adjustments to the limits of work for any job. The Contract Sum shall be adjusted on a pro-rata basis using the Item price tendered in the Schedule 1 and the difference in area of the revised works.
 The areas for items listed in Table 408.171 are accurate to 5%.
 408.05 INCLUSION AND DELETION OF JOB ITEMS
 The Superintendent may cancel any work, subject to notice of cancellation being given at least one week prior to the proposed commencement date.
 The Contractor will be notified in writing of such deletion and the Contract Sum adjusted by the price tendered in Schedule 1 for the job item/s deleted.
 No additional payment will be made as a result of the deletion of any job item. However, where the deletion of job items results in a Contract Sum reduction of more than 20% of the original Contract Sum, the deletion of job items in excess of this amount will be treated as a variation in accordance with the Contract.
 In the event of aggregate having been delivered to a job stacksite and the job is deleted in accordance with this clause, the cost of the removal of the aggregate and any loss of aggregate shall be treated as a variation in accordance with the Contract.
 The Superintendent may request the Contractor to undertake additional sealing works at sites not listed in Schedule 1. These works will be treated as a variation in accordance with the Contract.
 408.06 CALIBRATION OF BITUMEN SPRAYERS
 All sprayers used for application of bituminous materials shall have a current Certificate of Calibration showing compliance with Austroads Test Methods for Calibration of Bitumen Sprayers as listed in Section 175. The Certificate of Calibration shall be renewed every 12 months. If any sprayer has its spray equipment overhauled or replaced, it shall be issued with a new Certificate of Calibration prior to use.
 408.07 BITUMINOUS MATERIALS
 (a) Adhesion Agent
 Adhesion agent may be added to the aggregate precoat, binder or primerbinder to promote adhesion to the cover aggregate and/or pavement surface. The type of adhesion agent and the percentage to be used shall be subject to the Contractor providing evidence that the proprietary product has satisfactory field performance. When adhesion agent is added to the binder or primerbinder, the total volume of adhesion agent and diluent shall not exceed 1% by mass of the binder.
 (b) Aggregate Precoating Material
 Aggregate precoating material shall be distillate or distillate based product, cutback bitumen, emulsion based product or proprietary product subject to the Contractor providing evidence that the proprietary product has demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least 3 years. Restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 (c) Bitumen
 Bitumen shall be Class 170 complying with the requirements of the current Australian Standard for Bitumen for pavements as listed in Section 175. In addition, the minimum time to reach the specified apparent viscosity level shall be nine days when tested in accordance with the Australian Standard.
 Class 170 bitumen incorporating up to five parts of crumb rubber is considered to be an unmodified bituminous binder.
 Class 170 bitumen incorporating a low amount of polymer may be considered to be an unmodified bituminous binder, subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Bitumen Emulsion Bitumen emulsion of Class ARS or CRS shall comply with the requirements of the current Australian Standard for Bituminous emulsions for the construction and maintenance of pavements as listed in Section 175. Any non-standard proprietary classes of bitumen emulsion shall be subject to the Contractor providing evidence that the product has demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least 3 years. Restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 (e) Cutback Bitumen Cutback bitumen shall comply with the requirements of the current Australian Standard for Cutback bitumen as listed in Section 175, or an equivalent product subject to the Contractor providing evidence that the proprietary product has demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least 3 years. Restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 (f) Cutter Cutter shall comply with the current Australian Standard for Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements as listed in Section 175. Other cutters or methods of temporarily lowering the viscosity of the binder may be used subject to the Contractor providing evidence that such methods or products have demonstrated satisfactory field performance for a period of at least 3 years. Restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 (g) Flux Oil
 Not to be Used.
 (h) Geotextile Fabric The geotextile fabric used for a geotextile reinforced seal as a SAM or SAMI shall be a non-woven needle punched fabric. The mass of the fabric shall be a minimum of 135 g/m for seals of nominal maximum size of 14 mm and under, and 175 g/m for seals of nominal maximum size of larger than 14 mm. The geotextile fabric shall have a melting point (determined in accordance with the requirements of the current Australian Standard for Geotextiles  Method of test as listed in Section 175) at least 10C above the maximum binder spraying temperature.
 (i) Polymer Modified Binder (PMB) The class of PMB shall comply with the requirements of the Austroads Specification Framework for Polymer Modified Binders (AGPT/T190) as listed in Section 175. Alternative or `ungraded' PMBs which do not comply with the specified test requirements of AGPT/T190 shall not be used without approval by the Superintendent and will be subject to the Contractor providing evidence that the product has delivered satisfactory field performance for a period of at least 3 years. Restricted use of untried products at nominated trial sites shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 Unless otherwise specified in Table 408.171, one of the following classes of PMB shall be used:
 (i) HSS treatments Class S10E, S35E, ten parts crumbed rubber*, or alternative as approved by the Superintendent. HSS treatments may be applied as a single/single application (HSS1) or a double/double application (HSS2). Where a HSS is applied as a double/double the same binder shall be used for both applications. * If crumb rubber is used to field produce a rubber modified binder, the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than ten parts by mass of binder. The volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder.
 (ii) XSS treatments Class S20E, S45R or S15RF* or alternative as approved by the Superintendent. XSS treatments are applied as a double/double application and the same binder shall be used for both applications. * If crumb rubber is used to field produce S15RF rubber modified binder, the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than 18 parts (15%) by mass of binder. The volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder.
 (iii) SAM treatments Class S20E, S45R, S15RF* or alternative as approved by the Superintendent. Where SAM treatments are applied as a double/double application the above binder classes shall apply to the first application only. The second binder applications of all double/double SAM treatments shall use a conventional C170. * If crumb rubber is used to field produce S15RF rubber modified binder, the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than 18 parts (15%) by mass of binder. The volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder.
 (iv) SAMI treatments Class S25E, S18RF* or alternative as approved by the Superintendent. * If crumb rubber is used to field produce S18RF rubber modified binder, the amount of added crumb rubber shall not be less than 20 parts (18%) by mass of binder. The volume of carrier oil used before any cutting oil is added shall not exceed four parts by volume of binder.
 (v) GRS treatments Unless otherwise specified in Table 408.171, unmodified Class 170 bitumen binder shall be used for all geotextile reinforced seals.
 (j) Primer
 The primer shall be cutback bitumen complying with the requirements of 408.07(e) of this clause and shall be of a suitable class to ensure penetration into the pavement surface and when cured, be waterproof, of uniform appearance and capable of providing a strong bond between the bituminous surfacing and the pavement. Proprietary classes of bitumen emulsion may be accepted by the Superintendent as an alternative to cut back bitumen if evidence is provided to show that the emulsion product meets the same functional requirements and delivers the equivalent amount of bitumen residue to the road surface.
 (k) Primerbinder
 The primerbinder to be used shall be a suitable cutback bitumen or a bitumen emulsion. The primerbinder shall be waterproof and capable of penetrating into and adhering to the pavement surface while retaining sufficient binder on the surface to hold the aggregate in place.
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 408.08 CRUMB RUBBER Crumb rubber must be processed from waste tyres generated in Australia and processed by a Tyre Stewardship Australia accredited supplier and shall be free from cord, wire, fluff and other deleterious material.
 408.09 AGGREGATE (a) Aggregate Specification
 Aggregate shall comply with sections: 801 - Source Rock for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates 831 - Aggregate for Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing 832 - Sands for Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing.
 (b) Aggregate Precoating The Contractor shall either supply plant precoated aggregate from the aggregate supplier or field precoated aggregate from the stacksite.
 408.10 USE OF STACKSITES (a) General
 Any stacksites used by the Contractor during the Contract shall be cleaned and returned to their original condition within four weeks of completion of the use of that stacksite for works under this contract. Where the Contractor does not clean any stacksite used as specified, the Superintendent may arrange for it to be done by others at the Contractor's expense. No additional stacksites are to be constructed on the road reserve. The use of stacksites on other road reserves (such as municipal stacksites), or on other public or private land require the approval of the relevant authority or owner prior to use for items under this Contract.
 (b) Placement of Stacks The following requirements shall apply to the placement of aggregate and materials: (i) stacks shall be so placed that they do not unduly reduce sight distance at locations such as intersections and curves (ii) stacks shall not be placed under or immediately adjacent to power lines and shall comply with all "No-Go Zones" and the relevant requirements for spotters (iii) stacks shall not be placed under trees or structures where the overhead clearance is less than 6 m (iv) stacks shall be placed clear of the road formation, drains, gateways and side tracks and the toes of the stacks shall be not less than 1 m from any obstructions which could impede the operation of mechanical loading equipment.
 (c) Safe Work Method Statement Prior to using any stacksite, the Contractor or relevant parties shall submit a Safe Work Method Statement addressing the requirements of the SWMS Checklist in Appendix ##:
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 408.11 APPLICATION OF BITUMINOUS MATERIAL, AGGREGATE AND GEOTEXTILES
 
 (a) Design Rates of Application
 The Contractor shall determine the design rates of application for primer, primerbinder, binder, surface pre-treatments, remedial works and aggregate in accordance with the procedures set out in the current Austroads Sprayed Seal Design Method as listed in Section 175.
 All rates of application of bituminous material shall be expressed in litres/m. In the case of binder, rates of application shall refer to residual binder at 15C.
 Traffic data and default rates of application for bituminous material are specified in Table 408.171.
 At least 1 week prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall submit the design rates of application for bituminous material, aggregate, and rates for pre-treatment for review by the Superintendent.
 
 (b) Surface Pre-treatment
 Surface pre-treatments to correct variable surface texture shall be allowed for by the Contractor and carried out as part of the works to meet the requirements of Surface Texture and Aggregate Retention specified in Tables 408.132 and 408.133. Where the Superintendent has included a requirement for pre-treatment in Table 408.171 this does not limit the Contractor's responsibility for pre-treatments on all jobs. The cost of surface pre-treatments shall be included in the lump sum works.
 The acceptance criteria for Surface Texture and Aggregate Retention specified in Tables 408.132 and 408.133 will not be waived for any job item unless these requirements are waived in Table 408.171.
 
 (c) Geotextiles
 Geotextile fabric shall be fixed to the pavement surface free of wrinkles and/or folds. Transverse joins shall be butt jointed.
 Longitudinal joins in geotextile fabric shall be overlapped by approximately 150 mm and be located along lane lines. The Contractor shall make an allowance for additional binder to be applied along the join so that both geotextile layers are adequately saturated with bitumen. This allowance shall be included in the Contractor's seal design.
 
 (d) Minimum Temperature
 Unless otherwise approved by the Superintendant, the Contractor shall not apply any sprayed bituminous treatments unless the air and pavement temperature are above those listed in Table 408.111 and rising. The minimum temperature shall not apply for Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer (SAMI) treatments which will not be trafficked, prior to the SAMI being overlayed.
 In addition to Table 408.111 priming and primersealing shall only be undertaken when the prevailing weather conditions, when assessed in accordance with AAPA HSE Guide No.8  Environmental management when spraying bituminous materials, have a risk rating of `low' or less and appropriate work practices to minimise risks are in place.
 Table 408.111 Minimum Temperatures for Spraying Bituminous Materials
 
 Treatment Type
 Initial Treatments Primes Primerseals (single/single) Primerseals (double/double) Reseal Treatments C170 and crumb rubber modified PMBs Other PMBs Geotextile Reinforced seals
 
 Minimum air and pavement Temperature
 (C)
 10 15 10
 15
 20 20
 
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (e) Aggregate Spreading (Forward Direction Only)
 
 Not Applicable
 
 HP
 
 Where the contractor proposes to use forward aggregate spreading plant, written approval is
 
 required from the Superintendent prior to use, unless written approval has been previously
 
 provided by the Department.
 
 (f) Additional Payment for Forward Aggregate Spreading
 
 Not Applicable
 
 408.12 REMOVAL OF LOOSE AGGREGATE
 
 The Contractor shall remove and dispose of all loose aggregate, within the maximum time limits as specified in Table 408.121 below. This includes loose aggregate on all trafficked areas, and areas where loose aggregate has been swept, or moved by traffic onto sealed shoulders or non trafficked areas, or into other areas such as concrete channels, traffic islands, medians, open drains, drainage pits, footpaths, nature strips, or verges.
 Table 408.121 Maximum Time Limit for Removal of Loose Aggregate
 
 Traffic Volume (AADT) * >5000 and all Freeways >2000 to 5000 >500 to 2000 <500
 
 Maximum Time Limit Within 8 hours of sealing Within 24 hours of sealing Within 48 hours of sealing Within 5 days of sealing
 
 * Annual Average Daily Traffic - refer to Table 408.171 for AADT for each Job Item
 
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Until loose aggregate is removed from the sealed surface, traffic speed shall be controlled by signing and installation of road works speed limits in accordance with the Traffic Control for Works on Roads, Tasmanian Guide.
 Loose aggregate shall not be removed until the aggregate has properly bedded down into the binder by either trafficking or additional rolling. Any damage to the seal resulting from removal of loose aggregate shall be repaired by the Contractor.
 Rotary brooms and/or suction sweepers are permitted to remove loose aggregate from the trafficked areas unless otherwise specified.
 Loose aggregate may be temporarily dumped at the stack sites nominated in Table 408.172.
 For seals of nominal size 10 mm and over, including multiple application seals:
 After the removal of loose aggregate and at any time during the Defects Liability Period of the Contract, no more than 40 loose stones in any square metre of pavement shall remain. This includes stones that have originated from the area sealed under the Contract and which have accumulated on adjacent sealed areas such as intersections, additional traffic lanes (in either direction), shoulders, and flanks.
 On job items where 40 loose stones or more are measured warning signs shall be erected within eight hours, and the site shall be re-swept, or the loose stones removed within 48 hours of measurement.
 For seals of nominal size 7 mm and under:
 After the removal of loose aggregate and at any time during the Defects Liability Period, no more than 60 loose stones in any square metre of pavement shall remain. This includes stones that have originated from the area sealed under the Contract and which have accumulated on adjacent sealed areas such as intersections, additional traffic lanes (in either direction), shoulders, and flanks.
 On job items where 60 loose stones or more are measured warning signs shall be erected within eight hours, and the site shall be re-swept, or the loose stones removed within 48 hours of measurement.
 
 408.13 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK
 
 (a) Rates of Application for Binder
 
 The Contractor shall produce evidence to show that the actual rate of application for a particular job, or segments of a job with different design rates of application, complies with the design rates of application. Variation between the actual rates and the design rates will be assessed in accordance with Table 408.131.
 
 If a payment deduction or rectification is required in respect of unsatisfactory surface texture or aggregate loss as specified in parts (b) and (c) of this clause, deductions under Table 408.131 will not be applied.
 
 Table 408.131 Variation in Rates of Application of Bituminous Material
 
 Variation from the Design Rates of Application for Bituminous Material (l/m) *
 
 Assessment
 
 < 0.1 l/m below the design rate of application Accept
 
  0.1 l/m to 0.2 l/m below the design rate of application
 
 Deduct $0.50/m for the affected area provided that minimum texture and aggregate retention requirements are met
 
 > 0.2 l/m below the design rate of application Deduct $1.00/m for the affected area provided that minimum texture and aggregate retention requirements are met
 
 * The variation from the Design Rate of Application for SAM seals or SAMIs may be increased by 0.05 l/m.
 
 Acceptance or otherwise of the criteria specified in Table 408.131 shall not relieve the Contractor from its obligations under the Defects Liability Period.
 
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (b) Surface Texture
 Acceptance of work for surface texture and surface enrichment shall be based on visual assessment, however in marginal cases the Superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with VicRoads Test Method for Surface Texture of Sprayed Seals as listed in Section 175 and assessed in accordance with Table 408.132. The test lot size shall not be less than 100 m of single traffic lane or more than 600 m of single traffic lane. For any testing undertaken on areas other than within traffic lanes, the minimum lot size shall be not less than 400 m or more than 2500 m.
 
 Table 408.132 Surface Texture Requirements
 
 Treatment
 
 Size 5
 
 Mean Texture Depth (mm)
 
 Size 7
 
 Size 10
 
 Size 14
 
 Size 14/7
 
 Action Required
 
 Seals (All Types) (1)
 
 1.0 to 1.6 1.3 to 1.8
 
 0.8 to 1.0 1.2 to 1.3
 
 or
 
 or
 
 1.6 to 1.8 1.8 to 2.0
 
 1.5 to 2.5
 1.3 to 1.5 or
 2.5 to 3.0
 
 2.0 to 4.0
 1.7 to 2.0 or
 4.0 to 4.5
 
 1.3 to 2.4
 1.2 to 1.3 or
 2.4 to 2.7
 
 Accept
 The Superintendent may require rectification of the works or elect to reduce payment for the lot by $1.00/m
 
 < 0.8 or
 > 1.8
 
 < 1.2 or
 > 2.0
 
 <1.3 or
 > 3.0
 
 < 1.7 or
 > 4.5
 
 <1.2 or
 >2.7
 
 Work to be rectified
 
 Primerseals (2)
 
 N/A
 
 1.0 to 2.0 1.2 to 3.0
 
 N/A
 
 N/A
 
 Accept
 
 N/A
 
 < 1.0
 
 < 1.2
 
 N/A
 
 or
 
 or
 
 > 2.0
 
 > 3.0
 
 N/A
 
 Work to be rectified
 
 Surface
 
 N/A
 
 Enrichment (1)
 
 N/A
 
 0.8 < 0.8
 
 N/A
 
 Accept
 
 N/A
 
 Work to be rectified
 
 Notes: (1) Surface texture measurements for seals and surface enrichment may be undertaken at any time during the Defects Liability Period, but final acceptance of works is not affected until the end of the Defects Liability Period.
 (2) Surface texture measurements for primerseals shall be undertaken no sooner than 10 weeks after placement, and no later than 15 weeks after placement. If tests are not undertaken in this period and later test results require the works to be rectified, the later test results are to be used for acceptance of the works.
 
 (c) Aggregate Retention
 
 Acceptance of work for aggregate retention shall be based on visual assessment however in marginal cases, the Superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method for Stripping of Aggregate from Sprayed Seals as listed in Section 175 and assessed in accordance with Table 408.133. Depending on the measured Degree of Aggregate Stripping, the Contractor shall take action as specified in Table 408.133. The test lot size shall not be less than 100 m of single traffic lane or more than 600 m of single traffic lane. For any testing undertaken on areas other than within traffic lanes, the minimum lot size shall be not less than 400 m2 or more than 2500 m2.
 
 Table 408.133 Assessment of Aggregate Retention
 
 Degree of Aggregate Stripping
 
 Action Required
 
 0 to 2
 
 Accept
 
 3 to 5
 
 Work to be re-tested within one month prior to the end of the Defects Liability Period. If the Degree of Aggregate Stripping has increased since it was last tested, the work shall be rectified before the end of the Defects Liability Period.
 
 Greater than 5
 
 Work shall be rectified within 5 days.
 
 Note: Aggregate retention measurements may be undertaken at any time during the Defects Liability Period, but final acceptance of works is not affected until the end of the Defects Liability Period.
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Visual Uniformity
 The Contractor shall provide a surface with uniform colour and texture to provide a consistent appearance and aggregate for each job item including aggregate used for repairs and remedial works shall be supplied from the same source.
 408.14 MAINTENANCE OF SEALS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the monitoring and maintenance of seals from the time of application until the end of the Defects Liability Period. Monitoring of seals shall include regular and timely inspection of work, management of traffic, and monitoring of any deterioration in the surface condition.
 The Contractor shall carry out any work necessary to protect and maintain the seal or to effect repairs to any seal failure. Such failures include but are not limited to, potholing, emulsification, flushing, bleeding, fatty areas, significant areas of bitumen on kerb and channel, excess bitumen without aggregate cover at the start/finish of runs, aggregate stripping, non-uniform aggregate spreading and streaking of aggregate but do not include pavement failures or events beyond the reasonable control of the Contractor.
 HP The Contractor shall advise the Superintendent in writing of the proposed treatment to effect the above work before undertaking the work.
 HP Where the treatment for protection or repair of a seal involves the application of a further seal coat, the Contractor shall obtain the agreement of the Superintendent of the proposed treatment before undertaking the work.
 The Contractor shall undertake the protection or repair work within 48 hours of notification by the Superintendent.
 For urgent repairs, the Contractor shall take action to preserve the work and make the road safe within 2 hours of being notified or becoming aware of the problem.
 Payment will be made for the cost of repairs undertaken by the Contractor and approved by the Superintendent for damages that are the result of incidents outside the Contractor's control, including but not limited to, damage caused by others involving oil spills, accidents, vehicle fire or tearing due to heavy braking and skidding.
 408.15 RECORDS
 The Contractor shall forward to the Superintendent a Job Completion Report (Sealing) using the proforma included as Attachment A to this Section 408, or an equivalent proforma as approved by the Superintendent, for each job item in Schedule 1. The completed form shall be submitted within seven days of completion of sealing each job.
 The Contractor shall show and certify by initialling each item on the above Job Completion Report (Sealing) the actual status of the item compared to the specified requirement for that item, and sign and date the report prior to forwarding to the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall ensure that where a representative of the Superintendent is on site during the works, that officer validates the works as provided on the Job Completion Report (Sealing).
 408.16 DEFECTS LIABILTY PERIOD
 All defects should be rectified six months prior to the conclusion of the Defects Liability Period, to an agreed corrective action. This does not limit the Contractor's responsibly to undertake protection or urgent repair works under Clause 408.14. The Defects Liability Period for repaired work shall recommence on the date of repair in accordance with the provisions of the Contract. The Contractor shall carry out at least two inspections of each job during the Defects Liability Period and provide a condition report to the Superintendent. The condition report shall detail the condition of the seal, any defects and the proposed corrective action.
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Department of State Growth - SMeacrtciohn240018
 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** 408.17 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 Table 408.171 Schedule of Details
 
 Job Item (refer Sch 1)
 
 Freeway, Highway or Road Name
 
 Road & Link Ref
 
 Map & Ref (1)
 
 Chainage km
 
 Approx Approx
 
 Length Width
 
 m
 
 m
 
 Approx Area m2
 
 Treatment Type (2)
 
 Treatment Description (3)
 
 Single or Two Application
 (4)
 
 Agg Sizes mm
 
 Min Agg Class (A, B or C)
 
 Traffic Data
 
 24 hr AADT
 (5)
 
 24 hr % AADT/ EHV Lane
 (6)
 
 ## Note to author - The following items are examples only. Change text to suit your specification - DELETE THIS ROW BEFORE PRINTING:
 
 Agg Precoat
 Y/N?
 
 Default Binder Rates of Application
 l/m2
 
 Pre-treat Y/N?
 
 Other Requirements
 
 1 Birchip-Rainbow Road
 
 5432
 
 100-G7 7.00-8.00 1000 7.4 7400 FS
 
 C
 
 S
 
 10
 
 B 1400 15 700
 
 1.3
 
 (C243)
 
 2 Western Highway
 
 2520 (A8)
 
 150-B6 161.0-162.0
 
 12000 15 see under
 
 2.1 Lane 1 (slow lane)
 
 161.0-162.0 1000 3.7 3700 R GRS D 14/7 A
 
 4500
 
 2.4
 
 Min. PSV of ##: is required for
 
 aggregate
 
 2.2 Lane 2 (passing lane)
 
 161.0-162.0 1000 3.7 3700 R SAM S
 
 14
 
 A
 
 1500
 
 1.8
 
 PMB Class ##: is required
 
 2.3 Lane 3 (reverse direction)
 
 161.0-162.0 1000 3.7 3700 R HSS S
 
 10
 
 A
 
 6000
 
 1.5
 
 2.4 Shoulders x 2
 
 161.0-162.0 1000 2 x 2.4 4800 R
 
 SE
 
 S N/A N/A
 
 50
 
 0.8
 
 3 Mallee Highway
 
 2650
 
 11-C3 120-121 1000 7.4 7400 R SAM S
 
 14
 
 B 1000 10 500
 
 1.6
 
 (B12)
 
 If any space is left blank it shall be read as "Not Applicable.
 Notes on Table 408.171
 (2) Treatment Type - Prime Only (PO), Primerseal (PS), Prime and Seal (P&S), Final Seal (FS), Reseal (R). (3) Treatment Description - Conventional (C), Single/Single High Stress Seal (HSS1), Double/Double High Stress Seal (HSS2), Extreme Stress Seal (XSS), Strain Alleviating Membrane (SAM),
 Strain Alleviating Membrane Interlayer (SAMI), Geotextile Reinforced Seal (GRS), Fibreglass Reinforced Seal (FRS), Surface Enrichment (SE). (4) Single or Two Application - Single(S) or Double Application (D) of Binder and Aggregate. (5) AADT is the Annual Average Daily (24 hr) Traffic and % EHV is the percentage of the AADT calculated from number of heavy vehicles and large heavy vehicles. (6) AADT / lane is the Average Annual Daily (24 hr) Traffic for the traffic lane being considered. Where this is not given it shall be proportioned by the Contractor from the AADT figures. (7) Typical `Other Requirements' include: Specific PMB Class (Cl. 408.07(i)), Aggregate PSV >48 (Section 831), If plant precoated aggregate is specifically required (Cl. 408.09(b)), Need for
 gritting of trafficked areas for Prime Only treatments (PO), Notification to abutting landowners, Placement of variable message boards or other additional advisory signs, suction sweeper required (Cl. 408.11), Specific programming requirements.
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 408.172 Stacksite Locations  Not applicable, Contractor to identify and manage own Stacksite Locations
 
 Stacksite No.
 
 Map Reference
 
 Map No.
 
 Grid Ref.
 
 Location and General Description
 
 Additional Restrictions on Use and Cleaning Up of Stacksites
 
 ##Note to author. The following items are examples only. Change text to suit your specification. DELETE THIS ROW BEFORE PRINTING:
 
 1
 
 100
 
 G8 Birchip-Rainbow Road approx. 9.0 km / north Remnant aggregate shall be
 
 side
 
 removed from the stacksite
 
 within 2 weeks rather than
 
 4 weeks
 
 N/A
 
 Contractor to obtain approval to selected
 
 stacksite
 
 Department of State Growth - March 2018 Section 408
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 JOB SPECIFICS Job No: Road Name: Start Chainage: End Chainage:
 
 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (SEALING)
 Treatment: Seal Date: Stacksite Location:
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 408 CONTRACT No. ..............
 
 EXISTING CONDITIONS (circle or fill in) Weather: Air Temp: Pavement: Regulatory Speed Limit: Aggregate Conditions: Aggregate Pre-coat: NCR Required?
 
 Sunny
 Isolated stone loss 100 km clean
 pre-delivery Yes
 
 Clear
 stripping 80 km
 dry onsite
 No
 
 O'Cast Pavement Temp:
 flushed wheel paths 60 km dusty
 no pre-coat Reasons:
 
 W indy
 flushed 40 km dirty
 
 Showers
 patching < 40 km
 damp
 
 Wet
 cracking other wet
 NCR No:
 
 TRAFFIC CONTROL (circle or fill in) Subcontractor Managing Traffic Control? SIGNS During Work
 
 After Work
 
 Traffic
 
 Delays Queues
 
 Installed to WTM Code Removed Installed to WTM Code Removed Average Delay to Vehicles:
 Average Queue Length:
 
 Yes / No
 Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No
 minutes vehicles
 
 Subcontractor:
 Date / Time Installed: Date / Time Removed: Date / Time Installed: Date / Time Removed:
 
 Subcontractor Initials:
 Speed Limit TMP No. Used Speed Limit TMP No. Used
 
 km/hr km/hr
 
 SEALING WORKS
 
 RUN NO.
 
 Pre-treatment / Run 1
 
 Start Chainage
 
 End Chainage
 
 Lane Description
 
 Air Temperature
 
 Pavement Temperature
 
 Length (m)
 
 Width (m)
 
 Area (m2)
 
 Binder Type
 
 Tank Dip Start (litres)
 
 Tank Dip End (litres)
 
 Quantity Sprayed (litres)
 
 Actual Application Rate (l/m2)
 
 Design Application Rate (l/m2)
 
 Mix - Bitumen/Flux Oil/Cutter/Additive
 
 100 /
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 AGGREGATE
 
 Aggregate Size
 
 Quantity (m3)
 
 Average Least Dimension (ALD)
 
 Aggregate Design Spread Rate (m2/m3)
 
 / ALD
 
 Actual Design Spread Rate (m2/m3)
 
 / ALD
 
 Rolling Time (hrs)
 
 FORWARD AGGREGATE SPREADING PLANT
 
 Proportion of forward aggregate spreading use on run (e.g. 1/3, 4/5, All)
 
 DELINEATION
 
 Existing RRPMs Removed
 
 TRRPMs
 
 Installed
 
 Uncovered
 
 Reinstatement Pavement Markings - 1st Coat
 
 Pavement Markings - 2nd Coat
 
 RRPMs
 
 Weather Delays to Linemarking:
 
 Run 2
 
 Run 3
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 / ALD / ALD
 
 / ALD / ALD
 
 Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No
 days
 
 Date: Date: Date: Specified Date Due: Actual Date Done: Specified Date Due: Actual Date Done:
 Specified Date Due: Actual Date Done:
 
 Run 4
 
 Run 5
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 /
 
 /
 
 / ALD / ALD
 
 / ALD / ALD
 
 Spacings:
 
 Totals
 Average Average
 m
 
 I, ......................................................................................................................... certify the above details as correct (Contractor's Representative, print name)
 
 ......................................................................................................................... (Contractor's Representative, signed)
 
 /
 
 /
 
 I, ......................................................................................................................... concur with the above (Superintendent's Representative, print name)
 
 ......................................................................................................................... (Superintendent's Representative, signed)
 
 /
 
 /
 
 SECTION 409 - WARM MIX ASPHALT
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 407. Where Section 409 is included in the specification, Section 407 must also be included:
 
 409.01 GENERAL
 These clauses cover special requirements for Warm Mix Asphalt (WMA) that are in addition to, or override, the requirements for Section 407  Hot Mix Asphalt.
 
 409.02 DEFINITION
 Warm Mix Asphalt (WMA)
 Warm Mix Asphalt (WMA) is asphalt which contains an additive, or uses a manufacturing process, that allows the asphalt mix to be produced and placed at lower temperatures than Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA).
 
 409.03 BINDERS
 The class of binder for each asphalt type shall comply with the requirements of Clause 407.05.
 
 409.04 MIX DESIGN
 All mixes shall comply with the requirements of Clause 407.06.
 HMA mix designs registered as `General' can be used as the basis of WMA mix designs. The mix identification number for WMA shall include the suffix `W'.
 
 409.05 ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE TESTING FOR WMA
 (a) Representative samples of production asphalt shall be taken and tested at a frequency not less than that specified in Table 409.051.
 (b) Test specimens for the tests shall be compacted to an air voids content as specified in VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.01.
 
 Table 409.051 Frequency of Testing for WMA
 
 Test Required
 
 Minimum Frequency
 
 Moisture Sensitivity (Minimum Wet
 
 One per 10,000 tonnes or part thereof.
 
 Strength and Tensile Strength Ratio)
 
 Indirect Tensile Modulus*
 
 One per 2,000 tonnes or part thereof.
 
 * Modulus testing is only required for the approved WMA mixes produced by
 using the sequential aggregate coating method with two different binder grades.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 409 (Page 1 of 1)
 
 SECTION 417 - OPEN GRADED ASPHALT
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 407. If Section 407 is relevant, it should be included in the specification.
 If Section 407 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 417.01 GENERAL
 This section shall be read in conjunction with Section 407 - Asphalt, and covers special requirements for Size 10 open graded asphalt surfacing that are in addition to, or override, the requirements for Section 407.
 
 417.02 DESCRIPTION OF MATERIAL
 Open Graded Asphalt (OGA) is an asphalt manufactured essentially from a Size 10 one-sized aggregate to produce a mix with high air voids.
 
 417.03 AGGREGATES
 Unless otherwise specified, properties of the aggregates used in OGA shall comply with the requirements for asphalt Type H as specified in Clause 407.03. Further to Clauses 407.03 and 407.09, no RAP shall be added to OGA.
 
 417.04 BINDER
 Binder used in OGA shall be a Polymer Modified Binder (PMB), complying with the requirements of the Austroads Test Method AGPT/T190 Specification for Polymer Modified Binders.
 Unless otherwise specified in Clause 407.23(a), the PMB to be used in OGA shall be one of the following grades:
 A15E, A20E, A25E, A30P or A35P
 
 417.05 MIX DESIGN
 The asphalt mix proposed for use shall be registered in accordance with Clause 407.06.
 The Contractor shall also provide the following information: (a) the class and test properties of the PMB proposed (b) the results of the Binder Paste Drain Off tests meeting the requirements of
 Clause 417.06(d) and the selected maximum mixing temperature to avoid excess binder drain off.
 The Indirect Tensile Modulus of the mix is not required to be submitted.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 417 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 417.06 MIX DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
 
 (a) Grading Limits and Production Tolerances for Aggregates
 
 Unless otherwise specified or directed, the grading of mineral matter, and the production tolerances from the grading aim shall lie within the limits specified in Table 417.061.
 
 Table 417.061
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 Grading Aim % Passing
 (by mass)
 
 Production
 Tolerance from Grading Aim
 % Passing (by mass)
 
 13.2
 
 100
 
 Nil
 
 9.5
 
 90  100
 
 6
 
 6.7
 
 50 - 65
 
 6
 
 4.75
 
 25  35
 
 5
 
 2.36
 
 10  20
 
 5
 
 1.18
 
 6 - 12
 
 5
 
 0.600
 
 5 - 10
 
 5
 
 0.300
 
 48
 
 3
 
 0.150
 
 36
 
 3
 
 0.075
 
 35
 
 1.0
 
 (b) Added Filler
 The mix shall contain a minimum of 1% by mass of hydrated lime added filler.
 (c) Binder Content
 Unless otherwise specified or directed, the binder content of the mix shall be 6.5% with a production tolerance of 0.3%.
 (d) Binder Drain Off Test
 A series of Asphalt Binder Drain Off tests over the range of likely mix temperatures shall be performed at the specified binder content to determine the maximum allowable mixing temperature to avoid excessive binder drainage. The mass of binder paste drain off shall not exceed 0.3% of the total mass of the sample of mix tested at the maximum allowable mixing temperature.
 (e) Air Voids
 The mix design shall have an air void range of 18-25%.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 417 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 417.07 TEMPERATURES OF BINDER, AGGREGATE AND ASPHALT
 
 Unless otherwise specified or directed, temperatures of binder, aggregate and asphalt shall comply with the requirements of Table 417.071.
 Table 417.071
 
 Material
 
 Polymer Modified Binder Temperature C
 
 Min
 
 Max
 
 Binder delivered into plant storage
 
 180
 
 190
 
 Asphalt at discharge from mixing plant
 
 155
 
 180
 
 Asphalt at spreading plant
 
 150
 
 175
 
 417.08 AMBIENT CONDITIONS FOR PLACING
 OGA shall not be placed when the majority of the area to be paved has a surface temperature of less than 15C.
 417.09 WATER RESISTANT BITUMINOUS BOND COAT
 A water resistant bond coat shall be applied to the existing surface consisting of cationic rapid setting bitumen emulsion (60% bitumen content) applied at a rate of application of not less than 0.5 l/m2 using a calibrated sprayer to uniformly spray the emulsion. Hand spraying shall only be permitted on small irregularly shaped areas clear of the traffic path. A cationic rapid setting PMB emulsion with 60% to 70% binder content may be used to reduce the possibility of run off and excessive tackiness.
 417.10 SPREADING
 Heating of the paver screed shall cease while the paver is stationary and the screed is in contact with the asphalt mat.
 The thickness at any point in the OGA layer shall not be less than 20 mm and the mean thickness of a test lot of OGA shall not be less than the specified thickness. For the purposes of this clause a test lot shall be defined as an area of up to a maximum of 4,000 m2.
 Unless otherwise specified, all areas of the existing pavement surface that are not free draining shall be filled or regulated with dense graded asphalt as specified prior to placing OGA.
 417.11 JOINTS AND JUNCTIONS
 At junctions where the new asphalt mat is required to match the level of the existing pavement, and where the depth of the OGA cannot be used to match into the existing pavement, junctions shall be constructed with Size 10 Type H dense graded asphalt over the full width of carriageway as follows:
 Side streets and median openings.................................................600 mm Through carriageways with a speed limit of 75 km/h or less............3 metres Through carriageways with a speed limit of more than 75 km/h......6 metres.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 417 (Page 3 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth At any location where the layer is to be "feathered" to a depth of less than 20 mm, such "feathering" shall be carried out with Type N or H, size 7 or size 10 dense graded asphalt as specified. "Feathering" constructed in the direction of paving shall be placed by the paving machine. 417.12 COMPACTION REQUIREMENTS Acceptance of compaction shall be based on the adoption of approved placing procedures. Such procedures shall include not less than 5 passes with a static steel wheeled roller with a minimum overall mass of 6 tonnes.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 417 (Page 4 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 421 - BITUMEN CRUMB RUBBER ASPHALT
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 407. If Section 407 is relevant, it should be included in the specification.
 If Section 407 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 421.01 GENERAL
 This section is a supplement to Standard Section 407 - Asphalt and covers special requirements for Bitumen Crumb Rubber Asphalt that are in addition to, or override the requirements of Section 407.
 
 421.02 DESCRIPTION
 Bitumen Crumb Rubber Asphalt is asphalt which contains crumb rubber obtained from tyre shredding to improve flexural and elastic recovery properties of an asphalt layer.
 
 421.03 AGGREGATES
 Unless otherwise specified, properties of the aggregates used in Bitumen Crumb Rubber Asphalt shall comply with the requirements specified in Clause 407.03.
 
 421.04 FILLER Added filler shall be hydrated lime.
 
 421.05 GRANULAR CRUMB RUBBER
 
 (a) General Requirement
 Granular crumb rubber shall consist of synthetic rubber from car tyres or natural rubber from truck tyres or a mixture of both and shall be free from cord, wire, fluff and other deleterious material.
 
 (b) Grading and Particle Size
 
 The grading shall comply with Table 421.051 and shall not contain particles greater than 3 mm in length.
 
 Table 421.051
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 1.18
 
 0.600
 
 0.150
 
 Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 100
 
 80 - 100
 
 0 - 20
 
 (c) Bulk Density
 The maximum bulk density shall not exceed 350 kg/m3 as determined by the ARRB Transport Research test method described in AIR 286-3.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 421 (Page 1 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 421.06 MIX DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
 (a) Mix Design The asphalt mix proposed for use shall be registered in accordance with Clause 407.06. The Contractor shall also submit Marshall Stability and Marshall Flow properties.
 (b) Grading Unless otherwise specified, the grading of aggregate with added filler after mixing but before compaction, and the proportions of aggregate, added filler, granular crumb rubber and bitumen in the mix shall comply with Tables 421.061 and 421.062.
 Table 421.061 Grading of Aggregate with Added Filler
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 Percentage Passing (by Mass)
 Mix Size 14 Mix Size 10
 
 19.0
 
 100
 
 -
 
 13.2
 
 90  100
 
 100
 
 9.5
 
 65  75
 
 90 - 100
 
 6.7
 
 40  50
 
 64  74
 
 4.75
 
 30  40
 
 36  46
 
 2.36
 
 15  25
 
 20  30
 
 1.18
 
 10  19
 
 12  22
 
 0.600
 
 7  15
 
 8  17
 
 0.300
 
 5  10
 
 6  11
 
 0.150
 
 48
 
 48
 
 0.075
 
 35
 
 35
 
 Table 421.062 Proportions of Aggregate, Added Filler, Granular Crumb Rubber and Bitumen
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 Aggregate Added Filler Granular Crumb Rubber Bitumen
 
 Percentage Passing (by Mass)
 
 Mix Size 14
 
 Mix Size 10
 
 86 - 89
 
 86  89
 
 1.0 - 2.0
 
 1.0 - 2.0
 
 2.5 - 3.0
 
 2.5 - 3.0
 
 7.5 - 9.0
 
 7.5 - 9.0
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 421 (Page 2 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Marshall Test Properties The Marshall cylinder test properties of the mix shall comply with Table 421.063.
 
 Table 421.063
 
 Size
 
 Stability (kN) (min)
 
 Flow (mm)
 
 Air Voids (%)
 
 Voids in Mineral
 Aggregates (min) (%)
 
 Bitumen Film
 Thickness (microns)
 
 14
 
 3.0
 
 3.0 - 5.5 5.0 - 6.5
 
 27
 
 19 - 25
 
 10
 
 2.5
 
 3.0 - 5.5 5.0 - 6.5
 
 27
 
 19 - 25
 
 Notes: 1. For purposes of calculation of Voids in Mineral Aggregates, granular crumb rubber is not considered as part of the aggregates.
 2. Bitumen film thickness shall be calculated as bitumen distributed over the surface of the aggregates including granular crumb rubber.
 
 421.07 MIXING AND MIXING TEMPERATURES
 (a) Granular crumb rubber is added to the mix before the binder (Dry Mixing). A pugmill batch mixing plant shall be used. The temperature limits shall be 20C higher than those shown in Table 407.081. Following discharge of aggregate and filler into the mixer, the required quantity of granular rubber shall be added and dry mixed for a minimum period of 10 seconds. Following addition of bitumen, the whole mixture shall be mixed for a minimum of 60 seconds or until the whole of the mix is homogeneous and proper digestion of the rubber into the bitumen has occurred.
 (b) Granular crumb rubber / bitumen binder has been pre-blended prior to being added to the mix (Wet Mixing). The mixing plant may be a drum plant or a pugmill batch plant. The crumb rubber bitumen mixture shall not contain carrier oils, cutters or flux oils. The temperature limits shall be 20C higher than those shown in Table 407.081.
 421.08 AMBIENT CONDITIONS FOR PLACING
 Bitumen Crumb Rubber Asphalt shall not be placed when the pavement temperature is less than 15C.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 421 (Page 3 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 427 - BITUMINOUS SLURRY SURFACING
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 407 and 801. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification.
 If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 427.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for manufacture and placing sizes 3, 5, 7 and 10 mm bituminous slurry surfacing.
 
 427.02 DEFINITIONS
 Bitumen Emulsion
 A system of fine droplets of bitumen with or without polymer, suspended in a mixture of water and emulsifier which begins to set up on contact with surfaces and when exposed to air.
 Bituminous Slurry
 A mixture of fine graded aggregate, bitumen emulsion and water of sufficient fluidity to be capable of being screeded over a road surface in a very thin layer without the need for heating or use of mechanical compaction equipment.
 Micro-Surfacing
 A slurry surfacing that normally contains polymer modified binder for better stability and cohesion particularly on heavily trafficked roads and for coarse aggregate mixes.
 Mean Average Texture Depth
 The mean average texture depth is the mean of 10 tests for average texture depth using the Sand Patch Test Method.
 
 427.03 AGGREGATES
 
 (a) General
 The combined aggregate mixture shall consist of crushed rock or a mixture of crushed rock and sand.
 Aggregates shall consist of clean, hard, durable, angular rock fragments of uniform quality.
 Sand aggregates shall consist of clean, hard, durable grains free from lumps, clay, mica and foreign matter.
 
 (b) Source Rock
 Source rock shall comply with the requirements of Section 801 - Source Rock for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates.
 
 (c) Crushed Aggregate Products
 
 Unless otherwise specified, properties of the aggregates used shall comply with the
 
 requirements for asphalt Type H as speDceifpieadrtmiennt oCflaSutsaete4G07ro.0w3t.h  AFuugrutshter201t6o
 
 Clause 407.03, use of RAP is not permitted.
 
 Section 427 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (d) Crusher Fines and Manufactured Sand
 
 Crusher fines and manufactured sand shall comply with the relevant requirements specified in Table 427.031.
 
 Table 427.031 Quality of Crusher Fines and Manufactured Sand
 
 Test Value
 
 Degradation Factor -
 Crusher Fines (min)
 
 Plasticity
 Index (max)
 
 60
 
 3
 
 (e) Natural Sand
 
 Where natural sand is supplied as a washed sand for the registered mix, the Sand Equivalent Value of any such sand shall not be not be less than 45.
 
 Where natural sand is supplied as an unwashed sand, the Plasticity Index shall not be more than 3.
 
 427.04 AGGREGATE GRADING
 
 The combined grading of the aggregates shall conform to the following grading limits for dense graded Size 3, Size 5, Size 7 and Size 10 nominal size mixes as shown in
 Table 427.041 and as specified in Clause 427.24.
 
 Table 427.041 Grading Limits
 
 Sieve Size
 (mm)
 
 Size 3
 
 Size 5
 
 Size 7
 
 Size 10
 
 (% Passing) (% Passing) (% Passing) (% Passing)
 
 13.2
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 9.5
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 95-100
 
 6.7
 
 100
 
 100
 
 80-100
 
 75-95
 
 4.75
 
 100
 
 90-100
 
 70-90
 
 60-85
 
 2.36
 
 90-100
 
 60-85
 
 45-70
 
 40-60
 
 1.18
 
 65-90
 
 40-65
 
 28-50
 
 28-45
 
 0.600
 
 40-65
 
 25-45
 
 19-34
 
 19-34
 
 0.300
 
 25-42
 
 15-30
 
 12-25
 
 12-25
 
 0.150
 
 15-25
 
 10-20
 
 7-18
 
 7-18
 
 0.075
 
 10-15
 
 5-15
 
 5-12
 
 4-8
 
 427.05 ADDED FILLER
 Added mineral filler used in the mix shall comply with Australian Standard AS 2150  Hot mix asphalt  A guide to good practice, and the quantity added to the mix during placing shall not vary by more than 1% from the filler content for the mix design.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 427 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 427.06 BITUMINOUS MATERIAL
 Bitumen used for emulsion manufacture shall comply with the requirements of AS 2008 Bitumen for pavements.
 Polymer shall be added to the formulation of the emulsion to enhance its behaviour and field performance and meet the mix design requirements specified in Table 427.081 and the minimum softening point of the bituminous residue shall be 57C as determined by Australian Standard Test Method AS 2341.18 (1992).
 
 427.07 WATER
 Water to be added to the mix shall be tested for compatibility with the design mix prior to use.
 
 427.08 MIX DESIGN AND TEST REQUIREMENTS
 
 All asphalt mixes proposed for use on VicRoads works shall be registered by VicRoads in accordance with Section 407.06.
 
 HP No slurry surfacing shall be supplied until the mix has been registered and the Superintendent advised of details and approves the mix for use.
 
 The following information is also required for each new mix design: (a) source of the aggregates;
 (b) grading aim for aggregates; (c) Assigned Polished Stone Value (PSV) of the source rock;
 (d) Degradation Factor of the crusher fines component and Sand Equivalent of the natural sand component;
 (e) bitumen content of emulsion; (f) softening point of emulsion residue;
 (g) slurry properties determined from tests on laboratory mixes as specified in Table 427.081.
 Table 427.081 Slurry Surfacing Properties Test Requirements
 
 Property
 
 Test
 
 Description
 
 Requirement
 
 Traffic Time Austroads AG:PT271
 
 Wet Cohesion
 @ 30 minutes (Initial set) @ 60 minutes (Trafficking)
 
 12 kN.m (min) 20 kN.m (min)
 
 Wear Loss
 
 Austroads AG:PT272
 
 Wet Track Abrasion Loss One hour soak Six day soak
 
 540 g/m2 (max)1 800 g/m2 (max)2
 
 Notes: 1. Traffic 3,000 vehicles per lane per day (v/l/d) 2. Traffic > 3,000 v/l/d
 
 If it is proposed to use a mix which does not meet all the above requirements consideration may be given to its acceptance based on past field performance under similar conditions.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 427 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 427.09 ADDITIVES
 Additives may be used to control the setting speed of the mix depending on ambient conditions and traffic requirements. The Contractor shall specify the use of any additives when submitting the mix design.
 427.10 AMBIENT CONDITIONS FOR PLACING
 Unless otherwise specified fresh slurry surfacing shall be capable of being trafficked within one hour of being placed. Slurry surfacing shall not be placed when the pavement temperature and air temperature is 10C and falling but may be placed when the pavement and air temperature is 5C and rising. Slurry surfacing shall not be placed when the ambient temperature is above 40C without prior consultation with the Superintendent nor shall it be placed during rain or when rain is imminent. If weather conditions rapidly change to prevent the slurry surfacing being trafficked within one hour, work shall not proceed without prior consultation with the Superintendent.
 427.11 SURFACE PREPARATION
 Prior to slurry surfacing commencing, the Contractor shall remove all deleterious material and sweep the surface clean. The surface may be dampened by lightly spraying with water prior to placing slurry.
 427.12 PROTECTION OF ROAD FURNITURE
 Manhole covers, entry pits and valve covers and other road furniture shall be protected by papering or other suitable means to prevent these being covered or blocked by slurry surfacing. All used paper or cover material including surplus slurry shall be removed from site.
 427.13 MIXING AND SPREADING
 HP Spreading shall not commence until approval to proceed is obtained from the Superintendent.
 The metering devices used for slurry surfacing shall be re-calibrated every 12 months and shall be capable of consistently producing a uniform mix within the production tolerances for grading as shown in Table 427.131 and bitumen content as determined as part of the laboratory mix design.
 If any device critical to correct proportioning of materials is overhauled or replaced the machine shall be re-calibrated prior to recommencement of work.
 Adjustments to metering settings shall be made on a job by job or on a daily basis to allow for varying aggregate density, moisture content, and bitumen content of the emulsion.
 The Contractor shall produce a series of calibration charts or evidence of calibration prior to commencing work.
 The edge of the new slurry surface shall be located within 50 mm of all concrete edgings and sealed shoulders, and to within 100 mm of the specified width (or average width of carriageway if not specified) for roads with unsealed shoulders.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 427 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 427.131 Production Tolerances for Mix Grading
 
 Sieve Size
 
 Tolerance on Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 Size 3
 
 Size 5
 
 Size 7
 
 Size 10
 
 13.2
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 9.5
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 6
 
 6.7
 
 Nil
 
 Nil
 
 6
 
 6
 
 4.75
 
 Nil
 
 6
 
 6
 
 6
 
 2.36
 
 5
 
 5
 
 5
 
 5
 
 1.18
 
 5
 
 5
 
 5
 
 5
 
 0.600
 
 4
 
 4
 
 4
 
 4
 
 0.300
 
 3
 
 3
 
 3
 
 3
 
 0.150
 
 2
 
 2
 
 2
 
 2
 
 0.075
 
  1.5
 
  1.5
 
  1.5
 
  1.5
 
 427.14 FREQUENCY OF PRODUCT TESTING
 
 The Contractor shall test the constituents of the mix at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that the material supplied under the contract complies with specified requirements which is not to be less than shown in Table 427.141.
 Table 427.141 Frequency of Product Testing
 
 Checks Required
 
 Minimum Frequency
 
 Degradation Factor - Crusher Fines One per month.
 
 Sand Equivalent Test
 
 One per 250 cubic metres of aggregates used or part thereof.
 
 Unsound Rock Content
 
 One per 200 cubic metres or part thereof sampled directly from stockpile on site or one per 200 cubic
 metres of production at the quarry source.
 
 Sieve Analysis of Aggregates
 
 One per 200 cubic metres or part thereof sampled
 directly from stockpile on site or one per 200 cubic metres of production at the quarry source.
 
 Emulsion Content
 
 One tank dipping or flow meter reading per batch or every 10 cubic metres of material placed, whichever is
 the lesser.
 
 Binder Content and Full Sieve Analysis
 
 One per 50 cubic metres or one per day from a sample of mix taken from the mixer, whichever is the lesser.
 
 Residual Binder Content of
 Emulsion and Softening Point of Bituminous Residue
 
 Certification of specification compliance for each delivery to site.
 
 The tolerance on the residual binder content after curing shall be not more than 0.5% below
 
 or 1.0% above the mix design aim.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Section 427 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 427.15 RUT FILLING COURSE
 Where specified in Clause 427.24 or where wheel ruts average 25 mm or more in depth, a rut filling course shall be applied with the aid of a rut filling attachment to the mixer/spreader prior to placing the wearing course. Sections where rut filling has been carried out shall be trafficked for a minimum of 8 hours prior to placing the wearing course.
 427.16 TACK COATING
 Unless otherwise specified, concrete surfaces shall be primed with very light primer at a rate between 0.2 to 0.4 l/m2 and allowed to fully cure prior to placing slurry surfacing.
 427.17 REGULATING COURSE
 Where specified in Clause 427.24 or where the existing surface varies by more than 10 mm from a 3 m straight edge, a regulating or "scratch" course shall be applied to the surface prior to placing the wearing course. The wearing course shall not be applied until the regulating course has set sufficiently to carry the mixer/spreader without damage.
 For regulating or "scratch" courses, the spreader box shall be fitted with skids of not less than 1.6 m in length and where the shape of the existing surface permits, a rigid "strike off" blade may be used.
 427.18 WEARING COURSE
 The wearing course shall be placed over the road surface at the average thickness specified in Clause 427.24. The average layer thickness shall not be less than the nominal aggregate size or greater than twice the nominal aggregate size. The layer thickness at any point shall not exceed three times the nominal aggregate size without first applying a regulating course or pre-filling isolated low areas.
 427.19 JOINTS AND JUNCTIONS
 The longitudinal joints of the wearing course shall be placed at either the edge of a traffic lane or in the centre of a traffic lane. The edge of the mat and joints shall be lightly screeded with a squeegee to achieve a smooth uniform edge and to remove isolated mis -matches in level or excess build up of surplus material at the edge of the run.
 All joints shall be overlapped. The maximum overlap shall be 150 mm.
 427.20 SURFACE FINISH AND SHAPE
 The finished surface of the final wearing course shall not vary by more than 10 mm from a 3 m straight edge.
 When requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall measure the Mean Average Texture Depth on a lot by lot basis by VicRoads Test Method for Surface Texture of Sprayed Seals as listed in Section 175. Additional payment will be made for this work.
 For wearing course mixes of nominal size 7 or greater, the mean average surface texture depth determined from a lot of ten sand patch tests consisting of five tests taken at an equal spacing along each wheelpath shall be assessed as shown in Table 427.231. For the purpose of this test, a lot shall be considered as a maximum of 500 m of single traffic lane which has been trafficked for a minimum period of one month after completion.
 Smaller areas not less than 100 m of single traffic lane which have a different uniform appearance such as a defective batch of material, may be treated as a separate lot.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 427 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 427.21 CLEAN-UP
 All surplus slurry shall be removed from site and any road furniture such as kerb and channels shall be cleaned of all aggregate and bitumen deposited by the Contractor.
 The aggregate stockpile site and mixing area occupied by the Contractor shall be restored to a similar condition as existed before occupation.
 
 427.22 URGENT REPAIRS
 If serious damage to the new slurry surface occurs due to either a poor mix or inclement weather, whereby it presents a hazard to road users, the road shall be made safe within 2 hours of notification. The Contractor shall submit proposals for the rectification of damaged work to the Superintendent for review prior to commencing further work. Rectification of the damaged work shall be carried out as soon as weather conditions permit.
 
 427.23 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK
 
 Unless otherwise specified or directed work shall be assessed in accordance with Table 427.231.
 Table 427.231 Assessment of Work
 
 * Variation in Binder Content (% of total mass) from the Design Mix
 
 * Mean Average Texture Depth (mm)
 or Size 7 and Size 10 Wearing Courses
 
 Assessment
 
 Not more than 0.5% below or 1.0% above
 
 Greater than or equal to 1.2 mm
 
 Accept
 
 For the purpose of applying the provisions contained in Table 427.231, the binder content is to be calculated from measured flow rates of aggregates and emulsion, the moisture content of the aggregates, before and after dippings from the emulsion tank, and the residual binder content of the emulsion as applicable. These provisions shall apply for every individual batch of material or for every 10 cubic metres placed, whichever is the lesser.
 The requirements of Table 427.231 shall not apply to samples taken from the road for full sieve analysis and binder content unless results differ in a consistent way from the quantities measured by the mixer/spreader machine. In such cases the mixer -spreader shall be recalibrated before further work proceeds.
 * The assessment of work in Table 427.231 shall apply for either the Binder Content or the Mean Average Texture Depth, as applicable. Variation in binder content limits shall apply to all mixes in all layers, and the Mean Average Texture Depth is an additional requirement for Size 7 and Size 10 wearing courses.
 
 427.24 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 *** Bituminous Slurry Surfacing Requirements 427.18)
 Table 427.241 Schedule of Details
 
 (Clauses 427.03, 427.04, 427.15, 427.17 and
 
 Course
 
 Nominal Size
 
 Average Layer Thickness (mm)
 
 Minimum Polished Stone Value of 48
 YES / NO
 
 Wearing
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 YES
 
 Rut filling
 
 ##:
 
 Regulating
 
 ##:
 
 Other
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 427 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 428 - SURFACE RETEXTURING USING HIGH PRESSURE WATER
 ##This section cross-references Section 175. If Section 175 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 175 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 428.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for use of high pressure water to: - improve surface texture of bituminous surfaced roads by removing slick, flushed areas; - remove unwanted materials such as petrol, oil, grease, lichen, and other grime from road surfaces.
 428.02 DEFINITIONS
 Aggregate Retention Retention of aggregate particles by the binder under normal traffic conditions. The degree of aggregate stripping is measured to assess aggregate retention.
 Binder Binder is the material used to hold a mixture of aggregates together as a cohesive mass on the road surface.
 Retexturing Removal of excess binder to improve the texture of the road surface, with an aim of providing a binder level of 1/2 to 2/3 of the height of the aggregate, as is the case for a well textured surface.
 Sprayed Seal The sprayed application of bituminous binder to a pavement surface followed by an application of aggregate to form an all weather skid resistant road surfacing.
 Surface Texture The mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder as determined by the VicRoads' test for surface texture testing as listed in Standard Section 175.
 428.03 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
 The retexturing and surface cleaning machine shall consist of a self contained system which uses high pressure water jets to: - dislodge/remove excess binder from the road surface; - remove unwanted materials from the road surface.
 The equipment shall incorporate a suction system to uplift all of the dislodged particles of binder or other materials being removed and all sprayed water. The equipment shall meet all requirements of AS 4233, High Pressure Water (hydro) Jetting Systems.
 428.04 WATER SUPPLY
 The Contractor shall supply all water for the High Pressure Water Retexturing process, and shall ensure that all permits/licenses are obtained and any associated charges have been paid to the appropriate authority.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 428 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Proof of permits/approvals shall be submitted to the Superintendent prior to the obtaining any water from local streams, channels or dams. A record shall be kept of the quantity of water obtained from these sources.
 No additional payment shall be made for meeting this requirement. All associated costs for meeting this requirement shall be included in the contract sum.
 
 428.05 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK
 
 (a) Surface Texture
 
 Acceptance of work for retexturing shall be based on visual assessment. In marginal cases, the Superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance
 with the relevant Test Method for assessment in accordance with Table 428.051. The test lot size shall not be more than 600 m of single traffic lane, or 1000 m2 for other areas.
 
 Table 428.051 - Test Requirements for Minimum Surface Texture
 
 Treatment
 
 Average Texture Depth (mm) as per VicRoads Test Method for each aggregate
 size
 
 Action Required
 
 Size 5 & 7
 
 Size 10
 
 Size 14
 
 Sprayed
 Seals (All Types)
 
 > 0.9
 
 > 1.2
 
 0.6 to 0.9 0.8 to 1.2
 
 > 1.3
 1.0 to 1.3
 
 Accept
 Rectify or reduce payment for the lot by $0.50 / m2
 
 < 0.6
 
 < 0.8
 
 < 1.0 Work to be rectified
 
 (b) Aggregate Retention
 
 Acceptance of work for aggregate retention shall be based on visual assessment. In marginal cases the Superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in
 accordance with the relevant Test Method for aggregate stripping for assessment in accordance with Table 428.052. Depending on the measured Degree of Aggregate
 Stripping, the Contractor shall take action as specified in Table 428.052. For any testing undertaken, the maximum lot size shall be not be more than 1000 m2.
 
 Table 428.052 - Assessment of Aggregate Retention
 
 Degree of
 Aggregate Stripping
 
 Action Required
 
 0 to 2
 
 Accept
 
 3 to 5
 
 Work to be retested within one month prior to the end of the Defects Liability Period. If the Degree of Aggregate Stripping has increased since it was last tested, the work shall be rectified before the end of the Defects Liability Period.
 
 Greater than 5 Work shall be rectified within 5 days.
 
 (c) Areas Exempt from Testing
 Areas exempt from testing requirements are noted in Table 428.121 (Schedule of Details).
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 428 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 In addition to any areas noted in the above table as being exempt from testing requirements, the Contractor may seek approval from the Superintendent to exempt further areas from testing requirements. Areas that may be considered include gritted areas, asphalt surfaces, and distressed areas. In these cases a visual assessment of the improved surface condition shall be undertaken.
 428.06 WASTE MANAGEMENT
 (a) Liquid Waste
 Liquid waste generated from this process shall be disposed of to a treatment plant registered by the Environment Protection Authority to accept the type of waste generated. (b) Solid Waste
 Solid waste shall be disposed of to a waste facility licensed to accept the type of waste material generated.
 The Contractor may request to leave the solid waste at a site approved by the Superintendent for a period of not more than 1 week, prior to moving the waste to a licensed waste facility. If waste is to be left at an approved site (other than a licensed waste facility) for any period of time, the waste must be contained to the site where it was placed, with appropriate bunding used.
 428.07 LIMIT OF WORK
 The limits of work at the start and finish chainages and any individual areas within these limits have been marked on the pavement surface. These are described in Table 428.121.
 The Superintendent may increase or decrease the limits of work listed in the Schedules. The Contractor will be notified in writing prior to works commencing on job items, of such adjustments to the limits of work and the Contract sum adjusted on a pro-rata basis using the Item price tendered in the Schedules.
 Where the change in the limits of work results in a net change of the item price by greater than 10%, the amount in excess of 10% will be treated as a variation under Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract.
 428.08 INCLUSION AND DELETION OF JOB ITEMS
 The Superintendent may cancel any work, subject to notice of cancellation being given 1 week prior to the proposed commencement date.
 The Contractor will be notified in writing of such deletion and the Contract sum adjusted by the price tendered in the Schedules for the job item/s deleted.
 No additional payment will be made as a result of the deletion of any job item. However, where the deletion of job items results in a contract sum reduction of more than 20% of the original contract sum, the deletion of job items in excess of this amount will be treated as a variation under Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract.
 The Superintendent may request the Contractor to undertake additional surface cleaning or retexturing works at sites not listed in the Schedules. These works will be treated as a variation under Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 428 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 428.09 DAMAGED PAVEMENT AREAS CAUSED BY CONTRACTED WORKS The Contractor shall be responsible for all repairs to any damaged pavement areas caused as a result of these works. Damage includes areas such as those of excessive texture depth, loss of aggregate, and loss of surfacing. The Contractor shall immediately advise the Superintendent of any damage caused, and the nature of the damage. Before treating any damaged areas the Contractor shall have advised the Superintendent of the remedial works proposed, and have obtained the Superintendent's approval to those works.
 428.10 RECORDS The Contractor shall complete, and forward to the Superintendent, a Job Completion Report (Sealing) using the proforma included as Attachment A to this Section 428 (also available electronically in Microsoft Word and Excel format from the Standard Documents page of the VicRoads website), or an equivalent proforma as approved by the Superintendent, for each job item in the Schedules. The completed form shall be submitted within seven days of completion of each surface cleaning or retexturing job. The Contractor shall show and certify by initialling each item on the above Job Completion Report the actual status of the item compared to the specified requirement for that item, and sign and date the report prior to forwarding to the Superintendent. The Contractor shall ensure that where a representative of the Superintendent is on site during the works, that officer validates the works as provided on the Job Completion Report. A Job Completion Report shall also be completed for any repair works to damaged areas.
 428.11 ACCURACY OF QUANTITIES The total area of each job item in Table 428.121 is accurate to 2.5%. No additional payment or deduction will be made where the measured total treated area of each job falls within 2.5% of the listed area.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 428 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 428.12 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS Table 428.121 - Schedule of Details
 
 Item (refer
 Sch 1)
 
 Freeway, Highway or Road Name
 
 Chainag
 
 Road & Map &
 
 e
 
 Link No. Ref (1)
 
 Approximate Length
 (m)
 
 Approximate Width
 (m)
 
 Approximate Area
 (m2)
 
 ##Note to author - The following items are examples only. Change text to suit your specification. DELETE THIS ROW BEFORE PRINTING:
 
 1
 
 Birchip-Rainbow
 
 5162 18-D8 7.00-
 
 500
 
 5.0
 
 Road
 
 7.50
 
 2500
 
 2
 
 Western Highway
 
 2520 57-G8
 
 2.1 Lane 1 (left lane)
 
 162.3-
 
 50
 
 3.7
 
 185
 
 162.35
 
 2.2 Lane 2 (middle lane)
 
 161.0-
 
 1000
 
 2.4
 
 162.0
 
 2400
 
 2.3 Lane 3 (right lane)
 
 161.0- Various
 
 Various
 
 500
 
 162.0
 
 2.4 Shoulders (both sides)
 
 161.0162.0
 
 1000
 
 2 x 1.5
 
 3000
 
 Treat ment Type
 (2)
 
 Aggregate Sizes
 (mm)
 
 Other Requirements (3)
 
 RX
 
 SC
 
 14/7 Remove oil from
 
 surface
 
 RX
 
 14
 
 RX
 
 10
 
 Various patches in
 
 wheel paths, as
 
 marked
 
 SC
 
 7
 
 Remove lichen from
 
 shoulders. Exempt
 
 from Minimum
 
 Surface Texture
 
 Requirement.
 
 Department of State Growth  May 2016 Section 428 (Page 5 o7)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 428 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 428.121 - Schedule of Details
 
 Item
 (refer Sch 1)
 
 Freeway, Highway or Road Name
 
 Chainag
 
 Road & Map &
 
 e
 
 Link No. Ref (1)
 
 Approximate
 Length (m)
 
 Approximate
 Width (m)
 
 3
 
 Mallee Highway
 
 2650 9-B5 120-121 Varies
 
 1.0
 
 (west bound)
 
 Approximate Area (m2)
 850
 
 Treat ment Type
 (2)
 
 Aggregate
 Sizes (mm)
 
 Other Requirements (3)
 
 RX
 
 10
 
 Various patches in
 
 wheel paths,
 
 generally 1 m wide,
 
 and mainly in outer
 
 wheel path.
 
 Exempt from
 
 Minimum Surface
 
 Texture
 
 Requirements as
 
 surface has been
 
 extensively gritted.
 
 If any space is left blank it shall be read as "Not Applicable".
 
 Notes on Table 428.121
 
 (2)
 
 Treatment Type  Surface Cleaning (SC), Retexturing (RX).
 
 (3)
 
 Typical "Other Requirements" include: special restrictions on timing of works, exempt areas, type of material to be removed from surface.
 
 Department of State GrowVthicRoMadasyJ2un0e126009 Section 428 (PageSe6ctioo7n )428
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 428 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 JOB SPECIFICS Job No: Road Name: Start Chainage: End Chainage:
 
 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (SEALING)
 Treatment: Seal Date: Stacksite Location:
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 428 CONTRACT No. ........
 
 EXISTING CONDITIONS (circle or fill in) Weather: Air Temp: Pavement: Regulatory Speed Limit: Aggregate Conditions: Aggregate Pre-coat: NCR Required?
 
 Sunny
 Isolated stone loss 100 km clean
 pre-delivery Yes
 
 Clear
 stripping 80 km
 dry onsite
 No
 
 O'Cast Pavement Temp:
 flushed wheel paths 60 km dusty
 no pre-coat Reasons:
 
 Windy
 flushed 40 km dirty
 
 Showers
 patching < 40 km
 damp
 
 Wet
 cracking other wet
 NCR No:
 
 TRAFFIC CONTROL (circle or fill in) Subcontractor Managing Traffic Control? SIGNS During Work
 
 After Work
 
 Traffic
 
 Delays Queues
 
 Installed to WTM Code Removed Installed to WTM Code Removed Average Delay to Vehicles:
 Average Queue Length:
 
 Yes / No
 Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No
 minutes vehicles
 
 Subcontractor:
 Date / Time Installed: Date / Time Removed: Date / Time Installed: Date / Time Removed:
 
 Subcontractor Initials:
 Speed Limit TMP No. Used Speed Limit TMP No. Used
 
 km/hr km/hr
 
 SEALING WORKS
 
 RUN NO. Start Chainage
 
 End Chainage
 
 Lane Description
 
 Air Temperature
 
 Pavement Temperature
 
 Length (m)
 
 Width (m) Area (m2)
 
 Binder Type
 
 Tank Dip Start (litres)
 
 Tank Dip End (litres)
 
 Quantity Sprayed (litres) Actual Application Rate (l/m2)
 
 Design Application Rate (l/m2)
 
 Mix - Bitumen/Flux Oil/Cutter/Additive AGGREGATE
 
 Aggregate Size Quantity (m3)
 
 Average Least Dimension (ALD) Aggregate Design Spread Rate (m2/m3)
 
 Actual Design Spread Rate (m2/m3)
 
 Rolling Time (hrs)
 
 DELINEATION
 
 Existing RRPMs TRRPMs
 
 Reinstatement
 
 Pre-treatment / Run 1
 
 100 /
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 / ALD / ALD
 Removed Installed Uncovered Pavement Markings - 1st Coat
 
 Pavement Markings - 2nd Coat
 
 RRPMs
 
 Weather Delays to Linemarking:
 
 Run 2
 
 Run 3
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 / ALD / ALD
 
 / ALD / ALD
 
 Yes / No Yes / No Yes / No
 days
 
 Date: Date: Date: Specified Date Due: Actual Date Done: Specified Date Due: Actual Date Done:
 Specified Date Due: Actual Date Done:
 
 Run 4
 
 Run 5
 
 /
 
 /
 
 100 /
 
 /
 
 /
 
 / ALD / ALD
 Spacings:
 
 / ALD / ALD
 
 Totals
 Average Average
 m
 
 I, ......................................................................................................................... certify the above details as correct (Contractor's Representative, print name)
 
 ......................................................................................................................... (Contractor's Representative, signed)
 
 /
 
 /
 
 I, ......................................................................................................................... concur with the above (Superintendent's Representative, print name)
 
 ......................................................................................................................... (Superintendent's Representative, signed)
 Version 2 - April 2008
 
 /
 
 /
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 428 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 430 - HIGH FRICTION SURFACE TREATMENT
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175 and 721. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 430.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of high friction surface treatment (HFST).
 430.02 DEFINITIONS
 The following definitions apply to the high friction surface treatment clauses.
 Accelerant Accelerant refers to any material used to reduce the curing time of the binder.
 Aggregate Aggregate refers to any natural or synthetic particles used as a cover material applied to the binder, to provide texture and skid resistance to achieve a high friction surface treatment.
 Aggregate Coating Aggregate coating includes all materials used to cover and/or colour aggregate.
 Aggregate Retention Aggregate retention refers to the ability of the binder to adhere and retain the aggregate under traffic or maintenance conditions.
 Binder Binder refers to any resin used to bond the aggregate to the existing road surface.
 Cleaning Agents Cleaning Agents include all materials used to remove dirt, grime, fuel, oil and other materials from the existing surface.
 Delamination Delamination includes failure of the binder and aggregate to adhere to the existing pavement surface.
 High friction surface treatment High friction surface treatments provide increased skid resistance for vehicles. The treatment consists of a binder applied to the existing road surface, and aggregate spread over the binder surface. High friction surface treatment may include an additional layer of binder over the aggregate layer.
 Paint Paint shall comply with the relevant standard listed in Section 175.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 430 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Polished Stone Value Polished Stone Value of aggregate shall be determined in accordance with VicRoads Test Method RC374.01, or BS EN 1097-8.
 Priming Material Priming material refers to any substance used to clean and prepare the existing road for the application of binder. Priming materials may be used to improve the adhesion of the binder to the existing roadway.
 Protective Sealer Protective sealer refers to any substance used to protect and seal the high friction surface treatment from fuel and oils spills from traffic.
 Skid Resistance Skid resistance is the friction between the vehicle tyre and the pavement surface.
 Surface Texture Surface texture refers to the mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder. Surface texture shall be measured in accordance with the VicRoads Surface Texture by Sand Patch RC317.04.
 Test Lots Acceptance of work and materials shall be based on testing of the work or material in lots. A lot will consist of a single batch or area of like work which has been constructed under essentially uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance. A lot shall be the smaller of either each day's production, or each 500 m2 placed each day. Discrete portions of a lot which are non-homogeneous with respect to material and appearance shall be excluded from the lot and either treated as separate lots, or replaced. Where the areas excluded from a lot as non-homogeneous exceed 20% of the total lot area, the whole of the lot shall be rejected.
 Thermoplastic Thermoplastic shall comply with the relevant standard listed in Section 175.
 430.03 DETAILS OF MATERIALS
 (a) Binder The binder shall be:  resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic  non flammable after placement and curing on road surface  able to be broomed and high pressure water cleaned without damage  free from lead  capable of providing strong adhesion between the existing surface and the aggregate to achieve a uniform surface.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 430 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Thermoplastic binders are not permitted. Paint is not permitted as a binder.
 The following binder details shall be provided to the Superintendent at least 14 days prior to the start of works:
 (i) priming materials type and source (ii) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for priming material supply and
 placement (iii) binder type and source (iv) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for binder mix quantities and
 tolerances on mixing components (v) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for mixing of binder (and
 components) (vi) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for pot life of binder, i.e. time of
 mixing to time of spreading (vii) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for placement of binder including
 placement quantities and tolerances and placement temperatures (viii) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for curing (ix) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for accelerants (if applicable) (x) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for supply and placement of
 protective sealers.
 (b) Aggregate
 The aggregate shall be clean, of uniform shape and quality, free from dirt, free from clay and organic matter, resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic, able to withstand traffic stresses without damage, and able to be broomed and cleaned with high pressure water without damage.
 The following aggregate details shall be provided to the Superintendent at least 14 days prior to the start of works:
 (i) aggregate type, source and gradation (ii) manufacturer's or Contractor's recommendations/instructions for placement of
 aggregate including spread rate (iii) Polished Stone Value of the aggregate.
 (c) Product Performance
 Documented evidence of satisfactory performance over at least 5 years for the high friction surface treatment in a heavy urban traffic environment shall be provided with the Tender. The documentation may include; references from clients, details of sites with the high friction surface treatment, evidence of texture with time, evidence of skid resistance with time, evidence of colour retention with time, evidence of durability with time.
 Restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 The Superintendent may request additional information regarding performance of the proposed high friction surface treatment at no additional cost. The Superintendent shall determine if the documented evidence is satisfactory. Only products with satisfactory documented evidence will be considered for award of the works.
 Acceptance of the documented evidence and acceptance of the proposed high friction surface treatment does not guarantee the performance of the high friction surface treatment, and does not relieve the Contractor from any of the requirements of this document.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 430 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 430.04 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
 The high friction surface treatment shall not emit offensive odours after opening to traffic, such that complaints are received by the Department of State Growth. The Superintendent shall determine if the high friction surface treatment is producing offensive odours, and if the material is therefore unacceptable. The Superintendent's decision will be final.
 High Friction surface Treatment which is deemed to be unacceptable shall be rectified with the agreement of the Superintendent.
 430.05 SITE PREPARATION
 The existing pavement markings at the site may be covered by the surface treatment by the Contractor as part of the site preparation works, or may be masked to ensure the high friction surface treatment is not applied to the markings. All Raised Reflective Pavement Markers (RRPMs) may either be removed from the area of works prior to any high friction surface treatment being placed, or masked to ensure the high friction surface treatment is not applied to the RRPMs. All masking shall be removed prior to opening the site to traffic.
 All reinstatement of RRPMs and pavement markings shall be in accordance with Section 721.
 Any damage caused to the surface by the removal of pavement marking and RRPMS shall be repaired prior to placement of high friction surface treatment. The proposed methods of removal and repair shall be submitted to the Superintendent for approval.
 All loose material, grit, stones, vegetative matter, and rubbish shall be removed from the area of works prior to placement of high friction surface treatment.
 The site may be further cleaned and prepared as required by the Contractor. Cleaning and preparation shall not cause structural damage to the pavement. All cleaning agents and collected material shall be removed from site in accordance with Environment Protection Authority requirements for the type of waste generated.
 ##(stikeout this paragraph if not required):Cracks and sawcut traffic detector loops in the existing surface shall be masked with a maximum of 50 mm total width of tape. The masking tape shall ensure high friction surface treatment is not placed over the cracks and detector loops, and shall be removed after the high friction surface treatment is placed.
 HP High friction surface treatment shall not be placed until the Superintendent and Contractor agree the road surface is ready for surfacing.
 430.06 PLACEMENT
 High friction surface treatment shall be applied to produce a visually uniform surface. The edges of the work shall provide a neat and clean line onto the adjacent surface.
 (a) Priming Materials
 Priming Materials may be used on all or part of the site at the Contractor's discretion.
 (b) Binder
 Binder shall be spread to provide a uniform thickness over the site. The spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area, and the result recorded. All spread rates for the work shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 430 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Aggregate
 Aggregate shall be spread to provide a uniform thickness over the site. The spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area, and the result recorded. All spread rates for the work shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 (d) Temperature
 The pavement temperature of the site shall be measured and recorded at least every 2 hours during the works. The temperature shall be measured using an infrared temperature gauge accurate to +/-2C. The temperature results shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 (e) Accelerants
 Accelerants may be used to reduce the time of curing for the high friction surface treatment. The spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area, and the result recorded. All spread rates for the work shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 
 430.07 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS *** The details for each site of works for HFST are:
 
 Job No
 
 Road Name
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Map Ref
 
 Location
 
 ##: ##:
 
 Appro 24 hr
 
 x Area AAD
 
 (m2)
 
 T
 
 Other requirements
 
 ##:
 
 ##: ##:
 
 No additional payment or deduction shall be made where the measured total area of each job falls within 2.5% of the listed area.
 
 430.08 CLEAN-UP
 
 All excess material shall be removed from the site. The removal of loose aggregate and disposal from site is the responsibility of the Contractor.
 
 Excess aggregate shall be removed from the finished surface prior to opening the site to
 traffic. Excess aggregate shall be removed from the roadway, kerb and channel, driveways and any trafficked and untrafficked areas prior to opening to traffic.
 
 HP The Contractor and Superintendent shall agree the site is neat, tidy and free
 
 of
 
 excess aggregate, prior to opening to traffic.
 
 Material which becomes loose after the initial clean-up shall be removed at 24 hours, 3 days and 14 days after placement unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 430 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 430.09 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK High friction surface treatment shall provide a visually uniform surface with uniform aggregate retention, and be free from delamination, stripping and areas of wear/scuffing. (a) Surface Texture
 The surface texture of high friction surface treatment shall be a minimum of 0.6 mm as measured using VicRoads Surface Texture by Sand Patch. Each lot of material shall be tested within 2 weeks of initial placement, and within 8 weeks prior to the end of the defects liability period. (b) Skid Resistance Not used
 430.10 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS The Contractor shall be responsible for monitoring and maintenance of the high friction surface treatment from the time of placement, until the end of the defects liability period. The Contractor shall carry out any works necessary to protect and maintain the surface, and effect repairs to all surface failures. Such failures include but are not limited to loss of aggregate, bleeding, fatty areas, flushing, loss of skid resistance, and delamination from the existing surface. The Contractor is not responsible for defects caused by either settlement or failure of the existing pavement, or for damage (including gouging and vehicle fire) and repairs to the surface caused by traffic incidents. Areas of delamination less than 0.5 m2 are not required to be repaired, unless the total of defective areas exceeds 10% of any area. Areas of defect shall be agreed with the Superintendent. Areas shall be squared-up and extend to the width of the traffic lane. Defective high friction surface treatment shall be removed and replaced. Repairs shall be undertaken within 4 weeks of notification by the Superintendent. Urgent repairs shall be started onsite within 3 hours of notice by the Superintendent. HP The Contractor shall advise the Superintendent in writing of the proposed
 treatment for any repairs before undertaking the work.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 430 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 431 - COLOURED SURFACE TREATMENTS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175 and 721. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 431.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of coloured surface treatments.
 431.02 DEFINITIONS
 The following definitions apply to the coloured surface treatment clauses:
 Accelerant Accelerant refers to any material used to reduce the curing time of the binder.
 Aggregate Aggregate refers to any natural or synthetic particles used as a cover material applied to the binder, to provide a coloured and textured skid resistant surface.
 Aggregate Coating Aggregate coating includes all materials used to cover and/or colour aggregate.
 Aggregate Retention Aggregate retention refers to the ability of the binder to adhere and retain the aggregate under traffic and maintenance activities.
 Binder Binder refers to any resin used to bond the aggregate to the existing road surface.
 Cleaning Agents Cleaning Agents include all materials used to remove dirt, grime, fuel, oil and other materials from the existing surface.
 Coloured surface treatment Coloured surface treatments provide a trafficable surface that is coloured for enhanced delineation for specific road uses. The treatment consists of a coloured binder applied to the existing road surface, and coloured aggregate spread over the binder surface. A coloured surface treatment may include an additional layer of coloured binder or protective sealer over the aggregate layer.
 Delamination Delamination refers to failure of the binder and aggregate to adhere to the existing pavement surface.
 Polished Stone Value The Polished Stone Value (PSV) of an aggregate is a friction rating derived from test results. Measure of the aggregate's resistance to polishing shall be determined in accordance with
 
 VicRoads Test Method RC374.01.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 431 (Page 1 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Priming Material Priming material refers to any substance used to clean and prepare the existing road surface for the application of binder and improve the adhesion of the binder to the existing roadway.
 Protective Sealer Protective sealer refers to any substance used to protect and seal the coloured surface treatment.
 Sideways Force Coefficient (sfc) Sideways force coefficient, also called sideways friction coefficient, is a general term for the ratio of the resistance to sideways motion to the normal component of force between the tyres of a vehicle and the road surface when using sideway force test equipment.
 Skid Resistance Skid resistance is the friction between the vehicle tyre and the pavement surface. Skid
 resistance shall be measured using a portable pendulum friction tester, tested in accordance with AS 4663  Wet method.
 Surface Texture The mean height of aggregate particles above the level of the binder as determined by the VicRoads test for surface texture testing as listed in Section 175.
 Test Lots Acceptance of work and materials shall be based on testing of the work or material in lots. A lot will consist of a single batch or area of like work which has been constructed under uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance. A lot shall be the lesser of either one day's production or each 500 m2.
 431.03 MATERIALS
 (a) Binder The binder shall be: (i) resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic (ii) non flammable after placement and curing on road surface (iii) able to be swept using a mechanical broom and cleaned with high pressure water without damage (iv) free from lead and other heavy metals (v) Stable in UV light (vi) capable of providing strong adhesion between the existing surface and the aggregate to achieve a uniform surface. Thermoplastic and paint binders are not permitted.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 431 (Page 2 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The following primer and binder details shall be provided to the Superintendent at least 14 days prior to the start of works:
 (i) priming materials type and source (ii) binder type and source (iii) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for priming material supply and
 placement (iv) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for binder mix quantities and
 tolerances on mixing components (v) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for mixing of binder and components (vi) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for pot life of binder, i.e. time of
 mixing to time of spreading (vii) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for placement of binder including
 application rates and tolerances and placement temperatures (viii) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for curing (ix) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for accelerants (if applicable) (x) manufacturer's recommendations/instructions for supply and placement of
 protective sealers (xi) type of coloured pigment.
 (b) Aggregate
 The aggregate shall be clean, free from dirt, clay and organic matter, of uniform shape and quality, resistant to fuel and oils spills from traffic, able to withstand traffic stresses without damage, and able to be swept using a mechanical broom and cleaned with high pressure water equipment without damage.
 The aggregate may be pigmented to provide a colour match of the final product.
 The following aggregate details shall be provided to the Superintendent at least 14 days prior to the start of works:
 (i) aggregate type, source and gradation (ii) manufacturer's or Contractor's recommendations/instructions for placement of
 aggregate including spread rate (iii) Polished Stone Value (PSV)  aggregates shall have a minimum PSV of 54.
 431.04 PRODUCT PERFORMANCE
 Documented evidence of satisfactory performance over at least 5 years for the coloured surface treatment in a heavy urban traffic environment shall be provided with the Tender. The documentation may include references from clients, details of sites with the coloured surface treatment, evidence of texture with time, evidence of skid resistance with time, evidence of colour retention with time, evidence of durability with time.
 The Superintendent may request additional information regarding performance of the proposed coloured surface treatment and shall determine if the documented evidence is satisfactory. Only products with satisfactory documented evidence will be considered for award of the works.
 The Superintendent may require a sample of the material to be provided. The sample shall be a minimum size of 300 mm x 300 mm which is representative of the material to be applied.
 Acceptance of the documented evidence and acceptance of the proposed coloured surface treatment does not guarantee the performance of the coloured surface treatment, and does not relieve the Contractor from any performance requirements.
 Restricted use of untried products on a trial basis shall be subject to the approval of the
 
 Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 431 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 431.05 OFFENSIVE ODOUR
 The coloured surface treatment shall not emit offensive odours after opening to traffic. The Superintendent shall determine if the coloured surface treatment is producing offensive odours.
 Any coloured surface treatment which is deemed to be unacceptable shall be rectified with the agreement of the Superintendent.
 431.06 MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEETS
 Copies of Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for priming materials, binders, aggregate coatings, protective sealers and any other work materials shall be provided to the Superintendent prior to the start of works. Any requirements for environmental protection measures as recommended by the material manufacturer shall be undertaken.
 All materials shall be used and stored in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and MSDSs.
 431.07 SITE PREPARATION
 All loose material, grit, stones, vegetative matter, and rubbish shall be removed from the area of works prior to placement of the coloured surface treatment.
 The site may be further cleaned and prepared as required. Cleaning and preparation shall not cause structural damage to the pavement. All cleaning agents and collected material shall be removed from site and disposed in accordance with Environment Protection Authority requirements for the type of waste generated.
 Existing pavement markings shall be masked to ensure the coloured surface treatment is not applied to the markings.
 All Raised Reflective Pavement Markers (RRPMs) shall be removed from the area of works prior to any coloured surface treatment being placed. New RRPMs shall be reinstated after the application of the coloured surface treatment.
 Service pits and valve covers less than 0.03 m2, and drainage grates and frames shall also be masked. Larger pit and valve covers shall be covered with the coloured surface treatment. All lifting mechanisms and joins between the lid and frame shall be masked and protected such that the coloured surface treatment does not impede lifting and replacing lids.
 Any damage caused to the surface by the removal of pavement markings and RRPMs shall be repaired prior to placement of the coloured surface treatment.
 HP The Superintendent shall agree to the method of removal and any pavement repairs for pavement markings and RRPMs prior to these works occurring.
 All pavement markings covered by the application of coloured surface treatments shall be reinstated in accordance with Section 721. This shall also apply to any pavement markings or RRPMs which are covered partially or wholly by the coloured surface treatment due to inadequate masking.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 431 (Page 4 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 431.08 PLACEMENT
 
 Coloured surface treatments shall be applied to produce a visually uniform coloured and
 textured surface. The edges of the work shall provide a neat and clean line onto the adjacent surface.
 
 HP Coloured surface treatments shall not be placed until the Superintendent
 
 agrees
 
 that the prepared road surface is ready for surfacing.
 
 (a) Priming Materials
 Priming materials where used shall be applied uniformly over the site. The application rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area and result recorded. All application rates for the work shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 
 (b) Binder
 Binder shall be spread to provide a uniform coverage and thickness over the site and in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area, and the result recorded. All application rates for the work shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 
 (c) Aggregate
 Aggregate shall be spread to provide a uniform thickness over the site. The spread rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area, and the result recorded. All application rates for the work shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 
 (d) Temperature
 The pavement temperature of the site shall be measured and recorded at least every 2 hours during the works. The temperature shall be measured using an infrared temperature gauge accurate to +/-2C. The temperature results shall be provided to the Superintendent. All materials shall be placed within any temperature limits recommended by the manufacturer.
 
 (e) Accelerants
 Accelerants may be used to reduce the time of curing for the coloured surface treatment. The application rate for each lot of material shall be determined by mass or volume divided by the area, and the result recorded. All application rates for the work shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 
 431.09 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 The details for each site of works for coloured surface treatments are detailed in Table 431.091.
 
 *** Table 431.091 Schedule of Details
 
 Job No
 
 Road Name
 
 Map Ref
 
 Location
 
 Appro 24 hr
 
 x Area AAD
 
 (m2)
 
 T
 
 Other requirements
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##: ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##: ##:
 
 No additional payment or deduction shall be made where the measured total area of each job
 
 falls within 2.5% of the listed area.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 431 (Page 5 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 431.10 CLEAN-UP
 All excess material shall be removed from the site and disposed in accordance with EPA requirements.
 All masking shall be removed prior to opening the site to traffic.
 Excess aggregate shall be removed from the finished surface prior to opening the site to traffic. Excess aggregate shall be removed from the roadway, kerb and channel, driveways and any adjacent trafficked and un-trafficked areas prior to opening to traffic.
 HP The Superintendent shall agree the site is neat, tidy and free of excess aggregate prior to opening to traffic.
 All material which becomes loose after the initial clean-up shall be removed at 24 hours, 3 days and 14 days after placement.
 431.11 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK
 Coloured surface treatments shall provide a visually uniform surface with uniform aggregate retention, and be free from delamination, stripping and areas of wear/scuffing.
 Any work that fails to meet the minimum requirements shall be rectified.
 Acceptance of work shall be on a lot basis. Discrete portions of a lot which are nonhomogeneous with respect to material and appearance shall be excluded from the lot and either treated as separate lots, or replaced. Where the areas excluded from a lot as nonhomogeneous exceed 20% of the total lot area, the whole of the lot shall be rejected.
 (a) Surface Texture
 Acceptance of work for surface texture shall be based on visual assessment, however in marginal cases the Superintendent may request that nominated areas be tested in accordance with the test method for assessment of surface texture testing as listed in Section 175.
 A lot will consist of a single batch or area of like work which has been constructed under uniform conditions and is essentially homogeneous with respect to material and appearance. A lot shall be the lesser of one day's production or each 500 m2.
 The surface texture of each test site within the lot shall be a minimum of 0.6 mm.
 (b) Skid Resistance
 The Superintendent may require that the work be tested and assessed for skid resistance using the following method: Portable Pendulum Friction Tester The coloured surface treatment shall be tested using a pendulum friction tester in accordance with AS 4663  Wet method. Each lot shall have 5 randomly selected test locations selected in accordance with VicRoads test method RC316.10  Selection of test sites within a lot. Each lot shall achieve a minimum mean British Pendulum Number (BPN) of 55 with no individual test location having a BPN of less than 50 at any time during the defects liability period.
 The method selected to assess skid resistance shall be the most practical for the extent and size of work. The Superintendent may require testing at any time prior to the end of the defects liability period. The cost of Skid resistance testing shall be incDluedpeadrtminetnhteorfaStetafStoeercGstiuroopnwptl4yh31an(AdPuapggluaesc6tem2o0fe1n86t)
 
 of the surface treatment.
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Colour
 The colour of the finished surface shall be a Rating 3 Approximate Match (or better) with one of the following Australian Standard 2700 - 2011 colours as listed in Table 431.111.
 The initial colour shall be measured in accordance with Australian Standard 1580.601.1:1995. Each lot of material shall be tested within 2 days of placement. Testing shall be undertaken onsite and under daylight conditions only. Each lot of coloured surface treatment shall provide a Rating 3 Approximate Match (or better) with adjacent lots.
 
 Table 431.111 Colour Requirements
 
 Use Bus Lanes (Nominally Red)
 Bicycle Lanes (Nominally Green)
 
 AS2700S - 2011 Colour
 Preferred Colour R54  Raspberry
 Acceptable Alternatives R14  Waratah R15 - Crimson
 Preferred Colour G13  Emerald Green
 Acceptable Alternatives G16  Traffic Green G23 - Shamrock
 
 The same consistent colour shall be used along a continuous route or within a given locality.
 
 431.12 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for monitoring and maintenance of the coloured surface treatment from the time of placement, until the end of the defects liability period.
 The Contractor shall carry out any works necessary to protect and maintain the surface, and repair all surface failures, including loss of aggregate, bleeding, fatty areas, flushing, loss of skid resistance, and delamination from the existing surface.
 
 The Contractor is not responsible for defects caused by either settlement or failure of the existing pavement, or for damage (including gouging and vehicle fire) and repairs to the surface caused by traffic incidents.
 Areas of delamination less than 0.01 m2 are not required to be repaired, unless the total of defective areas exceeds 1% of the total area. Areas of defect shall be agreed with the Superintendent. Defective areas of coloured surface treatment shall be squared-up and removed and replaced.
 Repairs shall be undertaken within 4 weeks of notification by the Superintendent. Urgent repairs shall be started onsite within 24 hours of notice by the Superintendent.
 HP The Contractor shall advise the SuperDinetpeanrtdmeenntt ionf SwtraitteinGgroowfththeApurgoupstos2e0d16 Section 431 (Page 7 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth treatment for any repairs before undertaking the work. 431.13 EXCLUDED AREAS The following areas are excluded from the limits of work:  all service pits and valve covers less than 0.03m2  traffic detector loops  pedestrian crossings  the white pavement markings and designated travel path of pedestrians.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 431 (Page 8 of 8)
 
 SECTION 602 - EXCAVATIONS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 614. If Section 614 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 614 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 602.01 GENERAL
 Excavation shall consist of all clearing and grubbing necessary to clear the way for proposed excavations, the excavation of foundation pits or interiors of cofferdams or cylinders, the preparation of foundation, and shall include all sheeting and bracing, drainage, pumping or bailing, and other necessary work and materials.
 
 602.02 TIMBERING AND SUPPORT
 For excavations in soil or in rock containing unfavourable jointing, bedding or weak seams, which are deeper than 1.5 m the Contractor shall provide adequate support or benching to prevent collapse of excavation faces and/or heaving of excavation base. Works shall be undertaken in accordance with all relevant Acts, Regulations and Codes and in particular the Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
 For excavations adjacent to railway property, alongside roadways, in or alongside waterways, and excavations deeper than 1.5 m, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review detailed drawings of bracing and/or sheeting proposals, including design calculations and methods of construction and removal, not less than 10 business days prior to excavation commencing.
 For excavations carried out adjacent to railway property, obtaining approval of the appropriate railway authority and rail entities shall be the responsibility of the Contractor.
 HP No excavation adjacent to railway property shall commence without the approval of the Superintendent.
 All works and the quality of all materials used for the temporary support of excavations shall conform with the appropriate Australian Standards.
 
 602.03 EXCAVATION PREPARATION
 Water shall not be permitted to remain in the bottom of excavations during construction.
 The quality of the material (rock or soil) exposed in the side walls and at the bottom of the excavation shall be inspected by a geotechnical consultant with suitable experience to confirm that the material is of the type and quality indicated on the drawings. All loose material and pockets of unsound material, mud and/or water shall be removed to expose the foundation material being of the type and quality indicated on the drawings.
 The bottoms of excavations shall be trimmed in horizontal beds or steps. The steps shall have maximum vertical rise height to horizontal run length of 1 to 5 ratio.
 Where the excavation is for construction of footings, the sides of footings shall be formed in accordance with Section 614 - Formwork. The Contractor may dispense with formwork for the sides of the footing if all unsupported faces of the excavation are inspected by a geotechnical consultant, who confirms the material exposed in the unsupported faces has the material strength to maintain the stability of the faces without external (e.g. formwork) or internal support (e.g. soil nailing).
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 602 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth Where concrete is cast against an unformed surface, an extra 25 mm cover shall be provided to the reinforcement. The bottom of any excavation which has been disturbed by the action of water or any construction activity such that it does not meet the specification requirement shall be rectified by the Contractor. HP Blinding, sealing or foundation concrete shall not be placed until the bottom of the
 excavation has been reviewed by the Superintendent. Within 24 hours of a request from the Superintendent, the geotechnical inspection reports shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review. The Contractor shall provide appropriate facilities for the inspection of all work and shall be responsible for all costs associated with the provision of such facilities and the engagement of a geotechnical consultant who shall be pre-qualified with VicRoads or approved by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 602 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 SECTION 603 - COFFERDAMS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 176 (or 177) and 175. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 603.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the design, construction and removal of cofferdams.
 A cofferdam is an open-topped temporary structure for the purpose of providing a safe workplace for undertaking construction activities in water. Cofferdams may be constructed from steel sheetpiling or from pre-cast reinforced concrete and may be framed internally.
 The construction of caissons (fully enclosed and submerged temporary structures) is outside of the scope of this document.
 
 603.02 STANDARDS
 Design and construction of cofferdams shall comply with the requirements of relevant Australian Standards. Section 175 provides a list of current companion documents referenced in the VicRoads Standard Specifications for Roadworks and Bridgeworks.
 In circumstances where AS 5100 and AS 2159 requirements differ, the requirements of AS 5100.3 shall take precedence over those of AS 2159.
 
 603.03 WORK IN AND ADJACENT TO WATER
 HP The Contractor shall submit an Environmental Management Plan for construction of the cofferdam to the Superintendent for review in accordance with the requirements of Section ##176 (or 177):.
 Before entering a waterway for construction purposes, the Contractor shall obtain the written approval of the relevant authority. The Contractor shall observe all requirements imposed by the relevant authority and included in the written approval. A copy of the written approval shall be provided to the Superintendent prior to the commencement of work.
 The Contractor shall, to the satisfaction of the relevant authority and the Superintendent:
  pump and/or treat water as required to enable construction of the cofferdam;
  install measures to prevent the escape of sediment and/or construction materials into the water;
  remove the cofferdam and associated temporary jetties and causeways and restore the waterway.
 On completion of the works and prior to the award of Practical Completion, the Contractor shall obtain a written declaration from the relevant authority that the waterway has been left in a satisfactory condition. The Contractor shall continue to maintain the restored areas of waterway during the Defects Liability Period and at the end of the Defects Liability Period shall obtain a written statement of acceptance from the relevant authority which shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 603 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 603.04 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL OF COFFERDAMS
 HP Not less than 14 days prior to commencement of construction of cofferdams, the Contractor shall submit the following to the Superintendent for review: (a) detailed drawings of the cofferdam; (b) the method of construction and removal of the cofferdam.
 The method of construction and removal shall include the following: (a) sequence and method of construction, dismantling and removal; (b) procedure for and restrictions on the temporary removal of internal bracing; (c) safety procedures during construction, use and removal including delivery of materials and
 equipment into the cofferdam; (d) details of access provisions during construction, use and removal; (e) emergency evacuation procedure and details of emergency equipment such as life-belts and
 boats for all stages of construction, use and removal; (f) details of the training of all personnel involved in the construction and use of the cofferdam
 including safety training; (g) a dewatering procedure, including details of the dewatering equipment; (h) a procedure for identifying and controlling leakages; (i) a rewatering procedure; (j) a procedure for discharge of water into waterways including protection of waterways from
 turbidity during dewatering; (k) procedure to control blow-in and/or ground heave at the base of the excavation for each stage
 of the excavation.
 HP The design of the cofferdam shall be proof-engineered by a consultant who is prequalified in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification or approved by the Superintendent.
 The cofferdam shall be watertight, of adequate strength and shall be anchored in position to prevent movement.
 The construction, use and removal of the cofferdam shall be conducted in a safe manner and proper provision shall be made for the safety of all persons involved.
 A safe means of access shall be provided for the use of site personnel and the delivery of materials and equipment from dry land to the cofferdam.
 Unless otherwise specified in the Contract, cofferdams shall be self-supporting and shall not be connected to or supported by any existing structure.
 The Contractor shall provide and maintain a standby pump throughout the period that the cofferdam is in use until its removal. The standby pump shall be of the same capacity as the pump used to dewater the cofferdam.
 Unless otherwise specified in the Contract, the cofferdam and all its component parts shall be removed on completion of the structure and no part of the cofferdam shall be incorporated in the finished structure.
 Members of the public shall be prevented from accessing the cofferdam.
 If a cofferdam is to be filled, the filling shall comply with the relevant sections of this specification.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 603 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 SECTION 604 - CYLINDERS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 204, 602, 610, 611 and 613. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 604.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the construction of cylinders which comprise a circular pre-cast concrete open caisson together with a cast in situ plain or reinforced concrete core.
 Cylinders shall be limited to a maximum depth of 3 metres and shall have a minimum diameter of 1.5 metres.
 
 604.02 STANDARD
 Design and construction of cylinders shall comply with the requirements of the Australian Standard for Bridge design - Foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in Section 175. Where a cylinder footing has been designed in accordance with the Australian Standard for Piling  Design and installation as listed in Section 175, and design requirements differ between the two Australian Standards, the requirements of Bridge design  Foundations and soil supporting structures shall take precedence over those of the requirements of Piling  Design and installation.
 
 604.03 DESIGN OF CYLINDERS
 If the Contractor is required to design the cylinders, the design shall be treated as falsework in accordance with the requirements of Section 613. The procedure for construction of the cylinder including requirements for sealing, shall be included on the drawings and shall be subject to the proof-engineering requirements of Section 613.
 The cylinder shall comprise pre-cast concrete pipe(s) that comply with the requirements of the Australian Standard for Precast concrete pipes (pressure and non-pressure).
 The wall of the cylinder shall be treated as non load-bearing formwork and the design shall incorporate a layer of compressible material at the top of the cylinder to prevent the transmission of foundation loads into the cylinder wall.
 The cylinder shall be robust and of sufficient strength to support temporary construction loads.
 Cylinders shall have the same durability and design life as the structural element that they support.
 In situ concrete for cylinders shall comply with Section 610.
 Reinforcement for cylinders shall comply with Section 611.
 
 604.04 PREPARATION OF FOUNDATION
 Excavation for cylinders shall comply with Section 602.
 To prevent falls and the fall of objects into the cylinder, a safety barrier and kickboard shall be provided around the top of the cylinder throughout construction and until the cylinder has been filled. The barrier shall have a minimum height of 1 metre and shall be set back from the edge of the cylinder to allow access for working. The kickboard shall be at the rim of the cylinder and shall be a solid barrier with a minimum height of 200 mm.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 604 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Excavations for cylinders founded in rock shall penetrate the rock to the dimension shown on the drawings or to a depth of 150 mm, whichever is the greater, for the full circumference of the cylinder. The remaining exposed rock surface within the cylinder shall be trimmed and cleaned to remove any loose rock and soil. Excavation for the base of the cylinder shall be treated in accordance with the requirements for rock subgrade as stated in Section 204 excluding the requirements for filling of depressions and capping.
 604.05 CONSTRUCTION OF CYLINDERS Cylinders shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings. Cylinders shall be vertical with a maximum tolerance on verticality of 25 mm per 3 metres of depth and to the level stated on the drawings. Deviation from the position shown on the drawings shall not exceed 75 mm in any direction. Cylinder sections shall be securely fixed together so as to prevent displacement and to exclude flowing water. Damaged or displaced cylinder sections shall be removed and the cylinder re-assembled or replaced.
 604.06 SEALING Sealing of cylinders, if required, shall be in accordance with the drawings and shall be subject to the requirements of Clause 604.03.
 604.07 PLACING CONCRETE HP Concrete shall not be placed until the excavation and sealing has been approved
 by the Superintendent. Cylinders shall be concreted within two days of completion of the excavation. Otherwise, the excavation shall be re-submitted for the Superintendent's approval. Concrete shall be delivered and placed in accordance with Section 610. Placing of concrete under water is not permitted unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent.
 604.08 TESTING Where testing is required in the specification or shown on the drawings, the following testing shall be undertaken by the contractor: Integrity testing shall be carried out on cylinders in accordance with integrity test methods specified in AS 2159. Integrity testing equipment shall be capable of checking cross-sectional irregularities in cylinders and identifying the location and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants. Acceptance criteria, supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of AS 2159. Testing shall be carried out on each cylinder constructed. Raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the Superintendent within 48 hours of request of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 604 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 SECTION 605 - DRIVEN PILES
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 176, 177, 204, 610, 611 and 630. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 605.01 GENERAL
 The following information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings: (a) pile diameter and founding level (b) design axial and lateral capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State)
 (c) design bending moment capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State) (d) inspection requirements -
  foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing; and  socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction (e) pile testing requirements e.g. magnitude of test loads (Clause 605.06) (f) pile acceptance criteria:
 Criterion 1 - the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load; and Criterion 2 - a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state (g) reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established.
 Piles shall be driven in the locations and to the levels shown on the drawings. Care must be taken to ensure that piles are not damaged during transport, handling and driving. Piles that are damaged shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Piles that the Superintendent considers cannot be repaired shall be rejected.
 Piles shall be clearly marked at 500 mm intervals starting from the pile toe.
 Piles shall be driven in accordance with AS 5100  Bridge Design.
 Details of Australian Standards (AS), Australian/New Zealand Standards (AS/NZS) and other documents referred to in this section are provided in Section 175.
 
 605.02 DRIVING SYSTEM
 Piles shall be driven with sufficient energy to install the pile and to achieve an ultimate capacity in excess of the specified pile test load without causing damage to the pile. Where earth retention with or without compression capacity piles are to be driven and excavation will not be undertaken prior to testing, the pile driving system shall be designed to have adequate energy to mobilise the entire length of the test pile. The methodology used in determining the pile capacity below the ultimate retention height of the test pile should be provided to the Superintendent for review prior to commencement of pile driving.
 If a drop-hammer is used, the height of fall of the hammer shall not exceed 2 m.
 The Contractor shall provide details of the driving system including the make, model and rated energy of the hammer, the mass of the helmet, and the proposed cap-block and cushion materials.
 These details, including calculations which demonstrate that the proposed driving system has sufficient energy to achieve the specified pile test load, shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review not less than 14 days prior to the commencement of pile driving.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 1 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 605.03 DRIVING
 During driving, the tops of the piles shall be held and guided by a suitable helmet and protected by a cushioning material, to avoid damage to the pile.
 Piles shall be guided into the specified position and shall not be bent or sprung into place during or after driving.
 Each pile shall be driven in a continuous operation and not left partly driven.
 Piles that are to be extended shall be spliced immediately after the driving of a particular section has been completed. Driving shall re-commence as soon as the splice is completed.
 The Contractor shall ensure that piles achieve the specified accuracy of level and position. The following tolerances shall apply to piles after driving:
 (a) pile alignment  deviation from the vertical or the specified rake shall not exceed 20 mm per metre length of pile
 (b) pile straightness  deviation from vertical shall not exceed 5 mm per metre length of pile
 (c) pile position for piles in pile caps and the underside of crossheads  pile head centre,  50 mm of the specified position.
 HP Pile testing shall be carried out in the presence of the Superintendent.
 Piles shall be driven to the levels shown on the drawings.
 Piles forced up by the driving of adjacent piles shall be re-driven to the specified toe level.
 Piles shall achieve the specified ultimate load capacity.
 Set measurements shall be taken to verify capacity of each pile driven, recorded as traces during driving to show the temporary compression of the pile and the permanent set. Traces must be taken relative to a stable hurdle supported securely by posts at least one pile diameter from each side of the pile. Where set measurements cannot be undertaken due to OH&S issues, the Contractor shall provide alternative methods to the Superintendent for review at least 7 days prior to pile driving.
 If the ultimate load capacity is not achieved at the specified level, the pile shall have a restrike test undertaken in accordance with Clause 605.07  Restrike Test.. If directed by the Superintendent, the pile shall be driven until the specified ultimate load capacity is achieved.
 If it is necessary to drive and/or extend the head of a pile below the underside of the pile cap, disturbance of the surrounding soil shall be minimised.
 If it is necessary to drive piles through embankment fill, the full depth of the fill shall be pre-bored prior to pile driving. The diameter of the pre-bored hole shall not exceed the diagonal dimension of the pile minus 50 mm.
 *** Landfill sites containing domestic refuse shall be pre-bored prior to pile driving, or sufficient refuse shall be removed down to the natural surface to create a stable and safe working area prior to pile driving. Where excavation of refuse is required, the void created by removal of the refuse shall be backfilled with Type B material and compacted in accordance with Section 204. Disposal of refuse shall be in accordance with Section 176 / Section 177##(strikethrough inapplicable section):.
 After pile driving is completed, all voids resulting from pre-boring shall be filled with grout or sand. The area shall be reinstated and any damage made good.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 2 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 605.04 AXIAL LOAD CAPACITY OF DRIVEN PILES
 Piles shall achieve the capacity shown on the drawings which shall be confirmed by testing using the method described in Clause 605.05.
 The pile test loads shown on the drawings shall be determined by the designer in accordance with AS 5100 Bridge Design and VicRoads Bridge Technical Note 1996/001.
 
 HP Pile testing shall be carried out in the presence of the Superintendent.
 The measured ultimate pile capacity achieved shall be determined by the Contractor using the following:
 
 *** (a) Energy (HILEY) Formula ##(strikethrough option (a) if inappropriate - refer to Guide Notes and Bridge Technical Note 2014/002  and delete the contents of this bracket):
 If the use of the Hiley Formula is permitted in accordance with Bridge Technical Note 2014/002, this shall not preclude the Contractor from using Wave Equation methods of analysis.
 
 (i) Drop hammers (hydraulic or cable lift) 
 
 R=
 
 9.81 (EF.MR.H) S + 0.5 (C1 + C2 + C3)
 
 x
 
 MR + E2.MP MR + MP
 
 (ii) Diesel hammers 
 
 R=
 
 EF.EN S + 0.5 (C1 + C2 + C3)
 
 x
 
 MR + E2.MP MR + MP
 
 Where: R = Measured ultimate pile capacity in kilonewtons MR = Mass of ram in kilograms H = Height of free fall of hammer in metres EF = Efficiency of fall of hammer MP = Mass of pile in kilograms, including shoe and helmet EN = Rated energy of hammer per blow in joule E = Coefficient of restitution S = Final set of pile in millimetres per blow using an average of 10 consecutive driving blows, or the first 5 full re-test blows C1 = Temporary compression allowance for pile head and cap in millimetres C2 = Temporary compression of pile in millimetres C3 = Temporary compression of ground in millimetres.
 The values of the coefficients EF, E and C1, which are dependent upon the type of equipment used and the rake of the piles, shall be nominated by the Contractor and reviewed by the Superintendent.
 Coefficients C2 and C3 shall be measured by the Contractor for each pile during driving simultaneously with the measurement of set per blow.
 
 *** (b) Wave Equation Methods ##(strikethrough option (b) if inappropriate - refer to Guide Notes and Bridge Technical Note2014/002 and delete the contents of this bracket):
 (i) Bearing Graph Method
 Each pile shall be driven to a calculated set which shall be determined on the basis of wave equation analysis (GRLWEAP or approved equivalent).
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (ii) Dynamic Testing and Analysis If dynamic testing equipment (Pile Driving Analyser [PDA] or approved equivalent) is used during the process of pile driving, the records shall be subjected to closed form dynamic solutions (Case Method or equivalent) and full wave equation analysis (CAPWAP or TNOWAVE or approved equivalent) using proprietary computer programs.
 The Contractor shall arrange for monitoring of piles with dynamic testing equipment during driving at a frequency of not less than one test for each pile group. The selected pile shall be the initial pile driven in each group and shall be tested when the pile reaches final toe level.
 Pile stresses during driving shall not exceed 0.8 fc compression and 1.1fc tension for concrete piles, and 0.85Fy for steel piles. For exposure classification B2 or C, the driving tension for concrete piles shall not exceed 0.5fc.
 fc shall be the concrete strength at driving. The measured stresses in the pile induced during pile driving and ultimate pile capacity calculations shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review prior to driving further piles.
 605.05 PILE DRIVING RECORDS
 Pile driving records shall be in accordance with Section 7.7  AS 2159. The following records must be retained for each pile driven: (a) manufacturing lot number and date of casting (b) location in pile group (c) length prior to driving (d) date of driving (e) toe level (f) traces of set measurements showing set and temporary compression (g) calculated ultimate pile capacity (h) measured stresses in the pile.
 All records shall be provided to the Superintendent within 72 hours of each pile having been driven into position.
 605.06 PILE TESTING
 *** (a) Hiley Formula Testing ##( strikethrough option (a) if inappropriate - refer to Guide Notes and Bridge Technical Note 2014/002 - and delete the contents of this bracket):
 The first pile driven in each group shall be tested and the ultimate capacity determined in accordance with the formula in Clause 605.04(a).
 The pile test will determine the driving set for each pile group by correlating the set with the driving system and the designer's requirements for the pile test loads shown on the drawings. All piles within that group shall be driven to a set not exceeding the driving set as determined by the pile test for that group.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 4 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 *** (b) High Strain Dynamic Testing ##( strikethrough this option if inappropriate - refer to Guide Notes and Bridge Technical Note 2014/002 - and delete the contents of this bracket):
 All high strain dynamic testing shall be undertaken by a pre-qualified consultant or a consultant approved by the Superintendent. The testing shall be approved by the Superintendent. The consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor and advised to the Superintendent at least 2 weeks prior to testing.
 (i) General
 High-strain dynamic pile testing shall be performed to confirm that the design pile capacity and integrity has been achieved.
 The test procedure and test reports shall conform to the requirements of AS 2159.
 The pile driving system shall have adequate energy to mobilise a test pile by a single hammer blow.
 Testing shall be carried out by use of a PDA or approved equivalent.
 The data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using CAPWAP or TNOWAVE or approved equivalent.
 The driving resistance and corresponding set per blow of the test pile shall be measured during PDA testing to extrapolate the results of the test pile to the piles in the pile group.
 The test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings.
 The measured ultimate capacity of the test pile shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings.
 (ii) Driving Criteria
 The driving criteria for each pile group shall be determined by testing the first pile driven in each group in accordance with Clause 605.05(b)(i).
 The pile test will determine the driving set for each pile group by correlating the driving system and design pile capacity. All piles within that group shall be driven to a set not exceeding the driving set as determined by the PDA test.
 Where a pier or abutment has more than one pile cap, the piles within each pile cap shall be considered as a separate pile group.
 For large pile groups the number of piles tested shall be a minimum of 1 in 30, and the distance of any pile from the test pile shall not exceed 20 metres.
 An additional pile test shall be conducted where the driving conditions are no longer represented by the initial pile test for that pile group. Additional pile tests are required where:  the design pile toe level of individual piles within a pile group is more than 2 metres,
 or  during pile driving pile toe levels vary by more than 2 metres from the test pile, or  pile rake differs by more than 8 degrees from the test pile.
 605.07 RESTRIKE TEST
 Restrike testing shall be conducted not less than 24 hours after initial driving.
 Driving resistance must be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 5 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 605.08 CONCRETE PILES
 The date of casting shall be clearly marked on each pile.
 Piles shall be fitted with a steel or cast iron driving shoe as detailed on the drawings. Where no toe protection requirements have been specified on the drawings, the pile shoe and band shall be made up from welded steel plate. The pile shoe plate shall not be less than 5 mm thick. The pile band shall be reinforced with a steel strap not less than 5 mm thick and 65 mm wide cast with the pile.
 Piles shall be carefully stored and handled to prevent damage, overstress or permanent distortion.
 Piles that are damaged, cracked or distorted shall be inspected by the Contractor in conjunction with the Superintendent. The Contractor shall submit proposals for the rectification of any defects to the Superintendent. Piles that do not meet the requirements of the Specification shall be rejected.
 Minimum age before driving: Steam cured ............ 7 days after the date of casting Moist cured ........... 14 days after the date of casting
 provided that in all cases the specified concrete strength has been achieved.
 605.09 EXTENSIONS TO REINFORCED CONCRETE PILES
 Reinforced concrete piles may be extended with either an additional length of precast reinforced concrete pile or with a cast in place reinforced concrete extension subject to:
 (a) the pile extension having the same cross section and the same strength as the pile that is being extended
 (b) the angular deviation at the pile joint shall not exceed 1 in 100
 (c) precast extensions may be used provided that (i) the mechanical joints must comply with the requirements of AS 5100.3 Clause 11.4 and Bridge Technical Note 99/018 (ii) design of mechanical joints must comply with the durability requirements of AS 5100.3 Clauses 9.3 and 9.4
 (iii) the precast extension must have a minimum length of 5 metres (iv) the joint location is determined by the structural design engineer
 (d) cast in place extensions may be used provided that (i) they are capable of developing the full structural capacity of the pile including the bending and tensile capacities and durability classification shown on the drawings (ii) welding of reinforcement if required as part of the extension shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554.1
 (iii) design of the extension shall be determined by the structural design engineer (iv) driving shall not commence until the concrete in the extension has achieved the
 specified concrete strength in the connecting pile and at least 75% of the concrete strength grade for the concrete in the extension.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 6 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 605.10 STEEL SHELL PILES
 (a) Driving
 Where any pile is driven by application of the driving effort at the toe, a layer of dry concrete cushion between 300 mm and 600 mm thick shall be placed in the bottom of the pile immediately before driving.
 Where it is not possible to complete the driving within 8 hours, the pile shall be left for 3 days, following which another fresh dry concrete cushion between 300 mm and 600 mm thick shall be placed on top of the original cushion before re-driving.
 The ratio of the mass of the hammer to the mass of the pile shall be a minimum of 1.
 The maximum height of fall of the hammer shall be determined by the Contractor and in no case shall be greater than 3 m when driving at the toe of the pile or 2 m when driving at the head of the pile.
 Covers shall be securely fastened over the tops of shell piles until the concrete core has been placed for safety purposes and to prevent the entry of foreign materials. Covers may be removed only for the purpose of placing reinforcement and concrete.
 (b) Jointing
 (i) Steel shells shall be extended in place, with a full strength butt welded joint in accordance with AS/NZS 1554.3 or as detailed on the drawings. The extended steel shells shall not deviate about either principal axis from a straight line drawn between end points by an amount exceeding l/1000 or 3 mm, whichever is the greater, where l is the length between end points.
 (ii) Joints shall be watertight.
 (iii) Fabrication of each mechanical splice assemblies must be subject to the full inspection and test regime specified in Section 630, with traceability of each splice to a compliance Certificate and Inspection and Test Plan.
 HP Welding shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified in accordance with Section 630.
 (c) Reinforced Concrete Cores
 The concrete core shall not be cast until the steel shell is in its final position.
 The concrete core shall be cast to the cut-off level of the pile shown on the drawings.
 Pile driving within a radius of 10 m of a newly cast concrete core is not permitted until at least 7 days has elapsed since the time of casting.
 Before reinforcement is placed, the shell shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove all mud, silt, water or other foreign material including any loose uncompacted concrete.
 Water leakage shall be prevented by sealing of joints and other openings in the shell prior to concreting.
 Reinforcement cages shall be centred within the pile using proprietary spacers at suitable intervals.
 Reinforcement and concrete for shell piles shall comply with Sections 610 and 611.
 (d) Inspection
 HP Reinforcement and/or concrete shall not be placed until the shells have been inspected by the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall provide adequate lighting to the satisfaction of the Superintendent to enable the Superintendent to inspect at each stage, the pile after driving and cleaning, the reinforcement cage and placement and compaction of concrete.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 7 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth 605.11 STEEL H-SECTION PILES Steel H-section piles shall be of section size and mass per unit length as shown on the drawings. After driving, the top of the pile shall be at least 600 mm above the level of the underside of the pile cap. Steel H-section piles shall be extended in situ by means of full strength butt welds. Welding of joints shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554.3. The Contractor shall provide details of welded splices for review by the Superintendent not less than 14 days prior to the welding operation. HP Welding shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified in
 accordance with Section 630. On completion of driving each pile, any cavity formed around the pile or between the flanges of the pile by the displacement of soil shall be filled immediately with concrete or grout of suitable consistency to fully fill the cavity. 605.12 DEFECTIVE PILES Where a pile exceeds the specified tolerances, is damaged or is otherwise defective, the strength, serviceability and durability of the pile shall be reappraised and where found to be unsatisfactory the pile shall be repaired, downgraded or replaced with one or more supplementary piles subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 605 (Page 8 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 606 - BORED CAST-IN-PLACE PILES (WITHOUT PERMANENT CASING)
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 610 and 611. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 606.01 GENERAL This section covers the requirements for the construction of reinforced concrete piles which are bored and cast-in-place without the use of permanent casing.
 606.02 STANDARDS Material, design and construction of bored and cast-in-place piles without the use of permanent casing shall comply with the requirements of relevant Australian Standards including but not limited to the following:
 AS 2159 Piling - Design and installation AS 5100 Bridge Design
 In circumstances where AS 5100 and AS 2159 requirements differ, the requirements of AS 5100.3 shall take precedence over those of AS 2159.
 Section 175 details the relevant references to Australian Standards (AS) and other documents in this section.
 606.03 BORING AND TEMPORARY CASING
 (a) General The following minimum information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings: (i) pile diameter and founding level (ii) design axial and lateral capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State) (iii) design bending moment capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State) (iv) inspection requirements  the required foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing; and  the required socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction (v) pile testing requirements e.g. magnitude of test loads (Clause 606.07) (vi) pile acceptance criteria Criterion 1 - the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load; and Criterion 2 - a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 606 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (vii)reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established.
 Each pile shall be bored to allow the construction of the pile to the size, position and level shown on the drawings.
 Temporary pile casings shall be used unless the Contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that an alternative construction method without casing will achieve the specified pile dimensional tolerances and cover to the steel reinforcement and that the durability and strength of the finished concrete will not be impaired by inclusions of foreign material or voids. The Contractor may be required to carry out any tests that are reasonably requested by the Superintendent to demonstrate compliance with these requirements. The cost of such testing shall be borne by the Contractor.
 All excavated material shall be removed from the site and disposed of as soon as practicable, so that the site of the works is kept in a clean and tidy condition.
 If excavations are to be left open, the Contractor shall ensure that they are made safe with appropriate fall protection measures such as guardrails with a footplate around the full perimeter of the pile hole, a sleeve extending at least 1 metre above ground level or a secure pile hole cover. Fall protection shall be provided at all times during excavation and after excavation is completed. The Contractor shall provide effective measures to protect each pile hole from site run-off and from loose material falling in.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for ensuring services or adjacent structures are not damaged by the piling operations. Where percussion equipment is used, the level of energy per blow of the drilling bit shall be kept to the minimum consistent with effective boring, so as to minimize vibration, and avoid damage to adjacent piles, structures or services.
 Where piles are to be founded on rock, they shall extend a minimum of two pile diameters into rock of the type and quality shown on the drawings, but shall not finish above the levels shown on the drawings.
 HP The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent a quality procedure for the construction of the piles not less than 4 weeks prior to the commencement of the piling works. Piling works shall not take place until the quality procedure has been reviewed and approved by the Superintendent.
 The procedure shall provide details of materials and the plant and equipment to be used, the boring operation, the method of sealing the base of the pile against the ingress of water, full details of the installation and removal of the temporary steel casings, full details of the steel reinforcement including bar chair details and fixing to ensure minimum cover requirements, and concreting operations, including placement of concrete under water and in dry bores.
 (b) Temporary Steel Casings
 Unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent as per Clause 606.3(a) temporary casing shall be used to prevent collapse of holes during the boring operation.
 If holes are bored prior to placing the steel casing in position, the nominal size of the drilling bit used to bore the holes shall not be more than 25 mm larger than the outside diameter of the steel casing and any protective coating.
 The toes of the steel casings shall be driven into solid rock where specified on the drawings or suitable alternative material as required to seal them sufficiently to prevent soil and water entering from outside the casing.
 Temporary casings shall be free from holes and distortion and the internal surfaces shall be free of any projections that may interfere with the placing and positioning of the steel reinforcement cage. Splices in the casing shall be waterproof and strong enough to sustain any stresses induced during installation and extraction of the casing. Fixing of the steel reinforcement cage onto the temporary steel casing shall not be allowed.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 606 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The type and thickness of the steel plate used in the temporary casing shall be selected by the Contractor who shall be fully responsible for its structural adequacy. The type and thickness of the temporary casings include providing safe access for personnel, resisting all superimposed loads from driving, extraction, earth and water pressures and the effects of any distortion which is likely to occur to the casing shall be proof-engineered by a Proof-Engineer who is pre-qualified in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification or a ProofEngineer approved by the Superintendent.
 (c) Boring Excavation
 Boring excavations under bentonite or polymer fluids alone, or in combination with temporary casings shall be the subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 Any proposal to bore under bentonite or polymer fluids alone, or in combination with temporary casings shall be supported with full details of materials, plant and equipment to be used, disposal of bentonite or polymer fluids and drilling cuttings and full details of the whole boring operation, which shall be certified by the Contractor's geotechnical consultant who is pre-qualified in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification (or approved by the Superintendent) in the area of design and construction of deep foundation works under bentonite and polymer fluids. Bentonite and polymer fluids shall be of the biodegradable type and the Contractor shall obtain approval of use of such materials from the relevant waterway management authority and government agencies.
 606.04 PROTECTION OF ADJACENT PILES
 The Contractor shall ensure that the pile construction process does not result in damage to adjacent newly cast piles due to ground vibration. The following minimum requirements shall also be met.
 (a) no pile construction shall be commenced within 2.5 m clear distance of a newly cast pile until the concrete in the pile has attained a strength of 15 MPa;
 (b) piles more than 2.5 m clear distance from a newly cast pile may be installed by boring at any time providing there is no likelihood of damage to the newly cast piles;
 (c) installation of piles by methods which involve driven temporary casing or result in significant vibration shall not be carried out within the distance 2.5 m to 9.0 m until the concrete in the pile has attained a strength of 15 MPa and set for a minimum of 24 hours.
 606.05 INSPECTION OF PILE EXCAVATION
 The Contractor shall notify the Superintendent for inspection of the pile excavation by the Superintendent. A minimum of 48 hours notice shall be given to the Superintendent for arrangement of the inspection. Prior to inspection, the pile excavation shall be de-watered and the walls and base of the pile cleaned out, including the internal surface of the casing, to remove all mud, loose or foreign material.
 In the event that the Contractor is unable to de-water the pile hole for inspection, full details of the proposed method of cleaning out the pile and the pile inspection shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review. The Contractor shall obtain confirmation from its geotechnical consultant regarding the appropriateness of the proposed method before submitting to the Superintendent for review.
 HP The temporary casing (where used) shall not be removed, nor shall reinforcement and/or concrete be placed until the pile walls and base have been inspected by the Superintendent and that the inspection has confirmed that the geotechnical strength of the materials in the pile wall base have satisfied the design assumptions.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 606 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall provide all plant, equipment, temporary casing or protective inspection casing/shield, labour and for all other requirements necessary to provide safe and effective access for the inspection of the pile excavation.
 No person shall enter the pile excavation unless the pile hole diameter is greater than 900 mm and appropriate precautions have been taken in accordance with:
 Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012  Part 4.3  Confined Spaces WorkSafe Code of Practice Confined Spaces and other relevant Codes of Practice approved under the Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
 
 606.06 CASTING PILES
 
 (a) General
 
 Concrete used for the construction of bored piles shall comply with the requirements of Section 610.
 
 Steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of Section 611.
 
 Further to the requirements of Clause 611.10 spacers and supports for bored pile steel reinforcement shall be placed at intervals of no more than 2 m along the full length of the steel reinforcement cage to ensure that the specified concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is maintained.
 
 Concrete placed in the dry shall be either self compacting concrete (SCC) or highly workable concrete in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.07, Clause 610.13 and Clause 610.18(c).
 
 Where highly workable concrete is placed in the dry, it shall be compacted with immersion type, high frequency vibrators.
 
 Concrete shall be placed through a tremie tube and shall not be dropped from a height greater than 2 m through air. Concrete which is being discharged from a tremie shall be positively guided away from the pile reinforcement so that segregation is not caused by the flow of concrete impinging on the reinforcement.
 
 Alternative methods for placing concrete in the dry from those specified in this clause may be used subject to a review by the Superintendent.
 
 The casing shall be withdrawn with care during casting of the concrete.
 
 Care shall be taken to prevent soil and rock dislodging from the side of the hole and contaminating the concrete forming the minimum cover to the reinforcement.
 
 The minimum height of concrete within the casing shall be adjusted to ensure that water is not permitted to enter from outside the casing, and that the soil pressure at the toe of the casing is balanced by the mass of the concrete within the casing. The free surface of the concrete shall be at least 1.5 m above the bottom of the casing.
 
 If after driving the casing, it is found not possible to seal the excavated pile from the inflow of water, mud, loose rock or similar materials, the reinforcement and concrete may be placed under water, subject to a review by the Superintendent and the requirements of Clause 606.06(b).
 
 HP
 
 Reinforcement and/or concrete shall not be placed until the proposed
 
 method of removing mud, loose rock or similar materials, and the method of
 
 placement of concrete under water has been reviewed by the
 
 Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 606 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Piles shall be concreted within 24 hours of completion of the pile excavation. For delays greater than 24 hours, the Contractor shall ream the walls and the base of the pile to remove not less than 25 mm thickness of material, or any other foundation material which has softened in that time.
 Piles placed in the dry shall be constructed to a minimum of 300 mm above pile cut-off level to allow breaking back of contaminated concrete at the top of the pile.
 (b) Casting Under Water
 Concrete placed under water shall be self compacting concrete (SCC) in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.07, Clause 610.13 and Clause 610.18(c).
 The concrete shall be of such consistency, and shall be placed in such a manner that pockets of air or water or ground materials are not entrapped in the concrete, and the space between the reinforcement and the side walls of the hole are completely filled with compacted concrete.
 Concreting using tremie methods shall not commence until the pile hole is filled with such head of water as to equalise the external water pressure from the surrounding ground.
 Where a tremie is used, the hopper and pipe of the tremie shall be steel, smooth bore, clean and water tight throughout. The tremie pipe shall be sealed with a plate taped to its outlet, to prevent direct contact between the first discharge of concrete in the pipe of the tremie and the water. The tremie pipe shall extend to the base of the pile hole before the tremie is charged with concrete.
 Where a pump is used in lieu of a tremie, a sponge shall be inserted in the discharge line before the discharge hopper is loaded so that water and air in the line are prevented from mixing with the advanced column of fresh concrete. The end of the discharge hose shall be held against the bottom of the hole until the sponge is released. The whole operation shall be controlled to ensure that no voids are trapped in the pile concrete.
 Concreting shall not commence until the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose are fully charged. The outlet of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose shall not be lifted from the bottom of the hole until the hole has been filled with a minimum of 2 m depth of concrete. Thereafter, concreting shall be kept a minimum of 2 m below the top surface of the concrete at all times and the Contractor shall continuously monitor and ensure that the 2 m depth of embedment is to be maintained at all time. The rate of withdrawal of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose during concreting shall be pre-determined by the Contractor based on the actual pile hole diameter and the volume of concrete pumped into the pile hole. The rate of withdrawal of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose versus the volume of concrete placed shall be recorded by the Contractor and the records shall be submitted to the Superintended within 24 hours on completion of concreting of a pile. The method used for concrete placement shall be such that a continuous supply of concrete is available at the top of the tremie tube or pump hopper during the entire process of placing concrete. Concreting shall be continued until sound concrete appears a minimum of 400 mm above the required cut off level. The pile concrete shall not be cut back to its required level until a minimum of 24 hours after completion of placement of concrete.
 606.07 TESTING
 HP All testing shall be undertaken by a pre-qualified consultant in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification or aconsultantapprovedby theSuperintendent. All testing shall be approved by the Superintendent. approval of the Superintendent. The consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor. The contractor shall provide details of the pile testing consultant to the Superintendent for review at least 2 weeks prior to the testing.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 606 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (a) Integrity Testing
 Integrity testing shall be carried out on bored and cast-in-place piles in accordance with integrity test methods specified in AS 2159. Integrity testing equipment shall be capable of checking cross-sectional irregularities in piles and identifying the location of discontinuity and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants.
 Acceptance criteria, supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of AS 2159.
 Testing shall be carried out on the first 6 piles constructed, and subject to acceptable integrity test results being obtained, 1 in 3 remaining piles shall be tested. If any pile fails to meet the acceptance criteria, all piles shall be tested.
 Integrity testing shall not be carried out until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of at least 25 MPa and not before 7 days after casting of the pile.
 Raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the Superintendent within 48 hours of request of the Superintendent.
 (b) Static Load Testing
 The Contractor shall carry out static load testing on bored and cast-in-place shown on the drawings. Static load testing such as compression test, tension test and lateral load test shall be undertaken in accordance with AS 2159.
 Load testing shall not be carried out until the concrete achieves the specified 28 day compressive strength.
 (c) Dynamic Pile Testing
 In addition to Integrity Testing and Static Load Testing, the Contractor shall carry out dynamic testing of piles to confirm that design pile capacity has been achieved. At least one (1) load test shall be performed for every 10 piles or, one load test per pile cap or bridge abutment, whichever gives the greatest number of pile testing. Dynamic testing shall also be carried out on piles of which the pile toe levels vary by more than 2 metres from the test pile.
 The Contractor shall ensure that a pile driving rig with adequate capacity to mobilise the test pile with a single blow is employed during Dynamic Pile Testing.
 Where the Contractor intends to seek dispensation of pile testing, the Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that an appropriate geotechnical investigation(s) has been carried out at the piling location with relevant geotechnical information at least 5 m below the design pile toe level. The submission shall include a proof engineer's certificate to confirm that where the pile is expected to develop its capacity, the lowest bound value of material strength established from the investigation has been adopted, and that a maximum geotechnical strength reduction factor of 0.45 has been adopted in the Ultimate Limit State geotechnical strength design in accordance with AS 2159. This information shall be provided to the Superintendent for review at least 4 weeks prior to construction. No consideration for dispensation of pile testing shall be given during or after construction.
 The details of the proposed pile driving rig, hammer size and drop heights shall be provided to the Superintendent for review prior to undertaking the testing.
 Testing shall be carried out by use of a Pile Driving Analyser (PDA) and the data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using CAPWAP, TNOWAVE or other approved equivalent software.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 606 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Reporting The test procedure and test reports shall conform with the requirements of AS 2159, and two copies of a report showing the measured field parameters and the results of analysis to determine pile capacity shall be provided to the Superintendent. Where confirmation of pile capacity using dynamic pile testing is obtained by re-strike, the report shall include the results of the initial drive and all subsequent re-strike.
 (e) Acceptance Criterion The integrity testing shall demonstrate that the measured cross-sectional area of each test pile is not less than 5% of the corresponding pile shown on the drawings. Where piles are subjected to static load testing, the following criterion shall be satisfied:  the plot of pile settlement with log time shall be linear or decreasing rate of creep, and the creep rate shall be less than 2 mm per log cycle of time at the test load;  the maximum total pile settlement and lateral displacement at the design load shall not exceed the value shown on the drawings. The test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings. The measured ultimate capacity of test piles by dynamic testing shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings.
 606.08 TOLERANCES The following tolerances shall apply to completed piles: (a) pile head shall finish within 75 mm of the specified plan position; (b) variation from the vertical or the specified batter/rake shall not be more than 1 in 100; (c) where piling excavation has developed a curve or out of verticality, the offset from the
 theoretical straight pile line shall not exceed 150 mm over a length of 15 metres or proportionally for greater or shorter lengths.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 606 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 607 - CONTINUOUS FLIGHT AUGER PILES
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 610 and 611. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 607.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the construction of uncased piles that are formed in the ground by excavation with a hollow flight auger, with the auger progressively withdrawn and the void below the auger tip filled with concrete or cement grout injected under pressure.
 The following minimum information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings:
 (a) pile diameter and founding level
 (b) design axial and lateral capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State)
 (c) design bending moment capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State)
 (d) inspection requirements:  the required foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing; and  the required socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction
 (e) pile testing requirements e.g. magnitude of test loads (Section 607.07)
 (f) pile acceptance criteria: Criterion 1 - the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load; and Criterion 2 - a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state
 (g) reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established.
 Cement grouted Continuous Flight Auger (CFA) piles shall not be used in foundations for bridges and other structures on or over roads.
 HP Concrete CFA piles shall not be used in foundations for bridges and other structures on or over roads without the approval of the Superintendent. If the Contractor proposes to use CFA piles, it shall apply to the Superintendent not later than four weeks before the commencement of piling. The application shall include details of the following:
 (a) plant and equipment for installation and monitoring;
 (b) method statement for pile installation including how the specified tolerances will be achieved;
 (c) inspection and test plans for pile installation and testing;
 (d) training and experience of piling crew;
 (e) training and qualifications of on-site and off-site engineering and geotechnical supervisory personnel;
 (f) the method of achieving the required verticality and pile position;
 (g) the method of measuring penetration rate and torque during augering;
 (h) the pile design and founding level if this is not shown on the drawings or if the proposal differs from the drawings;
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 607 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (i) the procedure for checking that the pile toe has reached the anticipated founding stratum; (j) the procedure for reviewing the design of the pile if ground conditions vary from the
 anticipated conditions; (k) the method of monitoring the extraction rate of the auger; (l) the method of measurement and monitoring of pressure in the delivery line to ensure that
 positive pressure is maintained at all times during concreting; (m) the method of recording concrete/grout flow and auger extraction rates to ensure that no
 section of pile contains less than the theoretical volume of concrete; (n) the action to be taken if supply pressure and/or flow rate is not maintained during concreting
 or the construction process is interrupted; (o) the method of installation of the reinforcement cage including the method of cage-centering
 and ensuring minimum cover to reinforcement; (p) details of the method of integrity testing including the name and qualifications of specialist
 sub-contractors and details of the system for collection and reporting of testing results; (q) method of disposal of spoil from excavation; (r) where earth retention piles with or without compression capacity are to be constructed and
 excavation will not be undertaken prior to the testing as stipulated in Clause 607.07, the pile driving system shall be designed to have adequate energy to mobilize the entire length of the test pile. The methodology in determining the pile capacity below the ultimate retention height of the test pile shall be provided.
 607.02 STANDARDS
 Concrete for CFA piles shall comply with the requirements of Section 610.
 Reinforcement for CFA piles shall comply with the requirements of Section 611.
 CFA piles shall be designed and tested in accordance with the VicRoads Design parameters for driven piles as listed in Section 175 under Other Reference Documents.
 Materials, design and construction of CFA piles shall comply with the requirements of relevant Australian Standards including:
 AS 1012 Methods of testing concrete AS 1478.2 Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout  Methods of sampling and
 testing admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout AS 2159 Piling - Design and installation* AS 2701.2 Methods of sampling and testing mortar for masonry constructions - Methods of
 sampling AS 3972 General purpose and blended cements AS 5100 Bridge design* * In circumstances where AS 5100 and AS 2159 requirements differ, the requirements of AS 5100 shall take precedence over those of AS 2159.
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 607 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 607.03 MATERIALS (a) General
 CFA pile materials shall comply with the drawings and the specification. (b) Concrete
 Concrete shall be of the strength grade shown on the drawings and comply with Section 610. (c) Steel
 Steel reinforcement shall comply with Section 611.
 607.04 AUGERING AND INSTALLATION OF PILES CFA piles shall be of the size and position shown on the drawings. The finished pile toe and head levels shall be as shown on the drawings. Variation of the CFA pile founding level shall be subject to proof-engineering by a prequalified consultant in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification or approved by the Superintendent. The Contractor shall ensure that adjacent structures and services are not damaged during construction of the piles. The pile shall be augered in one continuous operation to the depth shown on the drawings. The concrete delivery hose shall be primed and pressurised and the toe of the auger shall then be withdrawn progressively. The boring rate, penetration rate and torque shall be monitored and recorded throughout the augering process. The Contractor shall produce a field log of the materials encountered over the full depth of the excavation. The materials retrieved at 1 metre depth intervals during the course of the drilling shall be recorded and inspected by the Contractor's geotechnical consultant who shall confirm that they are consistent with the design assumptions and in accordance with the Contractor's installation procedure prior to casting. If it is necessary to increase the depth of the pile to achieve the required pile capacity, the Contractor shall: (a) determine the required increase in depth of the pile in accordance with the Contractor's
 procedure for review and confirmation that the pile has achieved the required design capacity; (b) determine the required increase in depth of the pile in accordance with the Contractor's
 procedure for reviewing the design of the pile if ground conditions at the anticipated depth vary from the anticipated conditions; (c) obtain confirmation from the Contractor's geotechnical consultant of the required increase in depth of the pile; (d) provide a full account of the need for the increase to the Superintendent for review. Where piles are founded on rock, they shall extend the specified minimum distance into rock of the type and quality shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 607 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall provide a work method statement and procedure for construction of the CFA pile if there is a risk of an uncontrolled leakage of concrete into a watercourse or other sensitive area due to presence of weak stratum. As a minimum, the Contractor shall provide a temporary steel casing down to a level below which there is no risk of such leakage. The Contractor shall consult its geotechnical consultant whom shall verify the appropriateness of the construction procedure. The Contractor shall provide the geotechnical consultant's report to the Superintendent for review.
 Pile shafts shall be formed by injecting concrete continually as the auger is extracted. The method of maintaining positive pressure in the pumping equipment, and the method of maintaining an oversupply rate for concrete, shall be in accordance with the Contractor's installation procedure.
 The auger extraction rate, concrete pressure and concrete oversupply shall be monitored and recorded throughout the augering process.
 The concrete pressure and rate of concrete delivery shall be maintained as the auger is withdrawn in order to ensure that the pile excavation is completely filled and is free of voids and inclusions.
 The reinforcement cage shall be placed and centralised in the pile as soon as is practicable after the pile has been concreted and while the concrete is still plastic. The reinforcement shall then be allowed to descend under its own weight until the correct level is reached.
 If the reinforcement cage cannot be installed to the required level under the effects of gravity, a small vibratory drive head may be used to complete the installation of the cage subject to approval by the Superintendent, and provided the Contractor is able to demonstrate that such vibration will not cause segregation or bleeding in the concrete nor adversely affect the integrity of the steel cage.
 Further to the requirements of Clause 611.10 spacers and supports for CFA pile steel reinforcement shall be placed at intervals of no more than 2 m along the full length of the steel reinforcement cage to ensure that the specified concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is maintained.
 Care shall be taken to prevent soil or rock dislodging from the side of the excavation or from the ground around the top of the excavation that may contaminate the concrete and that may reduce the effective diameter of the pile or the minimum cover to reinforcement.
 Piles shall be constructed to ground level or a minimum of 300 mm above pile cut-off level to allow breaking back of concrete at the top of the pile.
 607.05 PROTECTION OF ADJACENT PILES
 The Contractor shall ensure that adjacent newly cast CFA piles are not damaged during the installation of subsequent piles or by other construction activities and plant movements.
 Pile excavation within 2 metres or three pile diameters (whichever is the greater) of a newly cast pile shall not commence until the concrete in the newly cast pile has attained a strength of 15 MPa.
 607.06 TOLERANCES
 The following tolerances shall apply to completed CFA piles: (a) centre of the pile head shall be in the specified plan position 75 mm; (b) maximum deviation from vertical shall be within 1 in 50 of the pile height; and (c) minimum cover to reinforcement shall be determined in accordance with the exposure
 classification and AS 5100 and shall be shown on the drawings; minimum cover to reinforcement shall be not less than 75 mm under any circumstances.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 607 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 607.07 TESTING
 HP All testing shall be undertaken by a pre- qualified consultant in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification or approved by the Superintendent. The consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor. The Contractor shall provide details of the pile testing consultant to the Superintendent for review at least 2 weeks prior to the testing
 (a) Integrity Testing
 The Contractor shall conduct integrity testing of all CFA piles.
 Integrity testing shall be conducted in accordance with the integrity test methods specified in AS 2159. Integrity testing equipment shall be capable of identifying cross-sectional irregularities, voids and inclusions.
 Acceptance criteria, supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of AS 2159.
 (b) Load testing
 The Contractor shall conduct dynamic testing of CFA pile capacity. The frequency of pile testing shall be in accordance with VicRoads Design parameters for driven piles as listed in Section 175 under Other Reference Documents.
 At least one load test shall be performed on each pile group. Dynamic testing shall also be carried out on piles if the pile toe level varies by more than 2 metres from the test pile or as shown on the drawings.
 Testing shall be carried out by use of a Pile Driving Analyser (PDA) and the data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using CAPWAP, TNOWAVE or other approved equivalent software.
 Where the Contractor intends to seek dispensation of pile testing, the Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that an appropriate geotechnical investigation(s) has been carried out at the piling location with relevant geotechnical information at least 5 m below the design pile toe level. The submission shall include a proof engineer's certificate to confirm that where the pile is expected to develop its capacity, the lowest bound value of material strength established from the investigation has been adopted, and that a maximum geotechnical strength reduction factor of 0.45 has been adopted in the Ultimate Limit State geotechnical strength design in accordance with AS 2159. This information shall be provided to the Superintendent for review at least 4 weeks prior to construction. No consideration for dispensation of pile testing shall be given during or after construction.
 The Contractor shall arrange for monitoring of piles with dynamic testing equipment during driving at a frequency of not less than one test for each pile group.
 The pile driving system shall have adequate energy to mobilise a test pile by a single hammer blow.
 Pile stresses during testing driving shall not exceed 0.8 fc compression and 1.1fc tension. For exposure classification B2 or C, the driving action shall not produce tensile stresses in concrete in excess of 0.5fc.
 fc shall be the concrete strength at driving.
 The test procedure and test reports shall conform to the requirements of AS 2159.
 The test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings.
 The measured ultimate capacity of the test pile shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 607 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 607.08 DEFECTIVE PILES If the CFA pile capacity is less than pile test load shown on the drawings, it shall be replaced. A pile shall be rejected if at any point of the pile it is found to contain voids and/or inclusions with the combined projected area more than 10% of the design cross-sectional area of the pile, or has a cross-sectional area that is less than the nominal diameter of the pile. If the pile exceeds the specified geometrical tolerances, it shall be rejected. If it is not possible to install the cage to the level required, the reinforcement cage shall be removed and the pile shall be replaced.
 607.09 REPORTING Reports of the following shall be supplied to the Superintendent on completion of CFA pile installation: (a) Pile Installation
 Records of all activities or actions taken under items (a) to (q) as listed in Clause 607.01. Raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the Superintendent within 48 hours of request of the Superintendent. (b) Pile Testing Field measurements and conclusions from the following -
 (i) pile integrity testing Field measurements and pile capacity determination from the following -
 (i) PDA testing (ii) wave equation analysis (c) Non-conformances Nature and disposition of all non-conformances.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 607 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 608 - CAST-IN-PLACE SOCKETED PILES (WITH PERMANENT CASING)
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 610 and 611. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 608.01 GENERAL
 The following minimum information shall be provided for each pile on relevant foundation drawings:
 (a) pile diameter and founding level
 (b) design axial and lateral capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State)
 (c) design bending moment capacity (Ultimate Limit State and Serviceability Limit State)
 (d) inspection requirements:  the required foundation conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via end bearing; and  the required socket conditions where the pile is required to develop its capacity via skin friction
 (e) pile testing requirements e.g. magnitude of test loads (Section 608.08)
 (f) pile acceptance criteria: Criterion 1 - the performance of the pile footing under the design serviceability load; and Criterion 2 - a resistance equal to at least the design geotechnical ultimate limit state
 (g) reference of geotechnical investigation and design reports from which the above information has been established.
 This section covers the requirements for the construction of reinforced concrete piles by progressively driving or by other means of installing permanent steel casings into the ground, excavating all materials from inside the casing, placing reinforcement and then filling the casing with concrete.
 
 608.02 STANDARDS
 
 Material, design and construction of bored and cast-in-place socketed piles with the use of permanent casing shall comply with the requirements of relevant Australian Standards including:
 
 AS/NZS 1554.1 AS 2159 AS/NZS 3678 AS 5100
 
 Structural steel welding - Welding of steel structures Piling - Design and installation Structural Steel - Hot-rolled plates, floorplates and slabs Bridge Design
 
 Section 175 details the relevant references to Australian Standards (AS) and other documents.
 
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 608 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 608.03 MATERIALS AND PILING PROCEDURE
 The Contractor shall determine and be responsible for the wall thickness of the casing and the thickness of the casing toe strengthening plate but under no circumstances shall the wall thickness be less than 10 mm nor the quality of steel be less than Grade 250 in accordance with AS/NZS 3678. The steel casing materials shall be supported by test certificates from a NATA accredited laboratory stating that all materials comply with the requirements of the relevant standard, including mechanical tests and chemical analysis where applicable.
 The Contractor shall determine and be responsible for the structural adequacy of the steel casing. The type and thickness of the steel casing shall be certified as being suitable for its intended purpose, which may include providing safe access for personnel, resisting all superimposed loads from driving, extraction, earth and water pressures, and the effects of any distortion which is likely to occur to the casing.
 Casing lengths shall be welded together to exclude any flow of water and/or soil.
 Concrete used for the construction of bored piles shall comply with the requirements of Section 610.
 Steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of Section 611.
 The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent a quality procedure for the construction of the piles not less than 4 weeks prior to the commencement of the piling works. The procedure shall provide details of materials and the plant and equipment to be used, the boring operation, the method of sealing the base of the pile against the ingress of water, full details of installation of the permanent steel casings, full details of the steel reinforcement including spacer and support details and fixing to ensure minimum cover requirements, and concreting operations, including placement of concrete under water and in dry bores.
 Further to the requirements of Clause 611.10 spacers and supports for bored pile steel reinforcement shall be placed at intervals of no more than 2 m along the full length of the steel reinforcement cage to ensure that the specified concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is maintained.
 HP Piling works shall not take place until the Contractor's proposed materials and procedures have been reviewed and accepted by the Superintendent.
 608.04 EXCAVATION
 (a) General
 Excavation shall consist of the excavation of the interiors of the pile casings and sockets, and the disposal of all excavated materials, and shall include all sheeting, bracing, drainage, pumping or bailing, and other necessary work and materials to enable the construction of the piles.
 All excavated material shall be removed from the site and disposed of as soon as practicable, so that the site of the works is kept in a clean and tidy condition.
 If excavations are to be left open the Contractor shall ensure that they are made safe with appropriate fall protection measures such as guardrails with a footplate around the full perimeter of the pile hole, a sleeve extending at least 1 metre above ground level or a secure pile hole cover. Fall protection shall be provided at all times during excavation and after excavation is completed. The Contractor shall provide effective measures to protect each pile hole from site run-off and from loose material falling in.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 608 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall be responsible for ensuring services or adjacent structures are not damaged by the piling operations. Where percussion equipment is used, the level of energy per blow of the percussion tool shall be kept to a minimum consistent with effective boring so as to minimise vibration and to avoid damage to the walls of the sockets, adjacent piles, structures or services.
 After completion of excavation, the internal surfaces of casings shall be cleaned to remove soil adhering to the inside of the casing prior to placement of the steel reinforcement. Fixing of the steel reinforcement cage onto the steel casing shall not be allowed.
 (b) Excavation to Bottom Casing Level
 The method of pile excavation and installation of the casing shall ensure that the ground is in contact with the casing at all times and no over-excavation or backfilling will be permitted.
 Casings shall be installed to provide penetration into the underlying bedrock to the levels or the dimensions shown on the drawings.
 If the excavation is to be carried out under water, the level of water in the casing shall be maintained within 1 metre of ground natural surface level or above the level of the adjacent surface water.
 Casings shall be installed so that the completed work complies with the tolerances specified.
 (c) Socket Formation and Inspection
 Socket bases shall be trimmed in near horizontal planes and all loose material, including rock fragments and other debris, shall be removed.
 Immediately prior to concreting, the base of the socket shall be cleaned. Methods of cleaning i.e. airlifting or other alternatives shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 The Contractor shall control the lifting speed of the drilling equipment to ensure that no scouring and overbreak of the excavation occurs.
 HP Following formation of the socket, the pile shall be de-watered to enable inspection by the Superintendent (or the Contractor's geotechnical representative in design and construct contracts) of the geology of the sides and base of the socket and to ensure that the base is free of debris. Reinforcement and/or concrete shall not be placed prior to this inspection.
 The Contractor shall provide all plant, equipment including an inspection shield and labour necessary to provide safe and effective access for the inspection of the pile excavation.
 No person shall enter the pile excavation unless the appropriate precautions have been taken in accordance with:
 Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012  Part 4.3  Confined Spaces WorkSafe Code of Practice Confined Spaces and other relevant Codes of Practice approved under the Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
 If during de-watering, investigations reveal that the casing is not properly sealed or that the sides of the sockets have collapsed or that the overlying materials such as sands, gravels or silts have entered the socket or that the casing has deformed from its circular shape, the Contractor shall cease pumping and immediately re-fill the casing with water. In this case, the Contractor shall submit for the Superintendent's review details of the proposed procedures for overcoming the difficulties and for completing the construction of the pile including the method of inspecting the sides and base of the socket and to ensure that the base is free of debris in accordance with this specification
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 608 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 608.05 PROTECTION OF ADJACENT PILES
 The Contractor shall ensure that the pile construction process does not result in damage to adjacent newly cast piles due to ground vibration. The following minimum requirements shall also be met: (a) no pile construction shall be commenced within 2.5 m clear distance of a newly cast pile
 until the concrete in the pile has attained the strength of 15 MPa (b) piles more than 2.5 m clear distance from a newly cast pile may be installed by boring at
 any time providing there is no likelihood of damage to the newly cast piles (c) installation of piles by methods which involve driven casing or construction methods which
 result in significant vibration shall not be carried out within the distance 2.5 to 9.0 m until the concrete in the pile has set for 24 hours.
 608.06 STAGING OF CONCRETE CASTING
 Concreting of piles shall be carried out in two stages as follows:
 (a) Stage 1
 Concreting for Stage 1 involves placing concrete under water from the base of the pile socket to within 1 m (0.5 m) below the bottom of the pile reinforcement, or to a level 3 m (0.5 m) above the bottom edge of the casing, whichever is the higher. These limits apply to the level of sound concrete after removal of unsound concrete as specified for construction joints.
 Sockets shall be concreted within 24 hours of completion of the socket excavation. For delays greater than 24 hours, the Contractor shall ream the socket to remove not less than 25 mm minimum thickness of material, or any other foundation material which has softened in that time.
 Concrete placed under water shall comply with the requirements of Clause 608.07(a).
 (b) Stage 2
 This includes concrete placed in the dry for the remainder of the pile.
 Construction joint treatment between the two stages shall be as specified for construction joints.
 608.07 PLACING CONCRETE
 At least 4 weeks before commencing concreting operations, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review, details of all the plant and equipment proposed for use, a method statement of how the work will be carried out including action required in the event of concreting of tremie action break-down and details of the record sheets proposed for monitoring the operations.
 (a) Pile Socket (Stage 1)
 Concreting using tremie methods shall not commence until the pile hole is filled with a head of water so as to equalise the external water pressure from the surrounding ground.
 Where a tremie is used, the hopper and the pipe of the tremie shall be steel, smooth bore, clean and water tight throughout. The tremie pipe shall be sealed with a plate taped to its outlet, to prevent direct contact between the first discharge of concrete in the pipe of the tremie and the water. The tremie pipe shall extend to the base of the pile hole before the tremie is charged with concrete.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 608 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where a pump is used in lieu of a tremie, a sponge shall be inserted in the discharge line before the discharge hopper is loaded so that water and air in the line are prevented from mixing with the advanced column of fresh concrete. The end of the discharge hose shall be held against the bottom of the hole until the sponge is released, and the whole operation controlled to ensure that no voids are trapped in the pile concrete.
 Concreting shall not commence until the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose are fully charged. During concreting, the outlet of the tremie pipe or pump discharge hose shall be kept a minimum of 2 m below the top surface of the concrete at all times and the Contractor shall continuously monitor and record the depth of the embedment. The method used for concrete placement shall be such that a continuous supply of concrete will be available at the top of the tremie tube or pump hopper during the entire process of placing concrete. Concreting shall be continued until sound concrete appears a minimum of 400 mm above the required cut-off level. The pile concrete shall not be cut back to its required level until a minimum of 24 hours after completion of placement of concrete.
 Concrete placed under water shall be self compacting concrete (SCC) in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.07, Clause 610.13 and Clause 610.18(c).
 The concrete shall be of such consistency, and shall be placed in such a manner, that pockets of air or water or ground materials are not entrapped in the concrete, and the space between the reinforcement and the side walls of the hole are completely filled with compacted concrete.
 (b) Pile Stem (Stage 2)
 Concrete shall be placed in the dry and shall be compacted by immersion type, high frequency vibrators.
 Concrete shall be placed through a tremie tube, and concrete shall not be dropped from a height greater than 2 m through air.
 Concrete which is being discharged from a tremie shall be positively guided away from the pile reinforcement so that segregation is not caused by the flow of concrete impinging on the reinforcement.
 Alternative methods for placing concrete in the dry from those specified in this clause may be used subject to a review by the Superintendent.
 Concrete placed in the dry shall be either self compacting concrete (SCC) or highly workable concrete in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.07, Clause 610.13 and Clause 610.18(c).
 Where highly workable concrete is placed in the dry, it shall be compacted with immersion type, high frequency vibrators.
 Where the socket is stable and is to be cast in the dry, Stage 1 and Stage 2 may be cast continuously in accordance with the requirements of Clause 608.06(b).
 Piles placed in the dry shall be constructed to a minimum of 300 mm above pile cut-off level to allow breaking back of contaminated concrete at the top of the pile.
 608.08 TESTING
 HP All testing shall be undertaken by a consultant in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification (or a consultant approved by the Superintendent). All testing shall be approved by the Superintendent. The consultant shall be independent of the piling contractor. The Contractor shall provide details of the pile testing consultant to the Superintendent for review at least 2 weeks prior to the testing.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 608 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (a) Integrity Testing
 Integrity testing shall be carried out on bored and cast-in-place piles in accordance with integrity test methods specified in AS 2159. Integrity testing equipment shall be capable of checking cross-sectional irregularities in piles and identifying the location and characteristics of any significant anomalies such as voids or contaminants.
 Acceptance criteria, supervision and reporting of integrity testing shall be in accordance with the requirements of AS 2159.
 Testing shall be carried out on the first 6 piles constructed, and subject to acceptable integrity test results being obtained, 1 in 3 remaining piles shall be tested. If any pile fails to meet the acceptance criteria, all piles shall be tested.
 Integrity testing shall not be carried out until the concrete has achieved a compressive strength of at least 25 MPa and not before 7 days after casting of the pile.
 Raw data of pile integrity testing shall be provided to the Superintendent within 48 hours of request of the Superintendent.
 (b) Static Load Testing
 The Contractor shall carry out static load testing on bored and cast-in-place shown on the drawings. Static load testing such as compression test, tension test and lateral load test shall be undertaken in accordance with AS 2159.
 Load testing shall not be carried out until the concrete achieves the specified 28 day compressive strength.
 (c) Dynamic Pile Testing
 In addition to Integrity Testing and Static Load Testing, the Contractor shall carry out dynamic testing of piles to confirm that design pile capacity has been achieved. At least one (1) load test shall be performed for every 10 piles or one load test per pile cap or bridge abutment whichever gives the greatest number of pile testing. Dynamic testing shall also be carried out on piles of which the pile toe levels vary by more than 2 metres from the test pile.
 The Contractor shall ensure that a pile driving rig with adequate capacity to mobilise the test pile with a single blow is employed during Dynamic Pile Testing.
 Where the Contractor intends to seek dispensation of pile testing, the Contractor shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that an appropriate geotechnical investigation(s) has been carried out at the piling location with relevant geotechnical information at least 5 m below the design pile toe level. The submission shall include a proof engineer's certificate to confirm that where the pile is expected to develop its capacity, the lowest bound value of material strength established from the investigation has been adopted, and that a maximum geotechnical strength reduction factor of 0.45 has been adopted in the Ultimate Limit State geotechnical strength design in accordance with AS 2159. This information shall be provided to the Superintendent for review at least 4 weeks prior to construction. No consideration for dispensation of pile testing shall be given during or after construction.
 The details of the proposed pile driving rig, hammer size and drop heights shall be provided to the Superintendent for review prior to undertaking the testing.
 Testing shall be carried out by use of a Pile Driving Analyser (PDA) and the data obtained from each pile shall be analysed using CAPWAP, TNOWAVE or other approved equivalent software.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 608 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Reporting The test procedure and test reports shall conform with the requirements of AS 2159, and two copies of a report showing the measured field parameters and the results of analysis to determine pile capacity shall be provided to the Superintendent. Where confirmation of pile capacity using dynamic pile testing is obtained by re-strike, the report shall include the results of the initial drive and all subsequent re-strike.
 (e) Acceptance Criterion The integrity testing shall demonstrate that the measured cross-sectional area of each test pile is not less than 5% of the corresponding pile shown on the drawings. Where piles are subjected to static load testing, the following criterion shall be satisfied:  the plot of pile settlement with log time shall be linear or decreasing rate of creep, and the creep rate shall be less than 2 mm per log cycle of time at the test load  the maximum total pile settlement and lateral displacement at the design load shall not exceed the value shown on the drawings  the test results are required to demonstrate meeting the acceptance criteria shown on the drawings, and  the measured ultimate capacity of test piles by dynamic testing shall be equal to or greater than the pile test load shown on the drawings.
 608.09 TOLERANCES The following tolerances shall apply to piles in their specified positions: (a) pile position at the top of concrete shall be within 75 mm of the specified plan position (b) variation from the vertical shall not be more than 1 in 100 (c) variation of diameter, within casing ................................... -10 to +20 mm (d) reduced level of top of sound concrete (after trimming) ....... 10 mm (e) reduced level of base of socket ......................................... 0 to -300 mm (f) variation in socket diameter for piles shall not exceed 50 mm less than the nominal pile
 diameter.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 608 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 SECTION 610 - STRUCTURAL CONCRETE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 204, 606, 611, 613, 614, 686, 687, 689, 703 and 801. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 610.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for durability, strength and surface finish for structural concrete including the requirements for mix design, supply and delivery of concrete, sampling and testing, placing, compaction, finishing, curing and protection.
 Additional requirements for concrete for post-tensioned, pre-tensioned, precast, sprayed concrete and other types of concrete construction are specified in the relevant sections. Requirements for general non-structural concrete paving Works are specified in Section 703.
 Concrete using general purpose portland cement Type GP or blended cement Type GB shall comply with the requirements of AS 3972 General purpose and blended cements. In addition, blended cement Type GB shall consist of a specified minimum quantity of portland cement in combination with any one or two of Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (Slag), Fly Ash or Amorphous Silica (SF) and as specified in this section.
 All concrete shall be special class performance concrete in accordance with Appendix B of AS 1379 Specification and Supply of Concrete and the requirements of this section.
 Structural concrete shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of this specification to prevent any adverse effects arising from excessive drying shrinkage and cracking, alkali-aggregate reactivity, soluble salts, inadequate cover, curing and compaction and from exposure to the specified in-service conditions.
 
 610.02 STANDARDS
 
 Australian Standards and VicRoads Codes of Practices are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 1379 and RC 500.00).
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS 1012 Methods of testing concrete
 
 AS 1141 Methods of sampling and testing aggregates
 
 AS 1379 Specification and supply of concrete
 
 AS 1478
 
 Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout  Admixtures for concrete
 
 AS 2758.1 Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Concrete aggregates
 
 AS 3582
 
 Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement
 
 AS 3582.1 Part 1 : Fly ash
 
 AS 3582.2 Part 2 : Slag - Ground granulated iron blast-furnace
 
 AS 3582.3 Part 3 : Amorphous silica
 
 AS 3799 Liquid membrane-forming curing compounds for concrete
 
 AS 3972 General purpose and blended cements
 
 AS 5100 Bridge Design Set
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 1 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) VicRoads Codes of Practices Code of Practice RC 500.00 Code of Practice for Quarry Investigations. Code of Practice RC 500.16 Code of Practice for Selection of Test Methods for the Testing of Materials and Work.
 (c) VicRoads Test Methods RC 252.01 Slump Flow, T500 Time and J-Ring Passing Ability for Self Compacting Concrete (SCC) RC 253.01 Determination of aggregate moisture content and estimated free water aggregate moisture RC 376.03 Potential Alkali-Silica Reactivity (Accelerated Mortar Bar Method) RC 376.04 Alkali Aggregate Reactivity using the Concrete Prism Test.
 (d) Additional Test Methods ASTM C295/C295M Standard Guide for Petrographic Examination of Aggregates for Concrete.
 (e) Additional Referenced Specifications ATIC-SPEC SP43  Cementitious Materials for Concrete published by ATIC (Australian Technical Infrastructure Committee)
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 610.03 DEFINITIONS Batch: One load or charge of a transit concrete mixer or agitator.
 Blended Cement: General purpose blended cement Type GB complying with the requirements of AS 3972 and as specified in this section.
 Cement: Material complying with the requirements of AS 3972 and as specified in this section.
 Cementitious Material: Portland cement or a mixture of portland cement with one or more supplementary cementitious materials or in combination with other supplementary material as approved by the Superintendent.
 Concrete Cover: Distance between the outside of the reinforcing steel and the nearest permanent surface of the concrete member excluding any surface finishing material.
 Water/Cementitious Material (W/C) Ratio: The ratio of the amount of water to the total amount of cementitious materials by mass in a freshly mixed cubic metre of concrete. The water shall be the total free water contained in the batch aggregates in excess of their saturated surface-dry condition.
 Concrete Grade: A grade of concrete with a specified minimum cementitious material content, a maximum W/C ratio and a minimum compressive strength at 3, 7 and 28 days. It is designated by the letters VR (VicRoads) followed by a three digit number indicating the minimum cementitious material content in kg/m and a two digit number indicating the specified minimum compressive strength at 28 days.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 2 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Exposure Classifications: As per Table 4.3 of AS 5100.5 Bridge Design - Concrete and summarised as follows:
 
 A - Mild B1 - Moderately Severe B2 - Severe
 
 C - Very Severe U - Special Consideration
 
 Portland Cement: General purpose portland cement Type GP complying with the requirements of AS 3972.
 
 Sample: A portion of fresh concrete drawn from a batch and from which test cylinders and other test specimens are made, and from which other concrete testing is undertaken as required. All sampling is carried out in accordance with AS 1012.
 
 Self Compacting Concrete (SCC): Concrete that is able to flow and consolidate under its own weight, completely fill the formwork or bore hole even in the presence of dense reinforcement, whilst maintaining homogeneity and without the need for additional compaction, and which complies with the requirements of Table 610.131. Also called selfconsolidating concrete or super-workable concrete.
 
 Supplementary Cementitious Material: Fly Ash (FA), Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (Slag), or Amorphous Silica (SF) complying with the requirements of AS 3582.1, AS 3582.2 and AS 3582.3 respectively.
 
 Triple Blend: Blended cement Type GB consisting of a minimum quantity of portland cement in combination with any two Supplementary Cementitious Materials (i.e. any two of Fly Ash, Slag or Amorphous Silica).
 
 VPV: % Apparent Volume of Permeable Voids as determined by test method AS 1012.21.
 
 610.04 DURABILITY
 Durability requirements with respect to exposure classification as detailed in AS 5100.5 Bridge design  Concrete and concrete grade shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified in this section.
 The durability requirements for concrete in exposure classification U shall be as shown on the drawings and this specification.
 The concrete shall be designed, manufactured and delivered, sampled and tested, placed, compacted, finished and cured in accordance with the requirements of this section to achieve a service life of at least 100 years in the specified in-service exposure conditions with minimal maintenance.
 
 610.05 MINIMUM COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH
 
 The minimum compressive strength requirements for each concrete grade are shown in Table 610.051.
 
 Table 610.051
 
 Concrete Grade
 
 Minimum Compressive Strength (MPa)
 
 3 days
 
 7 days
 
 28 days
 
 VR330/32
 
 14
 
 20
 
 32
 
 VR400/40
 
 17
 
 26
 
 40
 
 VR450/50
 
 23
 
 35
 
 50
 
 VR470/55
 
 25
 
 40
 
 55
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016August 2016 Section 610 (Page 3 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The 3 day minimum compressive strength requirement shall not apply to concrete mixes containing supplementary cementitious materials which exceed the cement replacement values stated in Clause 610.07(f).
 
 610.06 MAXIMUM VPV VALUES AT 28 DAYS
 
 The maximum VPV values at 28 days for each concrete grade for both test cylinders and concrete test cores cut from cast in situ and sprayed concrete shall be as shown in Table 610.061.
 Table 610.061
 
 Concrete Grade
 
 Maximum VPV Values at 28 days (%)
 
 Test Cylinders (compacted by
 vibration)
 
 Test Cylinders (compacted by
 rodding)
 
 Test Cores
 
 VR330/32
 
 14
 
 15
 
 17
 
 VR400/40
 
 13
 
 14
 
 16
 
 VR450/50
 
 12
 
 13
 
 15
 
 VR470/55
 
 11
 
 12
 
 14
 
 For the purpose of satisfying the requirements of this clause, VPV test results may be rounded down to the nearest whole number for the corresponding concrete grade.
 
 610.07 CONCRETE MIX DESIGN
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the mix design of all concrete, including any other nominated requirements, so that the specified durability, strength and other requirements of the hardened and plastic concrete are achieved.
 The Contractor shall ensure that arrangements for the supply of concrete are made with the concrete supplier at the commencement of the Works, to ensure that a fully compliant concrete mix design which is supported with all required test results meets the specified time frames of this section.
 (b) Mix Design Details
 HP The Contractor shall submit the concrete mix design details for review by the Superintendent not less than 4 weeks prior to the placement of concrete. Concrete shall not be placed until the mix design has been reviewed by the Superintendent, and allocated a registration number on the Register of State Growth approved concrete mixes.
 The concrete mix design details shall include the following:
 (i) the source, type and proportions of the constituent materials; (ii) the Cementitious Material Registration Scheme (CMRS) registration number(s) for
 the cementitious material(s) used in the mix as specified in Clause 610.08(c); (iii) aggregate gradings, water absorption and saturated surface-dry densities;
 (iv) chemical admixtures details and manufacturer's recommended dosage rates and method of use;
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 4 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (v) the nominated slump and where a superplasticiser is used the final slump; (vi) for self compacting concrete (SCC) additional details as specified in
 Clause 610.07(m); (vii) the maximum water content and maximum W/C ratio; (viii) level of control, accuracy and method of determination of both the coarse and fine
 aggregate moisture content, consistent with the requirements of Clause 610.13(d); (ix) documentary evidence of previous performance and relevant test results which shall
 not be more than 12 months old including (1) 3, 7 and 28 day compressive strengths complying with the minimum
 compressive strength requirements given in Table 610.051 (2) VPV values at 28 days complying with the requirements given in Table 610.061
 and Clause 610.07(l) (3) drying shrinkage test results as specified in Clause 610.07(j) (4) soluble salts content as specified in Clause 610.07(k); (x) alkali aggregate reactivity test results as specified in Clause 610.11(e) and which shall not be more than 3 years old in accordance with the minimum frequency of testing as stated in Table 610.121; (xi) the method of placement and the element(s) of the structure in which the concrete is to be placed; (xii) full details of concrete curing methods as specified in Clause 610.23; (xiii) a unique identification number for the concrete mix design to satisfy the requirements of Clause 610.15.
 Concrete mix designs not complying with the requirements of this section will require the approval of the Superintendent.
 The concrete mix design shall be strictly adhered to by the Contractor. In the event of changes to the agreed concrete mix design, the Contractor shall submit a new concrete mix design to the Superintendent for review or approval as appropriate.
 (c) Trial Mix
 In the absence of recent documentary evidence that the concrete mix design complies with the requirements of this section, a trial mix shall be undertaken in accordance with AS 1012.2.
 The relevant results of the trial mix and the associated concrete mix design details indicating compliance with the specified requirements shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent.
 (d) Mix Constituents
 The concrete shall consist of a mixture of cementitious material, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate and water.
 The concrete may also contain chemical admixtures, details of which shall be submitted with the mix design.
 If the coarse aggregate or fine aggregate is composed of more than one material or size of material, the mix proportions for each shall be specified separately.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 5 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (e) Cementitious Material Content and Water/Cementitious Material (W/C) Ratio
 
 The minimum mass of total cementitious material per cubic metre of finished concrete and the corresponding maximum W/C ratio shall be as shown in Table 610.071.
 
 Table 610.071
 Concrete Grade
 
 Cementitious
 Material Content (min) (kg/m3)
 
 W/C Ratio (max)
 
 VR330/32
 
 330
 
 0.50
 
 VR400/40
 
 400
 
 0.45
 
 VR450/50
 
 450
 
 0.40
 
 VR470/55
 
 470
 
 0.36
 
 The cementitious material content of concrete to be placed under water shall not be less than 400 kg/m, with a maximum W/C ratio of 0.45.
 The W/C ratio of the proposed concrete mix design shall not be less than 0.30 for concrete cast in situ works and 0.28 for concrete utilised in precast works.
 
 (f) Minimum Portland Cement Content
 The minimum mass of portland cement in concrete mixes containing Slag, Fly Ash or Amorphous Silica shall be 60%, 75% or 90% respectively, of the total mass of cementitious material in the concrete mix. The inclusion of Slag, Fly Ash or Amorphous Silica in concrete mixes shall only be in single or double combination with portland cement. In a triple blend concrete mix, the portland cement content shall be a minimum of 60% and the individual contribution of Slag, Fly Ash or Amorphous Silica shall be a maximum of 40%, 25% or 10% respectively, of the total mass of the cementitious material in the concrete mix.
 Other cementitious materials may be used subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 
 (g) Concrete Structures in Marine and other Saline Environments
 Concrete structures located in marine and other saline environments shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum compliant cementitious material options as shown in Table 610.072.
 Where proportioning of cementitious material in concrete mixes uses higher replacement levels of supplementary cementitious materials, the Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent a supporting documented detailed methodology addressing potential lower early strength development, longer formwork removal times and development of lower lifting strengths to ensure compliance with the specification.
 Additional protective measures for concrete structures constructed in marine and other saline environments are covered in Clause 610.28.
 
 (h) Concrete Structures Subject to Sulphate and Chemical Attack
 Concrete structures subject to sulphate and chemical attack represented by an acidity of pH of 5 and higher shall be constructed in accordance with the minimum compliant cementitious material options as shown in Table 610.072, provided that the mobility of any groundwater if present is in an approximately static condition. For pH lower than 5.0, the environment shall be assessed as exposure classification U and be subject to special consideration in accordance with Clause 610.29.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 6 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Where proportioning of cementitious material in concrete mixes uses higher replacement levels of supplementary cementitious materials, the Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent a supporting documented detailed methodology addressing potential lower early strength development, longer formwork removal times and development of lower lifting strengths to ensure compliance with the specification.
 
 (i) Use of Supplementary Cementitious Materials for Special Applications
 Supplementary cementitious materials requirements for other special applications shall be as specified in the drawings and specification.
 
 (j) Limitations on Drying Shrinkage
 One sample per trial mix shall be taken. Each sample shall consist of 3 specimens tested in accordance with AS 1012.13. The shrinkage strain of each sample, as determined from the average value of the 3 specimens, shall not exceed 550 microstrain and 750 microstrain after 21 days and 56 days of drying respectively.
 Drying shrinkage requirements for special applications shall be as specified in the drawings and specification.
 
 (k) Soluble Salts
 
 (i) Chloride-ion Content
 
 The maximum acid-soluble chloride-ion content of concrete as placed, expressed as the percentage of the total mass of cementitious material in the concrete mix shall not be greater than:
  0.1% for prestressed concrete  0.15% for reinforced concrete  0.07% for all mortars and grouts, including post-tensioning grout.
 
 (ii) Sulphate Content
 
 The sulphate content of concrete as placed, expressed as the percentage by mass of acid-soluble SO3 to the total cementitious material in the concrete mix shall not be greater than 5%.
 
 Notwithstanding the requirements of this clause the sulphate content for steam and heat accelerated cured concrete, expressed as the percentage by mass of acid-soluble SO3 to the total cementitious material in the concrete mix shall not be greater than 4%.
 
 Sulphate and chloride-ion content shall be determined by testing of hardened concrete in accordance with AS 1012.20.
 Table 610.072
 
 Concrete Members
 
 Exposure Concrete W/C Ratio
 
 Classification Grade
 
 (max)
 
 Proportioning of Cementitious Material (% mass) in concrete mixes
 
 Piles
 
 C
 
 Fender/keeper walls
 
 Wing walls
 
 Head walls
 
 Above Deck (Parapets etc)
 
 Bases slabs
 
 Pile Caps
 
 C
 
 Pier Columns
 
 Pier Crossheads
 
 Abutment Crossheads
 
 VR450 VR470
 
 0.40 0.36
 
  90% GP/ 10% SF; or
  Higher replacement levels of: - at least 30% FA; or - 30%GP / 60% Slag / 10% SF; or - 65% Slag / 35% GP
 
 Deck slab Approach slab
 
 B2
 
 VR400
 
 0.45
 
 Moderate replacement levels in
 
 accordance with Clause 610.07(f)
 
 Beams Crown Units
 
 C
 
 VR470
 
 0.36
 
 90% GP / 10% SF; or
 
 80% GP / 20% FA
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 7 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (l) Testing and Acceptance of Concrete Mix Design on the Basis of 28 Day VPV Value
 Test cylinders shall be cured in accordance with AS 1012. A minimum of 2 cylinders per sample per trial mix shall be taken. Each cylinder shall be tested for VPV at 28 days in accordance with test method AS 1012.21. The specification will be satisfied if the VPV value for each sample, as determined from the average value of the test cylinders, is not greater than the specified maximum 28 day VPV value in Table 610.061.
 Should the VPV value of any one sample representing the concrete exceed the specified maximum 28 day VPV value as shown in Table 610.061, the Contractor shall take steps to modify the concrete mix design and re-test to ensure that the maximum specified VPV value is not exceeded.
 (m) Mix Design for Self Compacting Concrete (SCC)
 The mix design requirements for SCC shall be as specified in this clause and Clause 610.13(b), except that the nominated slump requirements as stated in Clause 610.07(b)(v) shall not apply for SCC.
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.07(b), mix design details of SCC shall include the nominated slump flow, T500 (measure of viscosity) and passing ability which shall comply with the requirements for SCC given in Table 610.131.
 Notwithstanding the requirements of Clause 610.07(f), higher amounts of fly ash and slag may be used in SCC mixes where further optimisation of the mix is required to comply with this section, including the required cohesiveness, workability, flowability and selfcompactability of the concrete, without segregation.
 SCC shall be used only for the manufacture of precast concrete members and the construction of bored piles as specified in Clause 610.18(c).
 610.08 CEMENT, FLY ASH, SLAG AND AMORPHOUS SILICA
 (a) Cement
 Cement shall comply with the requirements of AS 3972 and ATIC-SPEC SP43. Cement per batch of concrete shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand, type and grind. Cement more than 3 months old shall not be used in the Works unless it is re-tested to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of AS 3972 and ATIC-SPEC SP43.
 (b) Fly Ash, Slag and Amorphous Silica
 Fly Ash, Slag and Amorphous Silica shall comply with the requirements of AS 3582.1, AS 3582.2 and AS 3582.3 respectively and ATIC-SPEC SP43 and shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand, type and fineness.
 (c) Pre-Registration and Testing of Cementitious Materials
 Cementitious materials used in the works shall be pre-registered under the Cementitious Material Registration Scheme (CMRS) in accordance with ATIC-SPEC SP43.
 The CMRS registration number(s) for the cementitious material(s) used in the Works shall be submitted as part of the concrete mix design review as specified in Clause 610.07.
 In addition to the information required as part of routine quality control, NATA endorsed analytical test data demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this section shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent.
 Summaries of cementitious material test data shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent. The data shall be traceable to the concrete supplier's batching plant(s).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 8 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 610.09 WATER
 The quality of water to be used in the concrete mix and for the curing of concrete shall comply with the requirements of Clause 2.4 of AS 1379. However, the amounts of chloride in the water shall be not greater than 0.03%.
 In addition, recycled water used in the concrete mix shall have total dissolved solids of not greater than 1700 milligrams per litre.
 Sources of recycled water containing differing levels or other contaminants shall be subject to approval by the Superintendent on the basis of predetermined test results and evidence of previous performance.
 Recycled or non-potable water shall be sampled and tested as a minimum at six monthly intervals to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this clause and AS 1379.
 610.10 CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES
 Chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of AS 1478 unless otherwise specified in this section. They shall be used in accordance with the requirements of Clause 2.5 of AS 1379 and the manufacturer's recommended method of use and shall not reduce the strength of concrete below that specified. Chemical admixtures shall be accurately measured by means of dispensers which are subject to regular maintenance and are calibrated as a minimum at three monthly intervals.
 Chemical admixtures shall not contain calcium chloride, calcium formate, chlorine, sulphur, sulphides or sulphites. Where two or more chemical admixtures are proposed for incorporation in a concrete mix, their compatibility shall be certified by the manufacturers.
 Air entraining admixtures shall not be used unless approved by the Superintendent.
 Where the use of air entraining admixture is approved, the Contractor shall determine the air content of the freshly mixed concrete at the point of discharge in accordance with AS 1012.4 and Clause 5.4 of AS 1379, and it shall not exceed the nominal value of 5%.
 The concrete represented by a sample taken in accordance with Clause 610.16 shall be deemed to comply with the approved air content if the measured air content is within 1.5% of the approved air content.
 610.11 AGGREGATES
 (a) General
 Fine and coarse aggregate for concrete shall comply with the requirements of AS 2758.1.
 The maximum amount of water absorption for fine aggregate, coarse aggregate, combined coarse aggregate and combined fine aggregate shall not exceed 2.5%.
 Aggregates shall be stored in such a manner that they will not segregate, become contaminated by foreign matter, or become intermixed. Stockpiles shall be arranged to prevent entry of adjacent surface or ground water and allow free drainage of rain water.
 (b) Fine Aggregate
 (i) Description
 The fine aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, durable, naturally occurring sands, or a combination of naturally occurring sands and manufactured sands, and shall be free from clay, dust, lumps, soft or flaky particles, shale, salt, alkali, organic matter, soil or other deleterious substances. Any manufactured sands used as fine aggregate shall be crushed from rock that produces aggregate complying with the requirements of Clause 610.11. Manufactured sands produced from any igneous or metamorphic rock shall have a Degradation Factor - Crusher Fines of not less than 60.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 9 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 A maximum of 25% of manufactured sand from a source approved by the Superintendent will be permitted.
 Consideration may be given by the Superintendent to approve the use of up to a maximum of 50% of manufactured sand if objective documented evidence is provided that concrete made with such higher amount of manufactured sand complies with all other requirements of this section both in the fresh and hardened state, including evidence of acceptable performance regarding tendency for segregation, bleeding, plastic shrinkage, satisfactory compaction and finishing properties.
 
 (ii) Testing for Impurities
 Fine aggregate shall be tested for impurities in accordance with AS 1141.
 The clay and fine silt levels of natural sands shall be monitored as a routine quality control measure and records shall be available for review by the Superintendent. Action shall be taken where levels exceed normal consistency limits derived from routine quality control testing.
 
 (iii) Grading of Fine Aggregate
 
 Fine aggregate shall be uniformly graded and shall comply with the limits in Table 610.111 when tested with standard sieves.
 
 If required fine aggregates can be combined in such proportions that the resulting fine aggregate mix shall comply with the grading requirements.
 Table 610.111
 
 Sieve Size Percentage Passing
 
 AS (mm)
 
 (by mass)
 
 9.5
 
 100
 
 4.75
 
 90 - 100
 
 2.36
 
 75 - 100
 
 1.18
 
 50 - 90
 
 0.6
 
 30 - 70
 
 0.3
 
 10 - 35
 
 0.15
 
 2 - 10
 
 0.075
 
 0-3
 
 (iv) Consistency of Grading
 The grading of fine aggregate shall not deviate from the submitted grading by more than 5%.
 Consideration may be given by the Superintendent to approve the use of fine aggregate with grading outside the specified limits if objective documented evidence is provided that concrete made with such fine aggregate grading complies with all other requirements of this section both in the fresh and hardened state, including evidence of acceptable performance regarding tendency for segregation, bleeding, plastic shrinkage, satisfactory compaction and finishing properties.
 (c) Source Rock
 Source rock shall comply with the requirements of Section 801.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 10 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (d) Coarse Aggregate
 
 (i) Description
 
 Coarse aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, durable angular rock fragments of uniform quality. It shall be free from clay, clay lumps, salt, organic matter or other substances deleterious to concrete or steel.
 
 (ii) Testing Requirements for Coarse Aggregate.
 
 Coarse aggregate shall not contain:
 
 (1) more than 5% by mass of unsound rock; or
 
 (2) more than 10% total by mass of unsound rock plus marginal rock. The flakiness index of the coarse aggregate shall not exceed 35%.
 
 (iii) Grading of Coarse Aggregate
 
 Coarse aggregate size ranges, when tested by means of standard sieves, shall have a maximum nominal size between 10 and 20 mm and shall comply with the requirements of AS 2758.1.
 
 (iv) Effective Size of Coarse Aggregate
 
 Concrete in various parts of the structure shall contain coarse aggregate with the following effective maximum sizes:
 
 Joint and pedestal concrete 14 mm
 
 Precast concrete
 
 14 mm for minimum cover of 25 mm 20 mm for minimum cover greater than 25 mm
 
 All other concrete
 
 20 mm
 
 The effective minimum size will be 10 mm for crushed material and 5 mm for rounded materials.
 
 (v) Use of Pebble Aggregate
 
 Notwithstanding the requirements of Clause 610.11(d) and Section 801, pebble aggregate may be used in the manufacture of structural concrete including concrete intended for use in pre-stressed and post-tensioned components subject to the following requirements:
 
 (1) where the LA of pebble aggregate or blended aggregate containing pebbles is greater than 35 but equal to or less than 45 the Wet and Dry Strength variation shall be equal to or less than 25 and the Sodium Sulphate Soundness shall be equal to or less than 8;
 (2) pebble aggregate or blended aggregate containing pebbles with an LA greater than 45 shall not be used in the works;
 (3) the minimum frequency of testing for Wet and Dry Strength and Sodium Sulphate Soundness shall be in accordance with the requirements of Table 610.121
 
 (e) Alkali Aggregate Reactivity
 Unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent, all aggregates shall be assessed and tested for alkali reactivity as follows:
 (i) Petrographic Examination
 Aggregates shall be assessed for any unstable silica minerals by petrographic examination in accordance with ASTM Test Method C295; and
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 11 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (ii) Potential Alkali Silica Reactivity
 The potential alkali silica reactivity of the coarse and fine aggregates shall be determined using either the VicRoads accelerated mortar bar test method RC 376.03 or the VicRoads concrete prism test method RC 376.04 as described in the VicRoads Code of Practice RC 500.16.
 (1) Accelerated Mortar Bar Test Method (RC 376.03)
 Coarse and fine aggregates shall be deemed to be non-reactive if the average expansion of the mortar bars made with the proposed aggregates and General Purpose portland cement Type GP does not exceed 0.1% at 21 days in the case of coarse aggregates and 0.15% at 21 days in the case of fine aggregates. Individual results shall not differ from the mean by more than 15%.
 Should the average expansion of the mortar bars exceed 0.1% at 21 days in the case of coarse aggregates and 0.15% at 21 days in the case of fine aggregates, the aggregates will be classed as reactive and either new aggregates shall be proposed for use and re-tested for compliance, or if it is proposed to use aggregates that have been classed as reactive, all of the following requirements shall be satisfied:
  the concrete mix be designed such that the alkali content does not exceed 2.8 kg/m3 (Na2O equivalent);
  a blended cement be used in the concrete mix that satisfies the minimum requirements of Table 610.112. Concrete mixes containing the minimum proportions of supplementary cementitious material as shown in Table 610.112 shall be deemed to comply with this clause.
 (2) Concrete Prism Test Method (RC 376.04)
 Aggregates shall be classified reactive when the average expansion at 12 months is greater than 0.03%, and non reactive when it is equal to or less than 0.03%.
 Aggregates classified as reactive by the concrete prism test method in a concrete mix design, shall not be used in that particular concrete mix design. Alternative aggregates and/or alternative concrete mix designs shall be used subject to compliance with the requirements of this specification.
 
 Table 610.112
 
 Supplementary cementitious material
 Fly Ash Slag Amorphous Silica Fly ash + Slag Fly Ash+ Amorphous Silica Slag + Amorphous silica
 
 Minimum proportion of supplementary cementitious material in single combination with portland cement in the concrete mix to mitigate alkali
 aggregate reactivity (%)
 
 Minimum proportion of supplementary cementitious material in double combination with portland cement in the concrete mix to mitigate alkali aggregate
 reactivity (%)
 Fly Ash Slag Amorphous Silica
 
 20
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 50
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 8
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 15
 
 15
 
 -
 
 -
 
 15
 
 -
 
 5
 
 -
 
 -
 
 40
 
 5
 
 Where blended aggregates are used, the aggregates from different sources shall be tested individually.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 12 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Notwithstanding the requirements of this clause when fine and coarse aggregates are procured from the same source, only one alkali silica reactivity evaluation per source shall be undertaken.
 Any proposed blended cement deviations from the minimum blended cement requirements of Table 610.112 shall demonstrate compliance with both the maximum mortar bar and concrete prism expansion limits stated in this clause, and as determined by both the VicRoads accelerated mortar bar test method RC 376.03 and the VicRoads concrete prism test method RC 376.04.
 
 610.12 MINIMUM TESTING REQUIREMENTS FOR AGGREGATES
 Aggregates shall be tested at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that concrete complies with the specified requirements. The frequency shall not be less than that shown in Table 610.121. Where the Contractor has implemented a system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that a lower frequency can assure the quality of the product, the Superintendent may agree to a lower frequency than that shown in Table 610.121.
 
 Table 610.121 Test
 Grading of Fine Aggregates
 Grading of Coarse Aggregates
 Water Absorption of Fine and Coarse Aggregates Unsound Rock Content
 Flakiness Index of Coarse Aggregate 10 mm and Larger Degradation Factor of Crusher Fines Organic Impurities other than sugar Alkali Reactivity of Aggregate Sources Wet and Dry Strength and Sodium Sulphate Soundness for Pebble Aggregates
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing On each day one per 500 tonne or part thereof On each week one per 1500 tonne or part thereof At 3 monthly intervals
 On each day one per 500 tonne or part thereof At monthly intervals
 At monthly intervals At monthly intervals At 3 yearly intervals At 3 monthly intervals
 
 610.13 MANUFACTURE AND DELIVERY OF PREMIXED CONCRETE
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the manufacture and delivery of all concrete which shall comply with the approved or registered concrete mix design and the requirements of AS 1379.
 The minimum quantity of a load of premixed concrete in the mixer or agitator delivered to site shall be 1 m3. The quantity of concrete delivered in any mixer or agitator shall not exceed the rated capacity of the agitator drum.
 Concrete shall not be mixed when the air temperature is lower than 5C or greater than 35C.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 13 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Water may be added to the freshly mixed concrete prior to commencement of discharge provided no more than 60 minutes have elapsed from the time of adding cement to the aggregate and a means of accurately measuring the volume of water is available to ensure that the maximum design amount of water and the agreed maximum W/C ratio are not exceeded. In addition, concrete samples shall be taken after the water has been added, in accordance with Clause 610.16(b). The consistency of the concrete shall be measured by a slump test after the water has been added, in accordance with Clause 610.16(c).
 No water shall be added after the commencement of discharge of concrete.
 Concrete which has begun to stiffen shall not be used in the works.
 Concrete which has been dried-out after leaving the mixing plant shall not be used in the works. Notwithstanding this requirement concrete may be dried-out after leaving the mixing plant provided the site of intended discharge is located within a close proximity to the mixing plant, to ensure the maximum discharge time of 60 minutes as stated in Clause 610.13(f) from the time of original mixing of the concrete is not exceeded and quality documentation is provided to verify that the affected load of concrete fully complies with this section.
 Prior to the discharge of concrete at the site, the mixer or agitator shall be operated at mixing speed until the concrete achieves the required uniformity but for not less than a period of three minutes. Where superplasticisers or other admixtures are added to the concrete on site, the concrete shall be mixed for a period of not less than five minutes prior to the discharge at the site
 
 (b) Self Compacting Concrete (SCC)
 
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.07, SCC shall incorporate the various cementitious materials, coarse and fine aggregate and any additional fine materials, water and chemical admixtures in proportions to achieve the rheological characteristics of flow and self-compaction. SCC shall be produced using High Range Polycarboxylate Type Water Reducers which include a viscosity modifying capability that impart psuedoplastic or thixotropic behaviour upon the concrete in order to inhibit segregation.
 
 Conventional superplasticisers may be used provided a viscosity modifying admixture is also used and it is clearly demonstrated that the required flow is being achieved without segregation.
 
 SCC shall not be vibrated or subjected to any physical disturbance after deposition.
 
 The slump flow, T500 time (measure of viscosity) and passing ability of the self compacting concrete (SCC) shall be determined in accordance with the VicRoads Slump Flow and J-Ring test method RC 252.01 as described in the VicRoads Code of Practice RC 500.16. The slump flow, T500 time and passing ability of the SCC shall comply with the requirements of Table 610.131.
 
 Sampling and testing for SCC shall be in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.16(n).
 Table 610.131
 
 Properties of SCC
 
 Measurement
 
 Observations
 
 Slump Flow
 T500 time (measure of viscosity) Passing Ability
 
 550  750 mm spread
 
 The aggregate shall be evenly distributed throughout the concrete paste within the spread and shall not exhibit signs of segregation
 
 Achieve a spread of The final spread shall not exceed 750 mm in 500 mm within 2 to 5 diameter seconds
 
  10 mm
 
 The concrete shall not exhibit signs of segregation
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 14 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Highly Workable Concrete
 Highly workable concrete shall be superplastisised with a nominated slump of between 160 mm and 220 mm and shall be compacted in accordance with this section. Highly workable concrete placed under water shall contain an anti-dispersing admixture.
 Sampling and testing for highly workable concrete shall be in accordance with Clause 610.16, including the requirements for superplasticised concrete as stated in Clause 610.16(c).
 (d) Moisture Content of Aggregates
 The moisture content of the fine and coarse aggregates shall be determined prior to concrete production for the day and whenever conditions change or fresh aggregates are delivered. Corresponding corrections shall be made to the mass of all aggregates and the volume of water used in the mix.
 The moisture content of the fine and coarse aggregates shall be determined to constant mass in accordance with the VicRoads aggregate moisture content test method RC 253.01 as described in the VicRoads Code of Practice RC 500.16. Moisture meters or other equivalent devices may also be used provided they are calibrated as a minimum, on a monthly basis.
 (e) Delivery Docket
 In addition to the information required by Clause 1.7.3 of AS 1379 the following information shall also be recorded on the delivery docket:
 (i) the total water in the batch, including (1) the moisture content of both fine and coarse aggregates as specified in Clause 610.13(d) (2) batch water (3) water added at the slump stand (4) total amount of water permitted to be added on site (5) water added on site before commencement of discharge, including water used to wash down the mixing blades of the mixer or agitator;
 (ii) cement brand and type, including (1) proportions of components (by mass) (2) total mass of cement;
 (iii) chemical admixtures, including (1) types (2) amounts;
 (iv) slumps, including (1) nominated slump (2) estimated slump (3) measured slump
 (v) any other additions to a batch;
 (vi) the unique identification number allocated to the concrete mix design in accordance with Clause 610.07(b)(xiii).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 15 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) Period for Completion of Discharge Concrete shall be placed and compacted within 60 minutes of the commencement of mixing. This time may be extended beyond the 60 minutes provided a hydration control admixture is added to the concrete mix to delay the hydration process and provided the concrete complies with the specified requirements. Where a hydration control admixture is added to the concrete mix to delay hydration the stated extended discharge time shall not be exceeded. Concrete shall not be incorporated into the works if its consistency is outside the acceptable limits as specified in Clause 610.16(c).
 (g) Water Left in the Mixer or Agitator Water left in the mixer or agitator from the previous load shall be discharged prior to reloading new concrete in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.1.3(c)(ii) `water in mixing chamber' of AS 1379 and in order to ensure that the maximum W/C ratio is not exceeded in accordance with requirements of this section. For the purposes of verification of this requirement quality documentation shall be signed and dated by the batcher of the mixing plant.
 (h) Addition of Water at the Slump Stand Addition of water to the mixed batch of concrete at the slump stand shall be undertaken in a disciplined manner, such that slump stand water meters are initially zeroed and actual amounts of water added into the agitator drum are accurately recorded. Only hoses connected to a functioning and accurately calibrated slump stand water meter shall be used to add water to the freshly mixed concrete in the agitator drum. Records of actual amounts of water added into the agitator drum at the slump stand shall be available for review by the Superintendent.
 (i) Calibration of weighing and metering equipment All batch plant weighing and all water metering equipment shall be subject to regular maintenance and independently calibrated by an accredited organisation, as a minimum at three monthly intervals. Chemical dispensers shall be calibrated as a minimum at three monthly intervals. The accuracy of all weighing and metering equipment shall comply with the requirements of Section 3 of AS 1379.
 610.14 STAND-BY MIXING PLANT
 The Contractor shall arrange for alternative supplies of concrete from stand-by mixing plant(s) capable of being operated immediately in case of breakdown, together with adequate supplies of cementitious material, fine and coarse aggregates for an approved compatible mix(es).
 Hand mixing will not be permitted.
 610.15 TRACEABILITY OF CONCRETE
 All concrete batches (truckloads) used in the works shall be traceable from the batch plant to its general location in the structure by a unique identification number.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 16 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 610.16 CONCRETE CONTROL, SAMPLING AND TESTING
 
 (a) General
 All concrete shall be sampled and tested in accordance with AS 1012 unless otherwise specified in this section.
 Each sample of concrete shall be tested for compressive strength, slump, air entrainment (when required), slump flow, T500 time and passing ability (when SCC is used), VPV value, drying shrinkage and soluble salts (at concrete mix design stage), as specified in this section.
 
 (b) Frequency of Sampling and Testing
 Whenever concrete is being cast in a structural element or a portion of it in one continuous casting operation, the minimum number of test samples shall be in accordance with Table 610.161.
 A continuous casting operation is one in which the maximum time interval between the end of discharge of one truckload of concrete and the beginning of discharge of the next truckload does not exceed 45 minutes.
 Whenever a group of structural elements is being cast in separate operations, where the time interval between the end of discharge of one truckload of concrete and the beginning of discharge of the next truckload exceeds 45 minutes, the minimum number of test samples shall be one (1) per truckload of concrete
 Samples shall be taken at the point of discharge prior to placement in a random and representative manner and at approximately equal portions of the volume of concrete cast in one continuous operation. Unless otherwise specified in this section or directed by the Superintendent, no sampling shall be undertaken from consecutive truckloads of concrete cast in one continuous operation.
 
 Table 610.161
 Volume Cast in One Continuous
 Operation (cubic metre)
 0 to 10
 10 to 25
 25 to 50
 50 to 100
 
 Minimum Number of
 Samples
 1 2 3 4
 
 For each additional 50 m one additional sample shall be taken.
 The Contractor shall develop and implement a site sampling and testing procedure in accordance with the minimum frequency requirements of this section for assurance of concrete quality, and shall ensure that records are available for review by the Superintendent.
 
 (c) Consistency
 The consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of a concrete sample in accordance with AS 1012.3 and Clause 5.2 of AS 1379 except as specified below.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 17 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 For concrete containing a superplasticiser, the consistency of all batches of concrete after the addition of the superplasticiser shall be determined by a slump test of a concrete sample. Testing of every batch shall continue until five consecutive batches of concrete have achieved the specified requirements. After satisfying this requirement, the Contractor may then make a submission to the Superintendent for agreement to reduce the frequency of slump testing of superplasticised concrete to be in accordance with Table 610.161, provided a high level of process control, including a high level of control of total water content in the mix in accordance with specified requirements, is supported with objective documented evidence.
 If the Contractor has satisfied the above initial testing requirement and is slump testing superplasticised concrete at the frequency in Table 610.161 and any batch fails to achieve the specified standard, the Contractor shall test all subsequent batches of superplasticised concrete until three consecutive batches have achieved the specified standard, at which time the frequency of slump testing may again be reduced to the minimum frequency requirements of Table 610.161.
 For the purpose of determining the actual slump of superplasticised concrete and the required testing parameters for SCC as stated in Clause 610.13(b) and Clause 610.16(n), the discharge of the first 0.2 m3 of concrete prior to taking the test sample shall not be required.
 The concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated mix design slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in Table 5.1 of Clause 5.2 of AS 1379.
 If the measured slump is not within the limits given in Table 5.1 of Clause 5.2 of AS 1379, one repeat test shall be made immediately from another portion of the same sample. If the value obtained from the repeat test falls within the limits given in Table 5.1 of Clause 5.2 of AS 1379, the concrete represented by the sample shall be deemed to comply with the appropriate nominated mix design slump, otherwise it shall be rejected.
 The slump of the concrete shall be checked and recorded within 30 minutes of adding cement to the aggregate, or immediately prior to discharge when the actual haul time exceeds 30 minutes and/or when water is added to the mixed batch in accordance with Clause 610.13(a).
 Concrete used for the slump test and the required testing for SCC shall not be re-used to make concrete test cylinders.
 Each batch (truckload) of concrete delivered to site shall be visually inspected to ensure consistency of concrete supply, and the estimated slump shall be recorded on the identification certificate for the batch. Both the visual inspection and slump estimate shall be carried out prior to the addition of any water which may be added on site and prior to any addition of a superplasticiser.
 (d) Test Cylinders for Compressive Strength
 Each sample of concrete for standard compression tests shall comprise a minimum number of:
 (i) 3 cylinders for reinforced and prestressed pre-tensioned concrete;
 (ii) 3 or 5 cylinders for prestressed post-tensioned concrete when application of the post-tensioning force will be after or before 28 days respectively.
 A minimum of 2 cylinders per sample shall be tested at 28 days.
 For all concrete, a minimum of 1 cylinder per sample shall be tested at 7 days. This requirement shall not apply for pre-tensioned concrete.
 For prestressed pre-tensioned concrete, a minimum of 1 cylinder per sample shall be tested prior to the application of the pre-tensioning force.
 For prestressed post-tensioned concrete, a minimum of 2 cylinders per sample shall be tested prior to the application of the post-tensioning force.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 18 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (e) Curing of Test Cylinders
 Test cylinders shall be cured in accordance with AS 1012. Cylinders shall be transported to the testing laboratory in moisture proof containers.
 For steam or radiant heat cured components test cylinders shall be cured with the components or in the test cylinder heating box respectively for the duration of the curing cycle as specified in Clause 610.23(g) and Clause 610.23(h). Following the steam curing cycle curing of the cylinders shall continue in accordance with the requirements of AS 1012.
 (f) Compression Testing Prior to Application of Prestress
 For post-tensioned concrete components, the post-tensioning force shall only be applied when two cylinders per sample are tested and the average compressive strength of these cylinders is equal to or greater than the specified compressive strength as shown on the drawings, and the lower cylinder result is greater than 90% of the specified compressive strength.
 For pre-tensioned concrete component(s) the pre-tensioning force shall only be applied when each cylinder per sample tested has achieved the specified compressive strength as shown on the drawings.
 In the event that the above requirements are not satisfied, application of prestress shall be deferred until such time as the compressive strength of an additional cylinder per sample achieves the specified compressive strength for pre-tensioned concrete or the cylinders tested at 28 days satisfy the requirements of Clause 610.16(g) for post-tensioned concrete.
 (g) Testing and Acceptance of Concrete on the Basis of 28 Day Compressive Strength
 (i) Test Cylinders
 A minimum of two cylinders per sample shall be tested at 28 days after casting. The specification will be satisfied if the compressive strength of each sample, as determined from the average value of the test cylinders, is not less than the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength and provided that the compressive strength of any cylinder in each sample is not less than 90% of the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength.
 Should the strength of any one sample representing the concrete fall short of the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength as shown in Table 610.051, the concrete represented by that sample may be rejected or the Contractor may elect to test concrete cores subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 Non-destructive tests may be used to determine the in-situ strength of suspect concrete subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 (ii) Test Cores
 Where required by the Superintendent, test cores shall be cut from the completed structural element, portion of element or group of elements represented by the test cylinder sample(s). A minimum of three cores per sample shall be tested. All cores shall be clearly labelled to identify them with the structural element and location they represent.
 The dimensions and testing of the concrete cores shall be in accordance with AS 1012.14. Testing shall be undertaken to ensure that the core locations are remote from existing steel reinforcement. Where cores are cut from concrete decks and slabs, core locations shall be remote from wheel paths. Cores containing steel reinforcement shall not be tested.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 19 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Core locations shall be submitted for approval by the Superintendent.
 Cores shall not be cut from prestressed concrete after the prestressing force has been applied or transferred to the concrete, unless the proposed coring is certified by the proof engineer. The certification shall state that the proposed coring will not be detrimental to the prestressed concrete member.
 The core holes shall be cleaned and repaired with a shrinkage compensating polymer modified cementitious repair material in accordance with the requirements of Section 689. The exposed surface of the repaired hole shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete.
 The specification will be satisfied if the compressive strength of each sample, as determined from the average value of the test cores, is not less than the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength and provided that the compressive strength of any core in each sample is not less than 90% of the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength.
 Should the strength of any one sample representing the concrete fall short of the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength as shown in Table 610.051, the concrete represented by that sample may be rejected.
 (h) Testing and Acceptance of Sprayed Concrete on the Basis of 28 Day VPV Value
 A minimum of two cores per sample shall be cut from the sprayed concrete test panels and permanent sprayed concrete and tested at 28 days at the minimum specified sampling frequency. Each core shall be 75 mm diameter and a minimum of 150 mm long, cut transversely into two equal slices and tested for VPV at 28 days in accordance with test method AS 1012.21. The VPV value for each core shall be determined from the average value of the test slices. The specification will be satisfied if the VPV value for each sample, as determined from the average value of the test cores, is not larger than the specified maximum VPV values at 28 days as shown in Table 610.061.
 (i) Testing and Acceptance of Concrete Mix Design on the Basis of 3, 7 and 28 Day Compressive Strengths
 A minimum of two cylinders per sample per trial mix shall be tested. The specification will be satisfied if the compressive strength of each sample, as determined from the average value of the test cylinders, is not less than the specified minimum 3, 7 and 28 day compressive strengths and provided that the compressive strength of any cylinder in each sample is not less than 90% of the specified minimum 3, 7 and 28 day compressive strengths.
 Should the strength of any one sample representing the concrete fall short of the specified minimum 3, 7 and 28 day compressive strengths as shown in Table 610.051, the Contractor shall take steps to modify the concrete mix design and re-test to ensure that the specified minimum compressive strengths have been achieved.
 (j) Testing and Acceptance of Non-Conforming Concrete
 In the event that any of the specified requirements of this section can not be clearly demonstrated to have been satisfied, the Contractor shall undertake appropriate measures to resolve the non-conformance(s) to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 The Superintendent may at his discretion require additional VPV testing and compressive strength testing to be undertaken from the remainder of the fresh concrete supply or the in situ hardened concrete or both, as described below.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 20 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (i) Fresh Concrete
 In addition to the compressive strength requirements as specified in this section, additional samples of concrete as detailed in Clause 610.16(b) and Table 610.161 of at least two cylinders shall be tested for VPV at 28 days, in accordance with test method AS 1012.21. The specification will be satisfied if the VPV value for each sample, as determined from the average value of the additional test cylinders, does not exceed the specified maximum 28 day VPV value in Table 610.061.
 Should the VPV value of any one sample representing the concrete exceed the specified maximum 28 day VPV value as shown in Table 610.061, the Contractor shall modify the concrete mix design and undertake other measures as required at its own expense, to satisfy the specification requirements for subsequent concrete supply by further sampling and testing. The hardened concrete represented by the samples shall be subject to rejection, rectification by the Contractor, the requirements as described below, or as determined by the Superintendent.
 (ii) Hardened Concrete
 In addition to the requirements of Clause 610.16(g)(ii) for compressive strength of test cores , a minimum of two cores per sample shall be cut from the relevant completed structural element, portion of element or group of elements represented by a set of test cylinder sample(s) and tested at 28 days. Each core shall be 75 mm diameter x 150 mm long, cut transversely into two equal slices and tested for VPV at 28 days in accordance with test method AS 1012.21. The VPV value for each core shall be determined from the average value of the test slices.
 For elements where the thickness is less than 150 mm the core length shall be the full thickness of the element. The specification will be satisfied if the VPV value for each sample, as determined from the average value of the test cores, does not exceed the specified maximum VPV value at 28 days as shown in Table 610.061.
 All cores shall be clearly labelled to identify them with the structural element and location they represent. Testing shall be undertaken to ensure that the core locations are remote from the existing steel reinforcement. Where cores are cut from concrete decks and slabs, core locations shall be remote from wheel paths. Cores containing steel reinforcement shall not be tested.
 Core locations shall be submitted for approval by the Superintendent.
 For coring from prestressed concrete the requirements of Clause 610.16 shall be satisfied.
 Where the VPV value of any one sample representing the concrete exceeds the specified maximum 28 day VPV value as shown in Table 610.061, the Contractor shall carry out rectification works. These works shall achieve the specified level of durability, otherwise the concrete represented by that sample may be rejected.
 Non-destructive tests may be used to investigate non-conforming concrete of observed or suspect quality subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 (k) Testing and Acceptance of Concrete on the Basis of 28 Day VPV Value
 Notwithstanding the requirements of Clause 610.16(j), where a concrete pour exceeds 100 m3 a sample consisting of at least two cylinders shall be sampled at the point of discharge and tested for VPV at 28 days, in accordance with test method AS 1012.21.
 For concrete structures located in marine and other saline environments or which are subject to sulphate and chemical attack at least two cylinders per sample shall be tested for VPV at 28 days as detailed in Clause 610.16(b) and Table 610.161.
 Should the VPV value of any one sample representing the concrete exceed the specified maximum 28 day VPV value as shown in Table 610.061, the concrete represented by that sample and subsequent concrete supply shall be subject to the requirements of Clause 610.16(j) for testing and acceptance of non-conforming concrete.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 21 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (l) Determination of early age compressive strength
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.16(d), additional test cylinder(s) shall be taken for the assessment of early age compressive strength where early application of loading or early removal of formwork is proposed, or where concrete is to be placed over or adjacent to and connected with a previous section prior to achieving the minimum 7 day compressive strength.
 The Contractor shall nominate the total number of cylinder(s) per sample in excess of the minimum number of cylinders specified in Clause 610.16(d).
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.16(e), when additional test cylinder(s) per sample above the specified minimum number are taken to vary a requirement of this specification, such as early application of loading or early removal of formwork, the test cylinder(s) shall be cured with the concrete member under conditions no more favourable than the most unfavourable conditions for the portion of the concrete which the test cylinders represent.
 (m) Maturity Testing for Estimating the In Situ Strength of Concrete
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.16(d) and Clause 610.16(e) various types of maturity testing may be used to determine the early age in situ strength development of concrete over a required time period for the purpose of facilitating early formwork removal, lifting precast units out of moulds or early application of loading, subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 Based on the specific application, a proposed maturity method of assessing early in situ strength shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent. Each proposal shall be supported with a documented detailed methodology and documented evidence of previous performance including accuracy in determining the in situ strength development of concrete.
 The proposed method of maturity testing shall include:
 (i) the type of equipment to be used to monitor the in situ temperatures, or the control temperatures for Temperature Match Curing (TMC), to develop a maturity relationship (correlation between compressive strength and maturity) for the specific concrete mix and prevailing curing conditions;
 (ii) method of recording the time/temperature relationship including the type of data loggers;
 (iii) the period of monitoring;
 (iv) the proposed number and location of temperature sensors to be used which shall include as a minimum the interior and near surface of the concrete element.
 (n) Sampling and Testing for Self Compacting Concrete (SCC)
 Sampling and testing for SCC to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Table 610.131 shall be in accordance with Clause 610.16, except that the slump flow, T500 (measure of viscosity) and passing ability of SCC shall be sampled and tested at the same frequency as superplasticised concrete, as stated in Clause 610.16(c).
 When making test cylinders for SCC the test sample shall be placed into the cylinder moulds from a height not exceeding 100 mm from the top of the mould. The placing of the concrete into the moulds shall be done in one continuous motion. With the exception of light tapping of the sides of cylinder moulds with a plastic mallet, rodding or vibration shall not be applied to test cylinders made up of SCC.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 22 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 610.17 TEMPERATURE, EVAPORATION LIMITS AND CONCRETING OPERATIONS
 (a) General
 All freshly finished concrete surfaces shall be protected where required from the sun, wind or rain, until curing is implemented.
 Where extreme conditions of temperature, humidity, wind and/or rain are expected during and after placing the concrete, the Contractor shall implement special precautions to protect the concrete.
 The temperature of concrete, measured immediately prior to placing, shall not be less than 10C or greater than 32C.
 The Contractor shall minimise evaporative moisture losses from the freshly placed and unprotected concrete in accordance with the requirements of Clauses 610.17(e) and 610.17(f).
 (b) Hot Weather Concreting
 Concrete shall not be placed when the air temperature measured at the point of placement is above 35C.
 Steel formwork, reinforcing steel and any other steel surfaces that will come in contact with the concrete shall be cooled to below 32C by shading or spraying with water before the concrete is placed.
 For decks and slabs, the concrete surfaces shall be protected immediately after screeding and finishing operations are progressively completed in order to minimise evaporative moisture losses, until curing by one or a combination of the methods specified in Clause 610.23 is implemented.
 (c) Cold Weather Concreting
 Concrete shall not be placed in the works when the air temperature measured at the point of placement is below 5C.
 Concrete which has been damaged by frost as a result of failing to maintain the temperature of the concrete surface above 5C will be rejected.
 (d) Wet Weather Concreting
 The Contractor shall take measures to protect the freshly placed concrete from rain.
 Concrete affected by rain will be rejected.
 (e) Evaporation Limits for Concreting Operations
 The Contractor shall be responsible for measuring and recording the air temperature, relative humidity, concrete temperature and wind velocity (measured one metre above the as placed concrete) at the point of concrete placement from commencement of placing the concrete and continue until curing has commenced. This information shall be used in conjunction with Figure 610.171 to determine the rate of evaporation of water from the freshly placed and unprotected surface of the concrete. The rate of evaporation shall be monitored by the Contractor until such time as curing commences.
 When the value of the rate of evaporation as determined from Figure 610.171 exceeds 0.50 kg/m per hour the Contractor shall take precautions to minimise evaporative moisture losses such as the application of an aliphatic-alcohol based evaporative retarding compound or controlled fog spray.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 23 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth Figure 610.171- Evaporation of Water from Freshly Placed Concrete
 (f) Application of Evaporative Retarding Compound The evaporative retarding compound, when required, is to be applied immediately after initial screeding. The remaining finishing operations can be carried out after application of the compound. An evaporative retarding compound shall be used for concrete decks and slabs. Application of the evaporative retarding compound shall be implemented in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Details of the proposed evaporative retarding compound and its application procedure including minimum application rates, shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review not less than four weeks prior to the commencement of concreting works.
 610.18 PLACING AND COMPACTING CONCRETE (a) Placing  General
 The Contractor shall submit the concrete construction quality procedure and inspection and test plan(s) which demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Sections 610, 611, 613 and 614, for review by the Superintendent not less than 4 weeks prior to the placement of concrete.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 24 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 HP
 
 Concrete shall not be placed until:
 
 (i) the Contractor's concrete construction quality procedure and inspection and test plan(s) have been reviewed by the Superintendent;
 
 (ii) the evidence that the forms, reinforcement, any stressing materials and embedments conforming to the requirements of this specification and the drawings, has been reviewed by the Superintendent;
 
 (iii) all foreign material has been completely removed from the forms.
 
 Concrete shall be transported, handled and placed so as to prevent segregation, loss or leakage of materials.
 
 Concrete shall not be dropped freely from a height exceeding two metres. Where placing concrete would otherwise necessitate a drop exceeding two metres, suitable tremie pipes, chutes or other concreting devices shall be used to place the concrete to prevent segregation. Concrete shall not be moved horizontally by the use of vibrators.
 
 Concrete shall be supplied at an adequate rate in a continuous operation to ensure that all the concrete in the forms can be kept plastic until placed in its final position and compacted, and all temporarily exposed surfaces covered by and knit in with fresh concrete so that no cold joints are formed. Equipment and personnel shall be adequate to maintain the rate of concrete placement adopted.
 
 In continuous concrete pours the maximum time lag between truck loads on site shall not exceed 25 minutes.
 
 No strain shall be placed on any projecting reinforcing steel or embedment for a period of at least 12 hours following completion of concreting.
 
 For construction of deck slabs the fixed screed supports shall be placed parallel to the longitudinal centreline of the bridge.
 
 Concrete above deck shall not be placed until the deck formwork or the falsework for the span has been released and/or any post-tensioning and grouting operations are completed.
 
 Prior to placing concrete any absorbent surfaces including blinding concrete and construction joints shall be thoroughly moistened and excess free water shall be removed.
 
 (b) Pumping of Concrete
 Prior to commencement of placing concrete, the initial discharge of concrete shall be pumped to waste until a consistent workable mix is discharged. Aluminium pipes shall not be used for the delivery of concrete.
 
 (c) Placing Concrete in Bored Piles, Under Water and in Dry Bores
 The Contractor shall submit the procedure for placing concrete in bored piles, under water and in dry bores, for review by the Superintendent at least four weeks prior to concreting.
 Concrete shall not be placed in bored piles, under water or in a dry bore until the proposed method of placement of concrete has been approved by the Superintendent. The minimum concrete grade for concrete placed in bored piles, under water or in dry bores shall be VR400/40, in accordance with the requirements of this section. The proposed mix shall be either a self compacting concrete (SCC) or a highly workable concrete as specified in Clauses 610.13(b) and 610.13(c) respectively.
 Highly workable concrete shall be compacted in accordance with the requirements of this section.
 Placing of concrete in bored piles, underwater or in a dry bore shall be carried out by tremie methods in accordance with Section 606. Concrete shall not be placed in water which has a temperature less than 5C.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 25 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Compaction, Screeding and Finishing of Concrete
 (i) Compaction
 Care shall be taken to fill every part of the forms or excavations, to force the concrete under and around the reinforcement without displacing it, to work coarse aggregate back from the face, and to remove air bubbles and voids.
 Concrete shall be deposited in horizontal layers not more than 350 mm thick except in the manufacture of prestressed concrete elements. For prestressed elements the concrete shall be built up to the full depth of the section and the concrete face moved forward progressively.
 During and immediately after placing, the concrete shall be effectively compacted by vibrators of adequate size, number and frequency.
 Vibration shall be applied to the full depth of each layer and extended into the top 100 mm of the underlying layer. Vibration shall continue at each point until air bubbles cease to emerge from the concrete, then withdrawn slowly. Concrete shall not be vibrated to the point where segregation of the ingredients occurs.
 Where internal vibrators are used, they shall be inserted vertically at successive locations at spacings not exceeding the manufacturer's stated zone of influence, and shall not be allowed to rest on the steel reinforcement.
 Concrete decks or slabs shall be compacted by immersion vibrators and vibrating screeds such that uniform consolidation is achieved throughout the deck and slab area.
 Where approved by the Superintendent proprietary power vibrating screeds of suitable widths may be used in narrow or constricted areas or where required by the deck and slab layout, with each new vibrating run overlapping the previous one by a minimum of 300 mm, such that uniform consolidation is achieved throughout the deck and slab area.
 (ii) Screeding of Exposed Surfaces
 Immediately after placing and compaction, exposed surfaces other than decks and slabs shall be screeded off to the specified levels and finished with a wooden float to an even uniform surface. Construction joints shall be left rough in accordance with Clause 610.20.
 During screeding surplus concrete shall be maintained ahead of the screed to ensure full and uniform compaction to exposed concrete surfaces.
 Concrete deck and slab surfaces shall be screeded on a longitudinal direction using vibrating screeds on screeding guides. The screeding guides shall be accurately set and rigidly fixed in position. Guides shall be capable of sustaining construction loading without undue or permanent deflection.
 The Contractor shall submit its proposed method of compaction adjacent to screed guides, and its proposed method and timing of repairs at screed guide supports for review by the Superintendent.
 (iii) Finishing of Exposed Surfaces
 Final finishing of exposed concrete surfaces shall be carried out after all bleed water has been removed and the concrete has become sufficiently hard to support the finishing operation. Driers (i.e. dry sand, cement or stone dust) shall not be used to absorb free water.
 Finishing of concrete decks or slabs shall be effected with a power trowel fitted with rotating steel floats.
 Any drying cracks which appear prior to initial set and before or during finishing operations shall be immediately closed as required with either a wooden or steel float.
 Curing shall commence immediately following the progressive completion at any location of final finishing operations.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 26 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 610.19 CONCRETE CASTING SEQUENCE
 The casting sequence shall be as shown on the drawings or as specified in this specification.
 (a) Deck Casting Sequence The deck casting sequence shall be as shown on the drawings or as specified in this specification. At least seven days shall elapse between the casting of adjacent sections. The maximum deck casting length shall be 25 metres.
 (b) Box Girder or Voided Slab Casting Sequence The Contractor shall submit details of his proposed casting sequence and falsework for review by the Superintendent. Casting sequence details shall include the length of segments, the order of casting and whether segments are to be cast monolithically or in stages. Box girders or voided slabs shall be cast in longitudinal segments with a maximum segment length of 25 metres. At least seven days shall elapse between the casting of adjacent segments. Segments incorporating a transverse diaphragm shall be cast monolithically with the full cross section of the webs, floor and deck slab extending a distance of at least five metres from the face of the diaphragm. Segments which do not incorporate transverse diaphragms shall be cast monolithically with the full cross section of webs, floor and deck slab, or alternatively may be cast in two stages with a construction joint provided between the webs and the deck slab. If the latter method is adopted, the deck slab shall be cast not later than 14 calendar days after the casting of the webs and floor slab.
 610.20 CONSTRUCTION JOINTS AND BONDING OF NEW CONCRETE
 The location and details of construction joints shall be as shown on the drawings.
 The placing of concrete shall proceed continuously from joint to joint.
 Any point at which the placing of concrete has stopped and the concrete has taken its initial set shall be treated as a construction joint.
 Construction joints shall be perpendicular to the principal lines of stress, and in general shall not be located in regions of maximum bending or maximum shear.
 Where applicable, concrete in the existing structure shall be broken back as shown on the drawings. Any cracked or damaged concrete remaining after breaking back shall be removed and replaced with new concrete.
 Before placing new concrete against concrete which has set, the forms shall be re-tightened.
 Concrete against which new concrete is to be placed shall be roughened by removing all laitance and sufficient mortar to expose the coarse aggregate to a depth of 3 mm. The roughened surface shall be cleaned of foreign matter, laitance and loose or porous material. The surface shall be thoroughly moistened with water and any excess water removed immediately prior to placing of concrete.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 27 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 610.21 INSERTIONS AND GREASED JOINTS
 Abutting surfaces of concrete shall be separated by grease or other surface coatings or insertions of bituminous impregnated felt or fibreboard as shown on the drawings, so as to prevent the surfaces from bonding or binding together.
 Dowels shall be placed as shown on the drawings and prior to placing the surrounding concrete.
 610.22 CONTROL OF EARLY AGE THERMAL CRACKING OF LARGE AND RESTRAINED MEMBERS
 Measures shall be taken to control early age thermal cracking of concrete for large and restrained members including but not be limited to crossheads, diaphragms, columns, abutments, footings and pile caps where:
 (a) the least dimension of a member exceeds 750 mm; and
 (b) one or more faces of a concrete member is restrained by previously placed hardened concrete or by other external restraints and the cross-sectional area of the member is equal to or less than the cross-sectional area of the restraining element.
 Except where justified by analysis and testing, the temperature differential across the concrete member being constructed shall not exceed 20C during the period of curing. The Contractor shall implement special precautions to reduce differential temperature build-up prior to the temperature differential between the concrete core and that of the exposed concrete surface exceeds 20C.
 Thermocouples shall be placed at a range of positions within the large and restrained concrete member to determine the maximum temperature and differential temperature across the section of concrete. Thermocouples with an accuracy of 1C shall be cast into each large concrete member, located in the centre of the core and 25 mm below the exposed surface, and monitored at continuously regular intervals by data loggers until the temperature difference falls such that control measures are no longer required.
 The temperature data acquired and proposed control measures to reduce differential temperature within the specified limits shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent.
 Temperature differential monitoring shall be undertaken on at least one representative member from each type of large and restrained members, provided that any required control measures to reduce the differential temperature within the specified limits is adopted for the subsequent construction of members of the same type.
 The temperature of all concrete members following concrete placement shall not exceed 75C.
 610.23 CURING
 (a) General
 Curing of concrete shall be carried out using one or a combination of the methods as specified in Clauses 610.23(c), 610.23(d), 610.23(e), 610.23(f), 610.23(g) and 610.23(h).
 The curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed at any location and shall continue uninterrupted for not less than the periods specified in Table 610.231.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 28 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review, full details of the proposed methods of curing, as part of the concrete mix design submission, not less than four weeks prior to placement of concrete. The Contractor shall not proceed with the placement of concrete until the curing method(s) has been reviewed and approved by the Superintendent.
 Details submitted shall include the following information for the proposed methods of curing:
 (i) Water Curing - materials, method and timing of curing;
 (ii) Curing Compound - technical specification of the proposed curing compound including the timing, rate of application and method of removal (where required);
 (iii) Polyethylene Sheet - material and method of application, sealing and control;
 (iv) Maintaining Formwork in Place - timing, method of sealing the formwork and curing exposed surfaces;
 (v) Steam or Radiant Heat Curing - full details of control methods and proposed curing cycle.
 
 (b) Period of Curing
 
 The period of curing shall be not less than the number of days given in Table 610.231. Table 610.231
 
 Periods of Curing (excluding steam and radiant heat curing)
 
 Periods of Curing (days)
 
 Concrete Grade
 
 Exposure Classification
 
 Type of Cement
 
 Average Air Temperature During Curing
 
 10C to 17C Above 17C
 
 VR330/32
 
 A, B1
 
 GP
 
 7
 
 6
 
 GB
 
 9
 
 8
 
 VR400/40
 
 B2
 
 GP
 
 6
 
 5
 
 GB
 
 8
 
 7
 
 VR450/50
 
 C
 
 GP
 
 5
 
 5
 
 VR470/55
 
 GB
 
 7
 
 7
 
 For concrete decks and slabs, the periods of curing shall be extended by 2 days.
 
 Notes:
 
 1. Type of cement: GP - General purpose portland cement GB - General purpose blended cement
 2. When the average air temperature during the specified periods of curing falls below 10C, the periods of curing shall be extended by 2 days.
 3. Where a higher concrete grade is adopted than that shown for a particular exposure classification, the periods of curing for the higher concrete grade may be adopted.
 
 (c) Water Curing
 All surfaces of the concrete shall be kept moist for the specified periods of curing by continuous spraying, ponding, wet hessian, felt matting or sand blankets. Wet curing materials used on vertical surfaces shall be effectively wrapped during the whole curing period. The water used shall conform to the requirements of Clause 610.09.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 29 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Curing Compounds
 Prior to the use of curing compounds, full details of the proposed curing method shall be submitted to the Superintendent, including the time and rate of application, documented evidence of the effectiveness of the compound as a curing agent supported by test certificates from a NATA accredited laboratory and method of removal where required. The test certificates of compliance shall relate only to the formulation on which the tests were made and shall be valid for not more than three years from the date of issue.
 Curing compounds shall not be used on concrete decks or slabs, unless an aliphaticalcohol based evaporative retarding compound is also applied after initial screeding in accordance with Clause 610.17(f).
 PVA based curing compounds shall not be used.
 Curing compounds shall comply with AS 3799. Such compounds shall be pigmented sufficiently to allow visual inspection to ensure full application on the surface. The pigment shall not be visible fourteen days after application. Curing compounds shall not have a deleterious effect on the concrete or stain the surface of the concrete.
 The curing compound shall be applied by a pressurised sprayer to give a uniform cover. The sprayer shall incorporate a device for continuous agitation and mixing of the compound in its container during spraying.
 The curing compound shall be applied using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance, or at a rate of 0.2 litres/m2 per coat, whichever is the greater. The application rate shall be checked by calculating the amount of curing compound falling on felt mats, each approximately 0.25 m2 in area, placed on the concrete surface.
 Two coats shall be applied at the full rate.
 The time between the first and second coat shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation, or on the basis of a trial application.
 Curing compounds shall not be applied to construction joints unless the joint is to be roughened or sandblasted at a later date.
 Curing compounds shall not be applied to surfaces which are to be subsequently coated unless they are compatible with the coating, waterproofing or surfacing system or provision is made for removal of the compound from these surfaces prior to the application of the coating, waterproofing or surfacing system.
 The curing membranes shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing. Any damage to the curing membranes during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application.
 (e) Polyethylene Sheet
 Polyethylene sheet shall be of sufficient strength to withstand wind and any imposed foot traffic or physical loading. Torn or punctured sheeting shall not be used. Laps shall be 300 mm minimum and edges and laps shall be sealed by tape or held down by boards or other means. All edges and laps shall be sealed against evaporative moisture losses for the duration of curing. Water shall be sprayed under the sheeting at the edges and at laps on the day after placing concrete and at regular intervals to maintain moist conditions.
 Polyethylene sheet shall not be used on concrete decks or slabs unless used in conjunction with water curing.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 30 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) Curing by Maintaining Formwork in Place
 Where formwork is left in place to satisfy the formwork removal times as specified in Clause 610.25, or where formwork is left in place for the specified period of curing or part thereof, the exposed surfaces of the concrete shall be cured and the formwork shall be sealed against evaporative moisture losses for the duration of curing.
 Where formwork is removed prior to the completion of the curing period, curing shall recommence within half an hour and continue until the total curing time is not less than the periods of curing specified in Table 610.231.
 (g) Steam Curing
 (i) General
 Method of control and the proposed curing cycle to achieve the specified concrete compressive strength shall be submitted to the Superintendent. After the initial `maturity' period, units shall be cured in an atmosphere saturated with water vapour at a pressure not exceeding atmospheric pressure.
 The Contractor shall take measures to allow for the potential lower 28 day compressive strength obtained from test cylinders cured initially under in situ conditions, as compared to those cured in accordance with the requirements of AS 1012.
 (ii) Steam Covers
 To prevent drying out, steam covers shall be placed over the units immediately following the casting and screeding operations in such a manner as to ensure free circulation of the steam around the concrete mass.
 (iii) Curing Cycle
 After an initial `maturity' of 40C hours, but not less than two hours after batching the last batch of concrete for the units, steam shall be admitted to the steam covers at such a controlled rate that the maximum average temperature rise shall not exceed 24C per hour. (Note: The initial `maturity' period is calculated by dividing 40C hours by the concrete temperature of the last batch of concrete placed in the unit. The concrete temperature is as measured on an indicating thermometer.) In addition, the temperature rise in any one fifteen minute period shall not exceed 6C.
 If the admission of steam to the steam covers is delayed by more than the initial specified `maturity' of 40C hours after the completion of placing of concrete, water curing, as specified in Clause 610.23(c) shall be applied until steaming commences.
 Steaming shall continue at a rate such that the temperature rise shall not exceed 24C per hour, until a temperature under the steam covers of not greater than 70C has been reached. The corresponding maximum temperature of the concrete shall not exceed 75C.
 After the elapse of sufficient time at the maximum temperature for the required concrete properties to have been reached, steam shall be completely shut down. Steam covers shall not be removed nor any part of the concrete units and test cylinders disturbed or operated upon in any way until the temperature under the steam covers has fallen to within 30C of the ambient temperature. Also the rate of loss of temperature under the steam covers after shutting off steam shall not exceed 30C per hour.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 31 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iv) Temperature Controls
 Temperature shall be recorded by means of recording thermometers supplied and installed by the Contractor. These thermometers shall be maintained in good condition and calibration. The temperature sensitive parts of the thermometers shall be so positioned under the steam covers as to cause the thermometers to record the minimum temperature under the covers. One recording thermometer shall be used for each unit or group of units in line up to a total length of 25 m. For greater lengths, additional recording thermometers shall be used and the distance between the temperature sensitive parts of the thermometers shall not exceed 25 m.
 The recording thermometers shall be set in operation immediately upon completion of the casting and screeding, the temperature sensitive part of each thermometer being installed in position at the same time.
 Charts shall not be removed from any recording thermometers, nor the recording thermometers disturbed or moved in any way until after the removal of the steam covers.
 Charts from temperature recording thermometers shall be retained.
 The following information shall be recorded on the chart:
 (1) date on which steaming commenced;
 (2) unique identification and description of concrete unit;
 (3) temperature correction, if any;
 (4) time correction, if any;
 (5) batching of concrete;
 (6) temperature of concrete when placed;
 (7) ambient temperature at time of removal of steam covers;
 (8) name of Contractor or manufacturer.
 (v) Steam Delivery
 Under no circumstances shall steam jets be allowed to impinge upon any part of the concrete units or of a test specimen, or of their formwork or moulds. Neither shall any steam delivery pipe be attached directly to any formwork or moulds in such a manner as may cause localised overheating of the concrete.
 Sufficient steam jets or steam entry points shall be provided to ensure that a substantially uniform temperature is maintained under the steam covers such that the difference in temperature between any two points adjacent to the concrete units is not more than 10C.
 (vi) Extent of Steam Curing
 Unless otherwise specified, steam curing shall be continuously applied until at least the 7 day compressive strength for the specified concrete grade is obtained.
 (vii) Partial Steam Curing
 Where steam curing is used only to obtain sufficient compressive strength for removal of forms or for lifting, curing shall be continued by one or a combination of the methods specified in Clauses 610.23(c), (d) and (e) for a minimum period of seven days from the time of finishing the concrete.
 Where partial steam curing is employed as above, curing shall recommence within half an hour of the cessation of steam curing.
 The minimum requirements of Clause 610.23(g)(iii) shall be complied with.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 32 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (viii) Curing of Test Cylinders
 Concrete compression test cylinders shall be placed near the concrete units, and shall be so positioned under the steam covers as to be midway between two adjacent points of steam entry, subject always to their being no closer to any points of steam entry than half the width of the concrete units. Test cylinders shall be positioned in a group at the lower face of the concrete unit and shall in no case be placed on top of the concrete unit or its formwork. Test cylinders shall remain in position under the steam covers until the steam curing cycle is complete. Test cylinders shall be suitably covered in such a way as to minimise moisture and temperature losses between the time of removal from the steam covers and the time of forwarding to an accredited laboratory for testing. Cylinders shall be transported in moisture proof containers.
 (h) Radiant Heat Curing
 (i) General
 The application of heat shall be effected by the circulation of hot water which is fed through a series of conduits attached externally to the steel form. A heating box used for the curing of concrete test cylinders shall be connected to the hot water heating system.
 (ii) Curing Cycle
 The curing cycle of the radiant heat curing method shall be in accordance with Clause 610.23(g)(iii) except that reference to steam curing shall be replaced by the application of hot water. The top surface of the finished concrete shall be kept moist throughout the curing cycle.
 (iii) Temperature Controls
 The water temperature shall be controlled by a thermostat and shall not exceed 70C. The corresponding maximum temperature of the concrete shall not exceed 75C. The temperature difference between ingoing and outgoing water shall be maintained at less than 10C.
 Temperature controls shall be in accordance with Clause 610.23(g)(iv), except that reference to steam covers shall be replaced by curing covers. In addition to the specified requirements of Clause 610.23(g)(iv), the Contractor shall also monitor the temperature of the test cylinder heating box by means of a recording thermometer. The difference in temperature between the test cylinder heating box and any point along the hot water heating system shall not exceed 10C.
 (iv) Curing Covers
 To prevent drying out, curing covers shall be placed over the units after the top surface of the concrete has taken its initial set and the watering hose has been placed on the concrete.
 (v) Extent of Radiant Heat Curing
 Radiant heat curing shall be continuously applied until at least the 7 day compressive strength for the specified concrete grade is obtained.
 (vi) Curing of Test Cylinders
 Concrete test cylinders shall be placed in the heating box which is connected into the mould heating system as soon as the curing starts and shall remain in position until the curing cycle is complete. Test cylinders shall be suitably covered to minimise moisture and temperature losses between the time of removal from the heating box and the time of forwarding to an accredited laboratory for testing. Cylinders shall be transported in moisture proof containers.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 33 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (i) Delayed Ettringite Formation To control the risk of delayed ettringite formation at later ages, the maximum concrete temperature during the curing period shall not exceed 75C except where analysis has been performed that justifies a particular maximum temperature limit for concrete.
 
 610.24 CRACKING OF CONCRETE
 
 (a) Maximum Acceptable Crack Widths
 The concrete shall have no cracks at any stage after construction measured at the concrete surface of width greater than the relevant value given in Table 610.241 for the corresponding exposure classification. Where such cracks exist, they shall be identified as a non-conformance.
 Not withstanding the requirements of this clause the acceptable crack width at the concrete surface of pre-cast pre-stressed concrete elements shall not exceed 0.1 mm.
 
 Table 610.241
 Exposure Classification
 A B1 B2 C, U
 
 Maximum Acceptable Crack Widths
 (mm)
 0.20
 0.20
 0.15
 0.10
 
 The Contractor shall undertake an assessment of the cracked concrete structure to evaluate the influence of cracks on the load bearing capacity, serviceability and durability. In addition, the Contractor shall establish the cause(s) of the cracks, crack width, the moisture condition of the crack and whether a crack is active or inactive, and submit a crack repair procedure for the Superintendent's review, prior to any repair works being undertaken. The assessment of the cracked concrete structure shall be undertaken by a technical specialist with a minimum of 5 years practical experience in the diagnostic assessment and investigation of concrete structures.
 The repair of concrete cracks shall be in accordance with Section 687.
 (b) Repair of Inactive Cracks
 Repair of inactive cracks shall be as follows:
 (i) Cracks up to 1 mm wide shall be repaired by pressure injection of low viscosity epoxy resin.
 (ii) Vertical cracks 12 mm wide shall be repaired by pressure injection of low viscosity epoxy resin. Horizontal cracks 12 mm wide shall be repaired either by pressure injection of epoxy resin or other repair methods which comply with the requirements of Section 687, provided a supporting assessment and evaluation by an appropriately experienced consultant has been submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 (iii) Cracks over 2 mm shall be repaired with filling materials and methods in accordance with the requirements of Section 687. Where the repair of such cracks is likely to result in the complete detachment of fractured pieces of concrete away from the main concrete component, such fractures shall be treated as patch repairs and repaired with polymer modified cementitious repair materials in accordance with the requirements of Section 689.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 34 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Repair of Active Cracks
 Live/active cracks shall be repaired using flexible filler materials and methods in accordance with the requirements of Section 687.
 
 610.25 REMOVAL OF FORMWORK
 
 (a) General
 Formwork shall be removed carefully and in such a manner as to avoid damage to the member or the concrete surfaces and maintain safety at all stages of removal.
 
 (b) Formwork Removal Times
 
 Formwork and formwork supports shall not be disturbed or adjusted during the concreting operation and shall remain in position and undisturbed until the minimum removal times given in Table 610.251 have elapsed, after completion of the placing of concrete.
 
 Table 610.251
 
 Concrete Components
 
 Minimum Period before Removal of Formwork and Formwork Supports
 
 Soffits of beams, soffits of decks, soffits of slabs, soffits of cantilevers, soffits of diaphragms, soffits of pier and abutment crossheads and soffits of other structural components.
 
 7 days or until such time as the concrete has reached the specified 7 day compressive strength, whichever is the greater.
 
 (a) Vertical faces of components when height of each day's cast is:
 
 (i) Columns - greater than 7 metres;
 (ii) Walls - greater than 4 metres.
 (b) Load supporting sides of sloping walls of box girders.
 
 5 days
 
 (a) Vertical faces of components when height of each day's cast is:
 
 (i) Columns - 4 to 7 metres; (ii) Walls - 2 to 4 metres; (b) Vertical faces of beams and pier and abutment crossheads; (c) Vertical faces of pad footings.
 
 3 days
 
 Vertical faces of components when height of each day's cast is:
 (i) Columns - less than 4 metres;
 (ii) Walls - less than 2 metres.
 
 2 days
 
 Sides of slabs and piles.
 
 1 day
 
 Where Type GB cement is used, the times for removal of formwork and formwork supports shall be increased by 1 day. This requirement shall not apply to vertical faces of beams and crossheads, columns and walls when the height of each day's cast is less than 4 metres or 2 metres respectively, or the sides of slabs and piles.
 
 Where the timing for the removal of formwork and formwork supports is based on compressive strength as given in Table 610.251, test cylinder(s) shall be prepared, cured and tested as specified in Clause 610.16. In addition, the curing requirements of Clause 610.23 shall apply to the newly exposed surfaces.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 35 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 610.26 ERECTION OF PRESTRESSED AND REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS
 Prestressed and reinforced concrete beams shall not be erected until the specified 28 day concrete compressive strength for the pier and abutment crossheads has been achieved, and not before 14 days after casting. Beams shall not be placed until at least seven days after pedestals have been cast. Where fixed bearings are specified beams shall not be placed until at least four days after fixing the dowels. Beams shall be placed so that anchor dowels at fixed bearings are engaged in the holes provided in the sole plates of beams.
 Beams shall be braced to prevent overturning at all stages of construction.
 Should a Contractor desire to place slabs using construction equipment operating from a previously placed span of slabs, the written approval of the Superintendent shall be obtained.
 610.27 CONSTRUCTION OF PEDESTALS
 Pedestals with a depth of less than 200 mm shall be constructed using a proprietary single component, self consolidating, and dual compensating (plastic and hardened state) non-shrink cementitious grout or a single component low shrinkage mortar specifically formulated for the construction of pedestals, complying with the minimum compressive strength requirements as specified on the drawings and in this specification. Only whole bags of material shall be used. Test certificates, material data sheets and health and safety data sheets shall be available for all materials. Pedestals shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.23.
 Proprietary cementitious materials which are specifically formulated and marketed as concrete repair materials shall not be used for the construction of pedestals.
 Three (3) 75 mm test cubes shall be taken from the first batch of material mixed, then three (3) 75 mm cubes for every 100 kg of material used thereafter to test for compressive strength. The cubes shall be cured for seven days under laboratory-controlled conditions. Two (2) cubes shall be tested at seven days and the third cube at 28 days to confirm compliance with the minimum compressive strength requirements as specified on the drawings and in this specification and the material manufacturer's technical data sheet. Test cubes shall be made, cured and tested in accordance with AS 1478.2.
 The contact face of the concrete shall be flat and have a surface roughness between an amplitude of 0.5 mm to 1.5 mm, with a surface presenting similar to Grade 40-grit sandpaper.
 610.28 PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURES IN MARINE AND OTHER SALINE ENVIRONMENTS
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.07(g) the following protective measures shall be implemented during the construction period to prevent the ingress of chlorides in the concrete in its early maturing and strength developing period.
 (a) Protection Against Ingress of Chlorides (i) All reinforcement and embedded metallic fixtures shall be protected against chloride contamination. (ii) All reinforcement shall be cleaned with water complying with the specification prior to casting the concrete to ensure that salt deposits are removed.
 (b) Curing
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.23, the period of continuous curing for all castin-place concrete shall be not less than 14 days.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 36 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Combinations of water adding techniques such as ponding or continuous sprinkling, or by continuous application of mist spray, retention of formwork in place and polyethylene plastic (in combination with wet hessian) shall be used to provide effective curing to the exposed surfaces of concrete of the various cast-in-place components.
 Curing compounds shall not be used for the construction of structures in marine and other saline environments.
 (c) Extended Protection of Concrete During the Curing Period
 Formwork shall be kept in place for the minimum period in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.25 prior to removal. Immediately following the removal of formwork, and for the remainder of the curing period, polyethylene sheet in combination with wet hessian shall be used to protect the surfaces of concrete being cured against ingress of chlorides from salt water or sea spray.
 (d) Electrical Continuity of the Steel Reinforcement
 Steel reinforcement shall be made electrically continuous in all substructure concrete components, including piles, to allow for future application of a cathodic protection system if required.
 (e) Application of Protective Coatings
 The following protective coatings shall be applied in accordance with Section 686.
 (i) Concrete surfaces extending between 0.5 m below the low water level and 0.5 m above the high water level An epoxy protective coating shall be applied to all exposed surfaces of concrete extending between 0.5 m below the low water level and 0.5 m above high water level. The epoxy protective coating shall be grey in colour and shall be a solvent free, high build epoxy system, providing good chemical, abrasion and corrosion resistance, for horizontal and vertical surfaces of concrete or steel. The epoxy coating shall be applied in a minimum of two coats to a dry film thickness of 300 microns. The epoxy coating shall be a two pack, solvent free epoxy coating with a volume solids content of 100%, and shall exhibit the following chemical resistance characteristics to a range of aggressive chemicals including: (1) Sodium hydroxide, Sulphuric acid, Nitric acid and Hydrochloric acid @ 25%; (2) Tartaric acid and Acetic acid @ 15%; (3) Lactic acid @ 10%; and (4) Resistance to saturated salt, saturated citric acid, petrol and kerosene. The appearance of the finished product has a high priority and the application of the coating system must ensure a uniformity of colour.
 (ii) Concrete surfaces 0.5 m above the high water level A dual protective coating system consisting of a pore-lining penetrant (i.e. silane, solid silane or silane cream) and two coats of a film-forming decorative/anticarbonation top coat shall be applied to all exposed surfaces of concrete extending from 0.5 m above the high water level including columns, pier and abutment crossheads, all exposed beam surfaces, sides and exposed soffits of deck slabs, parapet units, end posts, fender walls, keeper walls and wingwalls in accordance with the requirements of Section 686.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 37 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 In addition to the general requirements of Clause 686.05(a) and Clause 686.05(c)(i) the dual protective coating system shall satisfy the following requirements: (1) Silane pore-lining penetrants shall consist of at least 95% active ingredients and
 shall be applied in two applications and the application rate shall be a minimum 0.30 litres/m2 per application. Solid silane or silane cream pore-lining penetrants shall consist of at least 80% active ingredients and shall be applied in one thick application and the application rate shall be a minimum 0.40 litres/m2. (2) The film-forming topcoat shall satisfy the requirements of Clause 686.05(b) for decorative / anti-carbonation coatings, except that its dry film thickness shall be at least 200 micron.
 (f) Reinforcement Supports and Spacers
 Notwithstanding the requirements of Clause 611.10 steel reinforcement shall be supported by premium grade extruded fibre concrete supports and spacers manufactured under factory controlled conditions. The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent not less than 14 days prior to the proposed use of the steel reinforcement supports and spacers, a signed statement including relevant test reports demonstrating equivalent performance of the supports and spacers to the concrete used in the works and compliance with the specification.
 Supports and spacers made of plastic, wood, metal, plastic coated metal and site made concrete or factory produced non extruded fibre concrete shall not be used. Spacers shall be placed sufficiently close together to ensure that the specified cover is maintained before and during concrete placement and to prevent any potential crushing of the spacers or penetration into the formwork.
 (g) Other Concrete Durability Enhancing Measures
 Other concrete durability enhancing measures such as controlled permeability formwork (CPF), stainless steel reinforcement, and corrosion inhibiting admixtures, cathodic prevention and glass reinforced concrete permanent formwork shall be as specified in the drawings and specification.
 610.29 PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR CONCRETE STRUCTURES SUBJECT TO SULPHATE AND CHEMICAL ATTACK
 Concrete structures subject to sulphate and chemical attack with a pH lower than 5.0, or where highly mobile ground water conditions exist or high exchangeable soil acid conditions prevail the environment shall be assessed as exposure classification U and be subject to special consideration. As a minimum when conditions as stated in this clause prevail, additional protective measures in addition to the requirements of Clause 610.07(h) shall include the application of suitable protective coatings in accordance with Section 686 and/or other physical protection subject to approval by the Superintendent. Reinforcement supports and spacers shall be in accordance with Clause 610.28(f).
 610.30 SURFACE FINISH
 (a) General
 For any particular class of concrete surface finish, the method of construction and the materials used in the concrete and formwork shall remain consistent and shall be such as to meet the requirements of this specification.
 Contractors should note that the standard of surface finish is dependent on the quality of formwork, the compaction of the concrete, and the manner in which the formwork is removed. The higher the standard of surface finish required the greater care will be required to be given to these factors.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 38 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The use of mortar topping will not be permitted.
 The following surface finishes are specified: * Class 1 * Class 2 * Class 3 * sandblast * rope * tooled and bush hammered * exposed aggregate * scabbled * broomed * off-form.
 Except where other surface finishes are specified on the drawings, surface finishes Class 1, Class 2 and Class 3 shall be used as follows:
 (i) Substructure
 The back of abutments, culverts and wingwalls shall have a Class 1 surface finish. All exposed surfaces of abutments, wingwalls and piers from 300 mm below ground level shall have a Class 2 surface finish, except that in cellular structures the faces of wingwalls and ends of piers or walls only shall have a Class 2 surface finish.
 Upper surfaces of concrete bearing pedestals shall have a Class 2 surface finish.
 (ii) Superstructure
 The underside of deck between beams shall have a Class 1 surface finish. The faces and undersides of the beams, the edges and the underside of the cantilevered deck slab shall have a Class 2 surface finish. The interior and exterior faces of kerbs and the upper surfaces of the kerbs shall have a Class 3 surface finish.
 For box girder bridges, the inside surface of box girder webs, floor and deck shall have a Class 1 surface finish. All external surfaces of the box girder and voided slab shall have a Class 2 surface finish.
 (iii) Above Deck Surface
 All surfaces above the tops of kerbs shall have a Class 3 surface finish. End posts shall have a Class 3 surface finish. Precast parapet units and associated cast-in-place concrete shall have a Class 3 surface finish.
 (iv) Precast Concrete
 Precast crown units shall have a Class 2 surface finish. Precast parapet units shall have a Class 3 surface finish. Precast piles shall have a Class 1 surface finish. Precast components other than crown units and parapet units shall have a Class 2 surface finish.
 (b) Rejection of Surfaces Finishes
 Any concrete surface that does not comply with the requirements of this specification shall be subject to the following alternatives:
 (i) rejection of the concrete, in which case the concrete shall be demolished and replaced;
 (ii) acceptance of the defective concrete surface will be withheld subject to remedial measures being carried out.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 39 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Class 1 Surface Finish
 For a Class 1 surface finish no defects which structurally affect the concrete or reduce the cover to the steel reinforcement will be permitted. All mortar fins shall be tooled away to expose a surface of dense sound concrete. Bolts, wires and other embedments shall be set back to the minimum clear cover specified and the ends filled with shrinkage compensating mortar. Concrete spacer blocks shall be manufactured with concrete of the same mixture as the parent concrete in the structure.
 (d) Class 2 Surface Finish
 A Class 2 surface finish shall achieve a concrete surface of uniform colour and free from any major surface defects. The design of the formwork shall be such as to give a deflection under the loads imposed on it of not more than 3 mm between studs or frame supports. The formwork shall be constructed so as to prevent water runoff carrying stains on to previously cast concrete surfaces. The finished concrete surface shall be protected from mortar slurry, physical damage, spillage and water borne staining. Steel shall be protected to prevent rust staining of the concrete surface. No defect which structurally affects the concrete or reduces the cover to the steel reinforcement or other embedded components will be permitted.
 (e) Class 3 Surface Finish
 A Class 3 surface finish shall achieve a concrete surface of uniform colour and texture and free from surface defects. The design of the formwork shall be such as to give a deflection under the loads imposed on it of not more than the following:
 (i) 1.5 mm between adjacent framing members (ii) 3 mm over the vertical face for the full depth of a panel, or height of a lift, whichever
 is the lesser (iii) 3 mm over a 3 m length horizontally.
 (f) Sandblast Finish
 The following grade of sandblasting shall be applied as shown on the drawings: (i) Brush Finish - sandblasting shall remove the surface laitance and expose only the cement matrix. There shall be no projection of the coarse aggregate from the concrete surface. (ii) Light Finish - sandblasting shall expose the fine aggregate with occasional exposure of coarse aggregate. Projection of the coarse aggregate shall not exceed 2 mm above the finished concrete surface.
 (iii) Medium Finish - sandblasting shall be such as to expose the coarse aggregate which shall project no more than 4 mm above the finished concrete surface.
 (iv) Heavy Finish - sandblasting shall expose the coarse aggregate so as to provide a rough and uneven finished surface. The maximum projection of the large aggregate shall be 6 mm above the finished concrete surface.
 (g) Tooled and Bush Hammered Surface Finish
 The types of tooled and/or bush hammered surface finishes are as follows: (i) Light Bush Hammering - sufficient only to break the concrete surface to remove surface mortar without fracturing the coarse aggregate. Usually achieved by the use of a combed head roller chisel, or disc bush hammer.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 40 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (ii) Medium Bush Hammering - sufficient to expose the coarse aggregate pattern but without any pitting or spalling of concrete.
 (iii) Heavy Jack Picking - a coarse texture achieved through jack picking the concrete surface. Substantial lumps of concrete are spalled from the concrete surface.
 The Contractor shall manufacture suitable test panels for each type of finish to be used prior to placing concrete.
 (h) Exposed Aggregate Finish for Unformed Surfaces The prepared surface shall have an exposed coarse aggregate finish free from loose aggregate and laitance.
 (i) Scabbled Finish Scabbling shall remove all laitance and loose or porous material without leaving excessive depressions. Exposed aggregate shall be firmly embedded in the concrete.
 (j) Broomed Finish All deck and approach slab surfaces shall have a coarse broomed finish. The direction of brooming shall be at right angles to the bridge centre line.
 610.31 REPAIRS TO FORMED SURFACES AND OTHER DEFECTS
 The method of repair of minor surface imperfections including porous spots, shallow honeycombing, rough areas and blow holes not conforming to the class of surface finish as specified in Clause 610.30, and the method of cementitious patch repair of other concrete defects shall be in accordance with Section 689.
 Epoxy materials shall not be used for the patch repair of concrete.
 The exposed surface of the repaired area shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete.
 610.32 MORTARS AND GROUTS FOR GENERAL APPLICATIONS
 Where required for general applications other than those specified elsewhere in this specification, cementitious mortars and grouts shall be shrinkage compensating proprietary products with a consistency appropriate for the required use, and able to be placed and compacted to achieve full encapsulation. Cementitious mortars and grouts shall have a minimum 28 day compressive strength of not less than 40 MPa.
 Cementitious grouts shall be as a minimum Type C Class dual shrinkage compensating.
 Only whole bags of material shall be used. Test certificates, material data sheets and health and safety data sheets shall be available for all materials. The mortar and grout applications shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.23.
 Mortars and grouts shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.27.
 610.33 MEASUREMENT OF CONCRETE COVER TO REINFORCEMENT
 A concrete cover measurement survey of reinforced and precast concrete members shall be undertaken after construction on a representative and randomly selected number of exterior surface areas using a commercially available concrete cover meter in at least one 3 m2 test area for every 25 m2 or part thereof. A minimum of 10 cover meter measurements shall be undertaken within the test area and the least distance from the reinforcement to the concrete surface recorded to the nearest millimetre.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 41 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Any concrete members which exhibit cover less than the specified minimum shall be identified as a non-conformance and the affected locations marked and mapped.
 The Contractor shall undertake an assessment of the low cover concrete to evaluate the influence of the low cover on the durability of the structure and submit a proposed corrective action to rectify the non-conformity for review by the Superintendent.
 As a minimum, acceptable rectification shall include but not be limited to the application of approved protective treatment(s) in accordance with the requirements of Section 686.
 The cover meter shall be supported with a current calibration certificate and shall be capable of detecting the presence of reinforcement and indicating the depth from the concrete surface to the nearest point on the surface of the reinforcement with an accuracy of 1 mm at a depth of 25 mm.
 
 610.34 PLACEMENT OF FILL MATERIAL AGAINST CONCRETE
 Fill material shall not be placed against concrete within 14 days of casting in accordance with the requirements of Clause 204.11 of Section 204.
 Proposed placement of fill material against concrete prior to 14 days from casting shall comply with the early application of loading requirements of Clause 610.16(l) or maturity testing requirements of Clause 610.16(m).
 
 610.35 SLIPFORMED CONCRETE BARRIERS
 Construction of concrete barriers by slipforming shall be subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 
 610.36 TOLERANCES
 
 (a) General
 The tolerances listed in Tables 610.361, 610.362, 610.363 and 610.364 are the allowable deviations of the finished product from the dimensions shown on the drawings. These tolerances will be a basis for acceptance of the work.
 
 (b) Soffits
 The soffits of arches, box girders, beams and deck edges shall be continuous curves or straight lines as shown on the drawings, free from all visible irregularities.
 
 (c) Slipformed Concrete Kerbs and Barriers
 Cast in situ slipformed concrete kerbs and barriers and cast in situ off-structure concrete barriers shall comply with the tolerance requirements for precast concrete units as stated in Table 610.364. In addition, the vertical and horizontal alignment between adjacent segments shall not exceed 5 mm.
 
 Table 610.361 General Tolerances
 
 Item
 
 Tolerance (mm)
 
 Placing of reinforcement
 
 5
 
 Placing of post-tensioning sheathing
 
 5
 
 Concrete cover
 
 0 to +5
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 42 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 610.362 Cast In Situ Concrete
 
 Item
 
 (i) Footings
 
 * Plan dimensions - Formed footings and pile caps
 
 - Unformed footings (when approved by the
 
 Superintendent)
 
 * Thickness
 
 - < 300 mm
 
 - > 300 mm
 
 * Top of footing or pile cap reduced level
 
 * Departure from the plan position in any direction
 
 (ii) Cylinders
 
 * Variation from the vertical
 
 * Departure from the plan position in any direction
 
 (iii) Variation in Cross Section of Columns, Piers, Pier and Abutment
 
 Crossheads, Slabs, Walls, Beams and Similar Parts
 
 (excluding deck slabs and end posts)
 
 *<3m
 
 *>3m
 
 (iv) Variation of Cross Section of End Posts
 
 (v) Deck
 
 Thickness of Deck Slabs (excluding allowance for correction of camber
 
 or hog)
 
 Deck surface reduced level
 
 (vi) Deck Joints
 
 * Width of slot
 
 (vii) Variation from Vertical or Specified Batter of Columns, Piers,
 
 Walls, Handrail Posts and Arrises
 
 * Unexposed concrete
 
 * Exposed concrete
 
 (viii) Variation from Grades Indicated on Drawings for Railings, Kerbs
 
 and Arrises
 
 (ix) Reduced Level of Tops of Pier and Abutment Crossheads and
 
 Piers
 
 * With pedestals
 
 * Without pedestals
 
 * Difference in Level across width of crosshead
 
 (x) Bearing Pedestals
 
 * Reduced level
 
 * Variation from grade across the width of individual pedestals shall not
 
 exceed
 
 * Deviation from flat surface
 
 (xi) Departure from Plan Position at any level
 
 * Columns, Piers, Walls, Pier and Abutment Crossheads, Beams, Slabs,
 
 Kerbs, Railing and other similar parts
 
 * Relative displacement of adjoining components shall not exceed
 
 (xii) Departure from Alignment
 
 * Rows of columns, faces of piers or walls
 
 * Handrails, Faces of hand rail posts, Kerbs
 
 (xiii) Maximum Allowance for Irregularities in Exposed Concrete
 
 Surfaces
 
 * Sections less than 1 m in dimension when measured with a
 
 straightedge across the dimension of the section
 
 * Sections greater than 1 m in dimension when measured with a
 
 straightedge across the dimension of the section, except that when
 
 sections are greater than 2.5 m in dimension, a 2.5 m straightedge
 
 shall be used
 
 (xiv) Irregularities in Railings
 
 (xv) Slab Surface Finish
 
 Tolerance (mm unless shown
 otherwise)
 -15 to +50 0 to +150
 -5 to +25 -10 to +50 -25 to +25
 50
 25 mm in 3 m 75
 -5 to +15 -10 to +25
 -5 to +5
 0 to +10
 -10 to +10
 -3 to +3
 10 mm in 2.5 m (1/250) 5 mm in 2.5 m (1/500)
 2.5 mm in 2.5 m (1/1000)
 -10 to +10 -5 to +5 5
 -2.5 to +2.5 1 in 200
 +1.0 to -1.0
 25 10
 10 5
 2.5
 5
 2.5 mm in 2.5 m 5 mm in 2.5 m
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 43 of 45)
 
 Table 610.363 Pre-tensioned Concrete
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Item
 
 Tolerance (mm unless shown otherwise)
 
 (i) Cross Section
 * Dimension - < 2 m - >2m
 * Out of square - > 2 m
 
 -3 to +3 -6 to +6 0.5 in 250, or Desirable 3, Maximum 5
 
 (ii) Strand and Reinforcement
 * Placing of reinforcement * Placing of prestressing strand * Concrete cover
 
 5 3 0 to +5
 
 (iii) Squareness of Ends
 
 * Dimension - < 500 mm
 
 *
 
 - > 500 mm
 
 Deviation from a plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of a member, or from the specified end plane:
 3 mm 6 mm per metre (10 mm maximum)
 
 (iv) Length
 
 * Diagonal length for precast unit
 
 5
 
 * Overall length or length centre to centre of bearings (for beams and slabs)
 
 0.06% x specified length (max 20)
 
 * Centre to centre spacing of holes
 
 5
 
 for transverse rods or both
 
 (v) Profile in a Vertical Plane (Hog)
 
 The deviation in hog of any unit from the mean hog of all units shall not vary by more than 0.07% of the length of the units. The absolute value for hog for any unit shall not be less than zero. Hog measurements shall be made at transfer of prestress.
 
 (vi) Profile in a Horizontal Plane (Bow) The deviation of a unit from the required profile shall not exceed 0.06% of the length of the unit or a maximum of 15 mm.
 
 (vii) Twist
 
 The angular rotation of any cross section relative to an end cross section shall not exceed 1 in 200.
 
 (viii) Sole Plates
 
 The plane of the sole plate or bearing surface shall not vary from that shown on the drawings by more than 1 in 200 in any direction.
 
 (ix) Deviation * The distance of any point from a flat plane held against that surface.
 
 3 mm in 2 m
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 44 of 45)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 610.364 Precast Concrete Units
 
 Item
 
 Tolerance (mm)
 
 (i) General
 * Placing of reinforcement * Placing of sheathings for post-tensioned
 segmental components * Concrete cover
 
 5 5 0 to +5
 
 (ii) Cross Section
 * Dimension - < 2 m -> 2 m
 * Out of square
 
 0 to +3 0 to +6 Maximum 5
 
 (iii) Squareness of Ends
 
 * Dimension - < 500 mm
 
 *
 
 - > 500 mm
 
 Deviation from a plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of a member, or from the specified end plane:
 3 mm
 6 mm per metre (10 mm maximum)
 For parapet units and new jersey barriers, the deviation from a place perpendicular to the longitudinal axis shall not exceed 3 mm.
 
 (iv) Length
 * Diagonal length for precast unit * Overall length or length centre to centre
 of bearings (for beams and slabs) * Centre to centre spacing of holes for
 transverse rods or bolts * Overall length for parapets and new
 jersey barriers
 
 5 0.06% x specified length (max 20)
 5 3
 
 (v) Profile in a Vertical Plane (Camber)
 
 The deviation of a unit from the design camber, after allowance has been made for the deflection due to the mass of the member, shall not exceed 0.10% of the length of the unit with a maximum of 6 mm. Measurement of camber shall be made at the mid-point of the member which shall be supported at the bearing positions.
 
 (vi) Profile in a Horizontal Plane (Bow)
 
 The deviation of a unit from the required profile shall not exceed 6 mm or 0.10% of the length of the unit, whichever is the greater. Bow in precast parapet units and new jersey barriers shall not exceed 3 mm.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 610 (Page 45 of 45)
 
 SECTION 611 - STEEL REINFORCEM
 ##This section cross-references Section 175. S
 
 Department of State Growth
 611.03 GRADES OF STEEL REINFORCEMENT
 Grades of steel reinforcement used shall comply with the following requirements.
 (a) Carbon Steel Reinforcing Material
 Unless otherwise shown on the drawings, steel for reinforcing bars shall be Grade 500N, complying with the requirements of AS/NZS 4671. Steel for welded steel reinforcing mesh shall be Grade 500L, complying with the requirements of AS/NZS 4671.
 (b) Stainless Steel Reinforcement
 Where the use of stainless steel reinforcement is indicated on the drawings, stainless steel reinforcement shall consist of ribbed (deformed) bars or coil, deformed wire or welded mesh complying with the requirements of BS 6744 Grade 500. The chemical composition of stainless steel reinforcement shall conform to one of designations 1.4429, 1.4436 or 1.4462 to BS EN 10088 (as identified by Table 5, BS 6744:2001). Wire used to tie stainless steel shall conform to one of the designations 1.4429, 1.4436 or 1.4462 to BS EN 10088 (as identified by BS 6744:2001).
 611.04 STEEL REINFORCEMENT SUPPLY
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the preparation of the steel reinforcement schedule for all steel reinforcement required for the Contract.
 The Contractor shall make appropriate allowances when preparing the steel reinforcement schedule to achieve the specified tolerances on member dimensions, concrete cover and location of steel reinforcement and any post -tensioning sheathing or other fitments, taking into account the practical variations in the tolerances noted and other margins normally applied by steel reinforcement suppliers.
 Steel reinforcement shall be supplied cut to length, bent to shape, free from loose millscale, free from loose or thick rust, or any other surface contamination that adversely affects the steel and its intended use.
 All operations to process and fabricate steel reinforcement, such as cutting, bending, shaping, placing, joining and similar tasks, shall be in accordance with AS 5100 Part 5.
 Steel reinforcement shall not be coated unless specified, in which case the nature and type of the coating to be used and the conditions of application shall be separately specified. When carbon steel reinforcement is specified on the drawings to be hot -dip galvanised, the hot-dip galvanising shall be in accordance with AS 4680. Use of epoxy coated steel reinforcement shall not be permitted.
 Stainless steel reinforcement shall be supplied, handled and stored separately from other steels. Tools used for cutting, bending and transport of stainless steel reinforcement shall not have been used for other materials.
 611.05 CERTIFICATION AND TESTING
 (a) Third Party Certification
 Manufacturers and suppliers of steel reinforcement materials must be in possession of a current certificate of approval, issued by the Australian Certification Authority for Reinforcing Steel (ACRS). Evidence of compliance with this clause shall be submitted to the Superintendent within 14 days of award of the Contract.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 611 (Page 2 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) No Third Party Certification
 HP Approval shall be obtained in writing from the Superintendent for the use of steel reinforcing materials that are not covered by the long-term quality level of AS/NZS 4671 at least 14 days prior to the intended first date of use of such steel. Steel reinforcing materials that are not covered by the long-term quality level of AS/NZS 4671 shall not be ordered or placed in the works without approval. The Contractor shall nominate the members in which the reinforcing steel is to be used and the country and mill of origin and the specification to which the steel is produced, and clearly demonstrate how it is equivalent to that specified by AS/NZS 4671.
 Where use of steel reinforcement is not covered by the long-term quality level of AS/NZS 4671, testing shall be carried out in accordance with Clause B7 of AS/NZS 4671, including the frequency of sampling and testing, and to the appropriate Australian Standard, as listed in AS/NZS 4671.
 Where the certification of the steel is incomplete, the Contractor shall arrange for testing to be carried out, as required in Clause 611.05(c), to demonstrate compliance of the material, at the rate of one test per 1000 lineal metres of material.
 (c) Testing
 All testing shall be carried out by officers experienced in the test methods described in the Contract, in a laboratory accredited by the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) for those test methods. All test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA terms of accreditation for that laboratory, for chemical composition and physical properties, and welding procedure qualification (if required).
 For imported steel, all tests shall be carried out in a laboratory accredited by and with endorsement of the relevant national accreditation authority which has mutual recognition arrangements with NATA.
 611.06 BENDING
 Bending or re-bending of steel reinforcement shall be done in accordance with the requirements of AS 5100 Part 5, and be read in conjunction with VicRoads Bridge Technical Note BT N2011/001.
 Bars shall not be bent or straightened in a manner that will cause damage to the bars. Bars with kinks or bends not shown on the drawings or in the steel reinforcement schedule shall not be used.
 Heating of Grade 500N bars to a maximum of 450C is permitted under controlled workshop conditions, subject to methods in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The bars shall be heated uniformly through their cross-section and beyond the portion to be bent in each direction for a distance at least equal to the bar diameter. The internal bend diameter of any hot-bent bar shall meet the requirements of AS 5100 Part 5. Heated bars shall not be cooled by quenching. If during heating, the temperature of the bar exceeds 450C, the design yield strength of the steel after bending shall be taken as 250 MPa.
 On-site heating of steel reinforcement will not be permitted.
 Hot bending of stainless steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with methods recommended by the manufacturer. Tools used for bending stainless steel reinforcement shall not have been used for fabricating other materials. Pins used for bending stainless steel shall be made from stainless steel.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 611 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 611.07 RE-BENDING ON SITE
 Re-bending of steel reinforcement shall be by approved means. Steel reinforcement that has been bent and subsequently straightened shall not be bent again within 20 bar diameters of the previous bend. Minimum internal diameter of re-bend bars shall be in accordance with AS 5100 Part 5.
 HP Re-bending of steel reinforcement shall not commence until the procedure has been reviewed and approved by the Superintendent, and shall be witnessed by the Superintendent's representative.
 611.08 IDENTIFICATION
 Steel reinforcement and welded steel reinforcing mesh shall be bundled and tagged with a label identifying the bar reference number.
 611.09 HANDLING, STORAGE AND SURFACE CONDITION
 Steel reinforcement that has been damaged in any way shall not be incorporated into or used in the works.
 Steel reinforcement shall be stored in conditions that minimise or prevent the formation of surface rust.
 Steel reinforcement shall be kept free from rust, oil, grease, tar, paint, mud or any other deleterious substance which may reduce bond between the steel reinforcement and concrete.
 Thin powdery rust and tightly adhering rust are not considered detrimental, and need not be removed. Mill scale, which flakes off when the steel reinforcement is struck by a hammer, or which can be readily dislodged by hand wire brushing, shall be removed.
 Steel reinforcement that has surface pitted by corrosion, where the loss of cross-section is greater than the tolerance on mass per metre of bar (4.5%), shall not be used in the works.
 Stainless steel reinforcement shall be supplied, handled and stored separately from other steels. Stainless steel reinforcement shall be stored so that it is not contaminated by debris from processing operations, grease, oil, iron or other steels.
 611.10 PLACING
 All steel reinforcement shall be securely held during placing and compacting of the concrete. Steel reinforcement supports shall be made of durable materials strong enough to withstand the imposed loads without movement of the steel reinforcement, shall be positively attached to the steel reinforcement, and of such size as to maintain the specified cover.
 Wooden supports, metal supports and plastic coated metal supports which extend to the surface of the concrete shall not be used. Placing bars on layers of fresh concrete as the work progresses and adjusting bars during the placing of concrete will not be permitted.
 The specified minimum concrete cover shall be maintained at tie wire positions.
 The Contractor shall ensure that the method of placement of stainless steel reinforcement does not allow it to become contaminated by contact with other steel. In particular, welding or cutting of black steel bars or any other structural steel shall not occur after any stainless steel has been placed.
 Stainless steel embedment items shall be fixed in place by tying with stainless ste el wire of the same grade, or by anchoring to the forms using stainless steel fixings of the same grade.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 611 (Page 4 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 611.11 SPLICING
 Steel reinforcement shall be supplied in the full lengths shown on the drawings. Alternatively, and where directed by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall splice the bars by lapping. In lapped splices, the bars shall be placed in contact and the specified cover shall be maintained. The lap shall be long enough to develop the full strength of the bar and unless shown on the drawings shall be not less than the tensile or compressive development length determined in accordance with AS 5100 Part 5.
 Splicing of steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with AS 5100 Part 5.
 611.12 PROJECTING STEEL REINFORCEMENT
 Where shown on the drawings, projecting steel reinforcement shall be provided for the purpose of splicing to the adjacent sections of reinforced concrete. Care shall be taken to avoid damage to the projecting bars after they have been set and any damage to the bars or their setting shall be repaired by the Contractor. Projecting steel reinforcement in newly poured concrete shall remain undisturbed for a minimum period of 24 hours following the completion of placing concrete in order to avoid damage to the concrete surrounding the bars.
 611.13 TACK WELDING
 (a) Carbon Steel Reinforcement Tack welding of steel reinforcement will be permitted for Grade 250N and Grade 500N carbon steel reinforcement bars provided welding is not within 50 mm of the tangent point of a bend in the steel. All tack welding shall comply with the requirements of AS/NZS 1554 Part 3. In cases where the application of AS/NZS 1554 Part 3 indicates that welding procedure testing is required for tack welding, the tack welding procedure shall be qualified in accordance with Appendix C of AS/NZS 1554 Part 3.
 (b) Stainless Steel Reinforcement Tack welding of stainless steel reinforcement is not permitted.
 611.14 WELDED SPLICES IN CARBON STEEL REINFORCEMENT
 (a) General Welding of carbon steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 3. Steel reinforcement shall be spliced by welding only at the locations shown on the drawings. The steel reinforcement projecting from the ends of beams shall be spliced as shown on the drawings. Pairs of bars with misalignments less than 8 mm may be realigned prior to welding. Splices for pairs of bars with misalignments greater than 8 mm shall be packed prior to welding. Care shall be taken during welding to avoid excessive heating of the reinforcing bar. The earth lead shall be attached to the steelwork being welded at all times to prevent leakage of currents.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 611 (Page 5 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Welding Procedure Qualification
 HP Welding of splices in steel reinforcement, including to other steelwork and to continuity bar reinforcement, shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified and reviewed by the Superintendent.
 The qualification process shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554, Part 3 and with the following additional requirements:
 (i) production of a weld test plate, witnessed by either a Structural Steelwork Surveillance Officer, accredited to VicRoads Technical Bulletin TB46 Guide to Surveillance of Structural Steelwork, or the Contractor's Welding Supervisor
 (ii) submission to the Superintendent of test certificates demonstrating compliance of the procedure with AS/NZS 1554, Part 3 including a photograph of the weld sec tion, prepared and etched to AS 2205.5.1.
 The welding procedure shall provide a weld with the specified throat thickness, free from inclusions and imperfections, and with satisfactory fusion and surface appearance.
 (c) Inspection and Quality of Welds
 Inspection of the welding of steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 3.
 The quality of welds shall conform to AS/NZS 1554 Part 3, and any imperfections shall be assessed in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 3, Sections 9 and 10.
 611.15 WELDING STAINLESS STEEL REINFORCEMENT
 (a) General
 Welding of stainless steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 3 and Part 6.
 Stainless steel reinforcement shall be welded only in a welding workshop specifically set up for the purpose. Such facility shall maintain conditions preventing any contamination of the stainless steel and consumables used in the proper performance of the welding for the full duration of the Contract. All consumables shall be stored, conditioned and handled in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. HP Prior to the commencement of works, the Contractor shall submit to the
 Superintendent the results of an independent assessment that the purpose specific welding shop has been established.
 Reports of re-assessment shall be submitted to the Superintendent at 3 month intervals until welding and fabrication works are completed.
 Welding proc edures and consumables shall comply with the bar manufacturer's recommendations. Weld preparations shall be clean and free of any contamination prior to welding.
 (b) Welding Procedure Qualification
 HP Welding of splices in stainless steel reinforcement, including to other steelwork and to continuity bar reinforcement, shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified and reviewed by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 611 (Page 6 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The qualification process shall be in acc ordance with AS/NZS 1554, Part 3 and Part 6 and with the following additional requirements:
 (i) production of a weld test plate, witnessed either a Structural Steelwork Surveillance Officer, accredited to VicRoads Technical Bulletin T B46, or the Contractor's Welding Supervisor; and
 (ii) submission to the Superintendent of   test certificates demonstrating compliance of the procedure with AS/NZS 1554, Part 3 and Part 6, including a photograph of the weld section, prepared and etched to AS 2205.5.1, and  test certificates demonstrating that the weld procedure does not result in the loss of ductility and corrosion resistance as specified in sub-paragraph (e) below.
 (c) Inspection and Quality of Welds
 Welds shall be examined by liquid penetrant methods, to AS 2062, at a frequency of 5% of the welds manufactured.
 Inspection of the welding of stainless steel reinforcement shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 6. The quality of welds shall conform to Category 1B to AS/NZS 1554 Part 6, Table 6.1.1, and any imperfections shall be assessed in accordance with AS 1554 Part 3, Sections 9 and 10.
 All arc strikes shall be treated as welds, and inspected 100% by liquid penetrant methods, to AS 2062, and shall be assessed in accordance with AS 1554 Part 3, Sections 9 and 10.
 (d) Cleaning of Welds
 When specified, completed welds shall be cleaned and passivated by wire brushing and pickling to finish Category II to AS/NZS 1554 Part 6, Table 6.2.1. Pickling compounds shall be chloride free.
 (e) Ductility and Corrosion Resistance of Welds
 Welds on stainless steel reinforcement shall be tested for corrosion resistance against pitting and inter-granular corrosion in ac cordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 6, Appendix E. Corrosion resistance testing shall be carried out on test specimens sampled from the weld procedure qualification tests and on three product samples, each prepared and tested at equally spaced quantity intervals during the works.
 611.16 MECHANICAL SPLICES
 Mechanical splices shall not be permitted at critically loaded sections of the structure. Preference shall be given to lapped or welded splices. However, a mechanical splice may be permitted where the designer considers on the basis of engineering considerations that a lapped or welded splice is unsuitable. In this case the mechanical splice shall be designed in accordance with VicRoads Bridge Technical Note BTN2011/001.
 The Contractor shall submit full details of tests that demonstrate compliance of the proposed mechanical splice with the requirements of VicRoads Bridge Technical Note BTN2011/001 to the Superintendent. The tests shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate Australian Standard in a NATA accredited laboratory. When tested in accordance with AS 1391, mechanical bar splices shall develop at least the nominal ultimate tensile or compressive strength of the smaller of the bars being tested.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 611 (Page 7 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth Details of the type and location of mechanical splices together with the supporting test data shall be submitted to the Superintendent not less than 14 days before their proposed use in the works. Mechanical splices shall not be incorporated in the works until the Superintendent has accepted their proposed use. Mechanical splices for stainless steel reinforcement shall be manufactured from stainless steel that conforms to one of the designations 1.4429, 1.4436 or 1.4462 to BS EN 10088 (as identified by Table 5, BS6744:2001). The strength of the mechanical splice shall not be less than the strength of the smaller bar to be joined by the splice. 611.17 CONTACT BETWEEN DISSIMILAR METALS EMBEDDED IN CONCRETE Contact between carbon steel and galvanised steel reinforcement or carbon steel and stainless steel reinforcement or other similar metal embedments shall not be allowed. Where contact between such dissimilar metals embedded in concrete is unavoidable, the two different metals shall be electrically isolated to prevent galvanic or bimetallic corrosion. Electrical isolation may be effected by utilising PVC conduit sleeves, suitable soft plastic wrapping or tapes or by other approved means. Steel reinforcement and other metal embedment items shall only be fixed in place with tie wire made of the same metal and same grade.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 611 (Page 8 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 612 - POST-TENSIONING OF CONCRETE UNITS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 610 and 620. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 612.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for supply, placing, stressing and grouting of post-tensioning systems.
 Cast-in-place concrete for post-tensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of Section 610 - Structural Concrete.
 Precast concrete units for post-tensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of Section 620 - Precast Concrete Units.
 612.02 POST-TENSIONING SYSTEM
 At least 14 days prior to the commencement of manufacture of precast concrete units or placing formwork for in situ elements for post-tensioning, the Contractor shall submit full details of the proposed prestressing system to the Superintendent for review.
 These details shall include: (a) drawings and calculations that demonstrate the suitability of the proposed prestressing
 system for the structure. Where appropriate, values shall be substantiated by test results; (b) source of the tendon; (c) minimum breaking load of the tendon; (d) maximum permitted relaxation of the tendon; (e) modulus of elasticity of the proposed tendon material; (f) maximum values of the friction, curvature and wobble coefficients as defined in AS 5100; (g) predicted extension for each tendon; (h) predicted draw-in at anchorages; (i) anchorage details including any additional reinforcement at the anchorage zone; (j) type of duct and duct material; (k) internal and external diameter of duct plus the type of coating; (l) method(s) of restraining and joining the duct; (m) proposed tensioning system.
 612.03 SUPPLY OF TENDONS
 (a) Materials Strand shall be obtained from an Australian Certification Authority for Reinforcing Steel (ACRS) accredited supplier. High-tensile steel wires, strands or bar tendons for use in post-tensioning and the testing of these materials shall comply with AS/NZS 4672:2007 Steel prestressing materials.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall submit the following for the material in each coil of wire or strand, or lot of bars:  test certificates for tensile testing;  load-extension graphs;
 together with:  the manufacturer's certificate of compliance with the Australian Standard;  a relaxation test certificate for material taken from the same production facility
 and of the same type of material as that to be used in the works. Relaxation-test certificates for similar tendon material produced within the past year will be accepted;
 to the Superintendent at least seven days prior to the delivery of the coil or lot.
 Tests shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate Australian Standard:  in a laboratory accredited by the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) or
 approved equivalent for those test methods;  by personnel experienced in the test methods described in the Contract. At the discretion of the Superintendent, additional relaxation testing of samples by the University of Melbourne ACRS laboratory may be required.
 All tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA registration for that laboratory.
 High-tensile steel wires or strands shall be supplied in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the wires or strands are straight when unwound from the coil.
 (b) Sampling
 Where required under Clause 612.15, the Contractor shall arrange for the tendon material to be tested.
 Samples of wire, strand or bar shall be taken by the Contractor at the site of the works or at the supplier's fabrication shop, provided that all tendons fabricated from one coil or lot are bundled together and clearly identified with the coil or lot number.
 The Contractor shall arrange testing of samples representative of each coil or lot. These samples shall be taken not less than 1.5 metres from the end of any coil or bar.
 For split coils, comprising two or more production runs of strand, each production run of strand shall be sampled and tested separately.
 (c) Testing
 Samples shall be tested in a NATA accredited laboratory for compliance with AS/NZS 4672.
 All test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA terms of accreditation for the laboratory.
 (d) Assembly of Tendons
 Splicing of strands, wires or bars forming a tendon is not permitted. Tendon couplings shall only be used where shown on the drawings.
 Welding is not permitted on or near tendons, nor shall any heat be applied to tendons. Tendons which have been affected by welding, weld splatter and/or heat will be rejected and must be replaced by the Contractor.
 Flame cutting of wire strand or bars within 75 mm of an anchorage or jacking position is not permitted.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 2 of 12) )
 
 Department of State Growth
 A durable label shall be tied to each tendon. The label shall be stamped with the length of the tendon and the coil number of the wire or strand from which the tendon was cut.
 (e) Storage Coils of wire and strand and bars shall be stored above ground level and shall protected from mechanical damage or contamination with deleterious substances until their incorporation into the structure. Wire strand or bars that show any evidence of damage, kinks or bends shall not be used. Wire, strand or bars which is heavily corroded or pitted, will be rejected. Wire, strand or bars with light surface rusting is acceptable. Wire, strand or bars shall be kept free from loose rust, oil, grease, tar, paint, mud or any other deleterious substances. Material for tendons and assembled tendons shall be protected from contamination, mechanical damage and deterioration from exposure to harmful substances and conditions.
 612.04 SUPPLY OF ANCHORAGES
 Anchorages shall be tested by a NATA accredited laboratory for compliance with the requirements of AS 1314 - Prestressing Anchorages. The Contractor shall supply the test certificates to the Superintendent on delivery of the anchorages.
 Spiral or other reinforcement specified by the manufacturer for use in conjunction with anchorage devices shall be of the size and dimensions recommended by the manufacturer for the post-tensioning system.
 Anchorages shall be kept free from dirt, mortar, loose rust, tar, paint, oil, or any other harmful substances.
 All steel components including threads shall be protected from corrosion by greased wrappings or plugs until required for use.
 Damaged anchorage components shall not be used.
 25 mm minimum diameter grout holes shall be provided at both anchorages and shall be placed at the highest point of the anchorage. Each of the grouting holes shall be equipped with a plug valve or similar device capable of withstanding a pressure of 1.0 MPa without loss of water, air or grout.
 612.05 SUPPLY OF DUCTS
 Ducts shall be of a type suitable for the nominated post-tensioning system and shall be strong enough to withstand the placing and compaction of the concrete without suffering damage or deformation.
 The duct and any splices shall be sealed to resist the entry of grout.
 Steel duct shall have a corrugated profile and shall be galvanized.
 Plastic duct shall be corrugated and shall have sufficient thickness to resist abrasion during installing and stressing of the tendon.
 Enlarged portions of the duct at couplings or anchorages shall be of sufficient length to provide for the extension of the tendons.
 Vents, with plug valves, shall be provided at intervals not greater than 10 metres along the duct. Additional vents with plug valves shall be provided at high and low points in the duct.
 Ducts shall be stored off the ground in dry, clean conditions to prevent contamination.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 External and internal duct surfaces shall be kept free from loose rust, oil, grease, tar, paint, mud or any other harmful substances that might impair the bond between the duct and the concrete or grout, contaminate the tendons or alter the co-efficient of friction of the duct.
 Care shall be taken to ensure that the duct is not damaged or kinked. Duct that is damaged shall be discarded.
 612.06 TRACEABILITY OF MATERIALS
 Wire, strand, bars and anchorages shall be labelled in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 4672 or AS 1314.
 Individual lengths of wire, strand or bar shall be traceable from the point of manufacture of coils or lots to their final location by a unique identification number.
 Anchorages shall be traceable from the place of manufacture to their final location by a unique identification number.
 
 612.07 PLACING OF DUCTS
 Ducts shall be placed in the positions shown on the drawings to the tolerances stated in Section 610.
 Duct shall be securely fixed at intervals not exceeding 600 mm in flanges and 1200 mm in webs in order to maintain a smooth duct profile within the specified tolerance throughout the length of the tendon during concreting operations.
 Duct shall be fixed by methods which will not damage or deform it.
 Any temporary openings in the duct shall be plugged and all joints between the duct and any other part of the prestressing system shall be effectively sealed to prevent the entry of grout, dust, water or other harmful substances.
 The Contractor shall supply any additional reinforcement that is required to securely fix and support the duct and restrain the duct against flotation.
 The minimum straight length of duct at anchorages and at coupling points (required by some post-tensioning systems) shall conform to the manufacturer's recommendations.
 Welding shall not be done near ducts.
 Ducts shall be free from internal projections or reductions in diameter at joints.
 Temporary tendons, mandrels inflated tubes or other methods shall be used to stiffen the duct during placing and compaction of concrete.
 
 612.08
 
 PLACING OF ANCHORAGES
 
 In order to prevent movement during placing and compaction of concrete, anchorage devices shall be fixed securely in position.
 
 Care shall be taken during concreting to prevent displacement or damage to ducts.
 
 Anchorage devices shall be set square to the line of action of the tendon and to the profile and tolerances shown on the drawings.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Recesses shall be designed in accordance with the post-tensioning system manufacturer's recommendations, including:  the cover requirements to the ends of anchored tendons;  the minimum recess dimensions, including the clearance between the edge of the anchor plate
 and the recess wall (or the edge of the concrete), the required side slopes of the recess, and the requirement for access behind the anchorage to allow for the assembly, installation and operation of the jack.
 Details of the proposed anchorage recesses shall be submitted to the Superintendent with the formwork design.
 The anchorage devices shall be cleaned prior to and immediately after the placing of concrete. Any mortar or concrete which adheres to bearing or wedging surfaces shall be removed.
 Where tendons were inserted prior to concreting, the tendon shall be pulled back and forth about 0.25 m several times immediately after concreting in order to ensure that the tendon has not been locked-in by a grout-leakage and is free to move.
 612.09 CLEANING OF DUCTS AFTER CONCRETING
 Immediately after concreting, ducts shall be checked for obstructions, denting by concrete vibrators, and deformation.
 Ducts shall then be flushed with water and a steel dolly drawn through.
 Prior to installation of tendons, a steel dolly shall be drawn through the ducts and any obstruction which might impede the passage or movement of the tendons in the ducts shall be removed.
 612.10 PLACING OF TENDONS
 Except where dead-end anchorages are cast in concrete, tendons shall not be installed until immediately prior to stressing.
 Tendons shall be pulled or pushed through the ducts in a manner that avoids damage or contamination to either the tendon or the ducts.
 Damaged tendons shall be replaced.
 Damaged ducts shall be repaired.
 Contaminated ducts shall be cleaned by methods that do not affect the bond of the duct with the tendon.
 612.11 REQUIRED STRENGTH AND AGE OF CONCRETE FOR STRESSING
 (a) Strength and Age The post-tensioning force shall not be applied to a member until it has attained the compressive strength stated herein or on the drawings, nor shall it be applied at an earlier age than seven days after casting when moist curing methods are used, or two days after casting when steam cured, provided that in the latter case the temperature of the member has returned to normal. Consideration will be given to the application of stage stressing at an earlier date to overcome handling or shrinkage problems, or to permit early removal of temporary supports (falsework). Details of proposals shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Post-Tensioning Before 28 Days The frequency and acceptance of sampling and testing of standard test cylinders shall be as specified in Section 610. Two cylinders from each sample shall be tested prior to application of prestress. The specification will be satisfied if the average cylinder strength is not less than the specified strength and the lower cylinder strength is not less than 90% of the specified strength. A third cylinder will be reserved for the purpose of determining concrete strength at the proposed time of post-tensioning.
 612.12 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS
 The Contractor shall identify and manage the hazards to site personnel, other persons who might be affected by the stressing operation and nearby property and shall take the highest standard of care to ensure the safety of all affected persons and property in accordance with the provisions of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012 and all applicable regulations made, and codes of conduct approved, under that Act.
 The Contractor shall establish no-go zones with warning signs and substantial barricades in order to provide a protective barrier for site personnel, other persons and property and to prevent the entry of unauthorised persons into the hazard zone around and behind the jacking equipment.
 Jacking and other site personnel shall not be permitted to stand behind the jack or close to the line of the tendons while stressing is in progress.
 During stressing operations, warning signs that conform to AS 1319 shall be displayed at both ends of the member being tensioned.
 The stressing jack shall be adequately supported and restrained in order to ensure that it cannot cause injury to personnel operating the jacking equipment should the jack lose its grip on the tendons or should the tendon fail.
 612.13 POST-TENSIONING EQUIPMENT
 One week prior to stressing the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent calibration certificates conforming to the requirements of AS 2193 Grade B for the jack and pressure gauges or other force measuring devices to be used.
 Hydraulic pumps shall be power driven. The power unit shall be adjusted to ensure that the rate of extension of the tendon is within the limits specified. The measuring equipment used shall allow the jacking force to be determined to within the accuracy required by AS 2193 for a Class B machine or system. The measuring equipment shall allow elongation to be determined with an accuracy of  2%.
 Where pressure gauges are used, a suitable device shall be fitted to protect the gauge against sudden release of pressure. A tee connection shall be provided to allow attachment of a second gauge to enable checking of the primary gauge if requested by the Superintendent.
 612.14 BASIS OF MEASUREMENT OF TENSIONING FORCES
 At least one week prior to the start of post-tensioning the Contractor shall provide to the Superintendent calculations for extensions corresponding to the upper and lower limits of the tendon force diagram shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The calculations shall take into account the following:  the measured length of the tendon between the faces of anchorage plates;  draw-in at the anchorage devices on release of the jacks;  an allowance for extensions between the anchorage plate and the point at which extensions will
 be measured on the jack;  elastic shortening of the member;  losses due to stressing of subsequent tendons;  the modulus of elasticity determined from the test samples.
 Where tendons are to be jacked initially from one end only, the calculations shall provide details of the predicted extensions at both ends of the member.
 The applied tensioning force shall be determined by direct measurement of the jacking force at the gauge and shall be checked by measurement of the elongation of the tendon.
 The actual elongation(s) of the tendon shall lie between the calculated elongation(s) corresponding to the upper and lower limit of the tendon force diagram.
 612.15 TENSIONING FORCES REQUIRED
 The required tensioning force and corresponding friction and wobble coefficients shall be as shown on the drawings in the form of a tendon force diagram.
 Where the coefficients for the adopted prestressing system vary from the values shown on the drawings, the specified tensioning forces shall be revised by the Contractor and submitted to the Superintendent for approval.
 The final force in a tendon shall be within  3% of the value shown in the drawings.
 The final force in a member shall be within  2% of the value shown on the drawings.
 Should the modulus of elasticity of tendons differ by more than 3%, the required elongation shall be adjusted accordingly.
 If, on completion of tensioning each tendon to the required force, the check measurement of elongation differs from the predicted value by more than 5%, the Contractor shall nominate some or all of the following remedial steps subject to review by the Superintendent. The Contractor shall suspend stressing until the completion of the Superintendent's review:  re-calibration of equipment;  testing of tendon material to check the modulus of elasticity;  that tendons be released and restressed (with the adoption of a modulus of elasticity applicable
 to the second stressing);  lubrication of tendons to reduce friction losses. Only water-soluble oils shall be used in ducted
 systems and these shall be washed out before grouting;  where one jack was used previously to tension the tendon from one end, the tendon may be
 tensioned from both ends using two jacks;  other methods as agreed.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 612.16 TENSIONING PROCEDURE
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall give the Superintendent a minimum of seven days notice of each stressing operation.
 HP All stressing operations shall take place in the presence of the Superintendent.
 Tendon ducts and anchorages shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to commencement of tensioning. The protruding ends of tendons shall be cleaned in order to remove deposits of oil, rust, mortar or soil, which would lessen the grip of wedges or of anchorage devices.
 Tendons shall be checked before tensioning to ensure that they are free to move inside the duct.
 The jacks shall be set accurately in the line of the tendons.
 The stressing operation shall be performed by suitably trained and experienced personnel who are familiar with the approved system using the best available practices in accordance with the manufacturer's advice.
 The stressing force shall be applied smoothly and evenly.
 The sequence of stressing shall be as shown on the drawings.
 No member shall be left partly stressed unless the drawings require the member to be stressed in stages.
 The force which is applied initially to take up the slack of the tendon shall be sufficient to seat the jack firmly but shall not exceed the amount normally associated with the particular method of prestressing. After taking up the slack, the tendon shall be accurately marked at both ends and the elongation or draw-in shall be measured in relation to these marks. Readings of force and elongation shall be taken at regular intervals during the tensioning of a tendon. The elongation readings shall be plotted in order to determine the zero error and a correction for the zero error shall then be made to the final elongation. Where tendons consist of a number of individual components each component shall be marked so that any slip may be observed.
 Where one or more components or tendons of a group stressed together slips during stressing operations, the Superintendent may permit a compensating increase in the elongation of the remaining tendons of the group provided that the jacking force does not exceed 85% of the minimum ultimate tensile strength of the remaining tendons. In the case of a tendon breaking or slipping after tensioning, so that the allowable tolerances above are exceeded, the tendon shall be released, replaced if necessary, and re-stressed. Under no circumstances shall the maximum jacking force exceed the rated capacity of the jacking equipment or 85% of the specified minimum ultimate strength of the tendon, whichever is the lesser.
 Allowance shall be made for draw-in of the tendon at the anchored end and where tendons are coupled, allowance shall be made for draw-in or movement at the coupling.
 Tendons shall be marked to allow measurement of elongation at both the jacking end and, where possible, at the anchored end.
 Friction losses shall be measured.
 On completion of stressing, wedges shall be seated and the stressing force shall be released gradually.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Subject to the above, tendons may be tensioned by one of the following methods.
 
 (b)
 
 Tensioning with One Jack
 
 Short tendons with low friction losses may be tensioned with a single jack.
 
 (c)
 
 Tensioning with Two Jacks
 
 Longer tendons in which friction losses are significant may be tensioned from both ends of the tendon, either simultaneously or sequentially.
 
 (i) Tensioning Simultaneously from Both Ends
 
 Tensioning shall continue until the required force in the tendon is reached. The extensions at the two jacks need not be the same but the sum of the elongations should equal the predicted total elongation subject to the provisions of Clause 612.15.
 
 (ii) Tensioning Initially from One End (Sequentially)
 Jacks shall be positioned at both ends of the tendon. The trailing jack shall be set so that the force transmitted to it can be recorded. Stressing shall commence at the leading jack and shall continue until the force at this end is approximately 75%* of the required tendon force. The force at the trailing jack shall then be increased until the force in the leading jack is reached. Stressing shall then continue simultaneously at both jacks until the required force in the tendon is reached. The extensions at the two jacks need not be the same but the sum of the elongations should equal the predicted total elongation subject to the provisions of Clause 612.15.
 
 * The designer may, in consultation with the Contractor and the supplier of the prestressing system, vary the level of the initial jacking force at the leading end provided that the required final jacking force is achieved.
 
 (d) Data to be Recorded
 The following data shall be recorded where applicable:  identification number of each dynamometer/gauge, pump and jack;  identification particulars of tendons;  initial forces (or pressures) when tendons are marked for measurement of elongation;  forces (or pressures) together with corresponding elongations obtained at 20%, 40%, 60%,
 80% and 100% of the required force;  final forces (or pressures) and elongations obtained on completion of tensioning;  residual elongations after release of jacks;  measurement of hog at completion of stressing operation;  the nature of any unexpected occurrences and the corrective measures taken.
 Completed records shall be submitted to the Superintendent on completion of stressing.
 
 612.17 GROUTING
 Tendons shall be grouted as soon as practicable, but not more than two weeks after their installation. If tendons cannot be grouted within this period of time, the duct shall be sealed to protect the tendons from corrosion.
 Prestressing anchorages shall be sealed before grouting, to prevent loss of grout.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 612.18 GROUT
 (a) Materials
 Grout for filling prestressing duct shall comprise cement, water and an admixture to reduce shrinkage and bleeding. Cement shall conform to the requirements of AS 3972 for general purpose cement and shall not contain calcium chloride. Permitted admixtures shall not contain chlorides, nitrates, metals or similar electrolytic conducting materials and shall only be used where they will increase workability or reduce shrinkage and bleeding. The water cement ratio shall be as low as possible consistent with adequate workability and shall be not less than 0.38 or more than 0.45 by mass. All batching shall be by mass with an approved measuring device and to an accuracy of  1%. The maximum proportion of chlorine shall not exceed 0.05% with not more than 0.02% in the cement and not more than 0.02% in the water. The maximum proportion of sulphur in the form of sulphites and sulphides shall not exceed 0.2%.
 Details of the materials and the proportions of the grout mixture shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 The Contractor shall give the Superintendent not less than seven days notice of any grouting operation.
 HP All grouting operations shall take place in the presence of the Superintendent.
 (b) Properties
 The minimum compressive strength of test cubes made, cured and tested in accordance with AS 1478.2 shall be 32 MPa at 28 days. At least one pair of cubes shall be taken from each 5 cubic metres or part thereof of grout. Bleeding of the grout shall not exceed 2% of the volume three hours after mixing and shall not exceed 4% of the volume at any time. All separated water shall be absorbed within 24 hours. Bleeding shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of AS 1478.2.
 612.19 GROUT MIXING AND PUMPING EQUIPMENT
 Proposal for mixing and pumping equipment shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 Grout shall be mixed in a high speed mechanical mixer, for at least two minutes, until a uniform colloidal consistency is achieved. Mixing by hand, or by tumbling action, is not accepted.
 Water shall be added to the mixer before any other mix ingredients. Cement shall then be added gradually and the grout shall be stirred continuously for a minimum period of two minutes prior to the commencement of grouting. Admixtures shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 Grout may be used for a period of 1 hours following addition of cement to the mix. On the expiry of 1 hours following the introduction of cement to the mix, unused grout shall be discarded and a fresh mix shall be prepared.
 Pumps shall be capable of continuous operation with minimal pressure variation, and shall have a system for recirculating the grout when grouting is not in progress. Pumps shall be fitted with a pressure gauge and shall be capable of delivery at pressures up to 1.0 MPa. The use of compressed air will not be permitted. The hoppers to the pumps shall be fitted with 2.36 mm sieve strainers.
 Piping to the grout pump shall have a minimum internal diameter of 25 mm and a minimum of bends, valves and changes in diameter.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Grouting equipment, especially piping, shall be thoroughly washed with clean water after each grouting operation.
 612.20 GROUTING OPERATIONS
 Grouting shall not commence when the temperature is below 5C, or when the temperature exceeds 35C.
 Immediately prior to grouting, the duct shall be flushed with clean water until all loose particles are removed and clean water is discharged.
 The duct shall then be water-pressure tested and shall be capable of sustaining a pressure of at least 0.7 MPa. All vent and drain hole leaks shall be plugged and surplus water shall be removed by air-flush using oil-free compressed air.
 Grout shall then be injected into the duct with sufficient volume to achieve a speed of between 0.3 m and 0.6 m per second.
 A continuous, steady flow of grout shall be maintained until all entrapped air and water has been expelled and the duct is completely filled and pure grout issues from all vents and from the remote end of the duct. In order to ensure complete filling of the duct, the vents shall be closed progressively commencing at the inlet end as soon as a steady flow of grout, free of bleed-water and air-bubbles is achieved at the vent. A grout pressure of 0.7 MPa shall then be maintained at the inlet for ten minutes. During this period the crest vents shall be opened after five minutes to allow removal of bleed water or air that may have accumulated in the vent. This process shall be repeated after ten minutes after which the inlet shall be closed to maintain the pressure in the duct.
 All vents and the ends of the duct shall remain closed until the grout has set.
 If the pressure in the duct cannot be maintained at 0.7 MPa, grouting shall be suspended, the duct flushed clean with water and the leakage sealed before grouting is resumed.
 If a blockage occurs, pumping may be transferred to the far end of the duct provided that thus is done in sufficient time for the grout to remain workable and there are enough vents to ensure that the duct will be filled with grout. Alternatively, duct may be flushed with clean water to clear the blockage and the grouting repeated. If a second blockage occurs, the grout mix will be rejected and the Contractor will be required to revise the grout mix design.
 All duct openings shall be inspected at between two and three days after grouting and topped up if required.
 On completion of grouting and after the grout has hardened sufficiently, vents or grouting tubes that extend to the surface of the concrete shall be cut off 25 mm below the concrete surface and the recess filled with a proprietary concrete repair mortar.
 An alternative method for grouting of tendon ducts in pre-cast post-tensioned beams
 To ensure that the tendon duct is completely filled with grout and that there are no voids containing air or bleed-water in the grout, the above procedure may not be sufficient.
 Although this method is of greatest benefit for beams with tendons having a curving profile, it may also offer significant benefits for beams with straight tendons.
 The beam shall be raised at one end to a point where the gradient of the curving duct is always positive. The end of the beam shall be lifted by the embedded lifting attachments with the use of a crane. The beam shall be lifted and supported in such a way that no damage occurs to the concrete and that none of its components are overstressed. After lifting the beam, it shall be supported on a rigid and stable support designed to prevent collapse or toppling.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 612 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Grouting of the duct shall then be conducted as described above, working from the low end of the beam. When the grout has achieved sufficient strength, the beam shall be returned to its normal storage position taking the same precautions as described for lifting and with the same equipment. Non-destructive testing shall be used to prove the absence of voids at the request of the Superintendent. 612.21 CONCRETING OF ANCHORAGE RECESSES Filling of recesses at anchorages shall be as shown on the drawings. When the grouting has been completed and the grout has set, the protruding ends of tendons shall be cut back sufficiently to ensure a minimum of 30 mm cover to the ends of the tendons when concreting of the recesses has been completed. Flame cutting of the protruding ends of strands or tendons is not permitted. The interior surfaces of anchorage recesses shall be scabbled. Steel reinforcement shall be placed in the recesses as shown on the drawings. The surface of the recess shall be coated with a bonding agent after which concrete, conforming to the requirements of Section 610 , shall be cast in the recesses to the shape required by the drawings.
 Department of State GroVwitchRoadAsuAgugsutst22001160 SectioSnec6ti1o2n 6(1P2a(gPeag1e211oof f1121))
 
 SECTION 613 - FALSEWORK
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 166 and 175. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 613.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the design, and erection of falsework required to facilitate construction of the permanent works and the subsequent dismantling and removal of falsework.
 
 613.02 STANDARDS
 (a) Australian Standards
 Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 3610). AS 1170 Parts 1 and 2 `Loading Code' AS 1576 Scaffolding AS 1720 Timber structures AS 3610 Formwork for concrete AS 4100 Steel structures AS 5100 Bridge Design Set.
 (b) Additional Documents Work Health and Safety Act 2012 Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012.
 613.03 DEFINITIONS
 Falsework: The temporary structural system required to support the formwork, the permanent structural components, material, plant, equipment and personnel required in the construction of the works. The temporary structural system comprises foundations and all structural members supporting the formwork, or supporting permanent structural components.
 
 613.04 FALSEWORK DESIGN
 Falsework shall conform to the requirements of AS 3610 and this specification.
 HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review, detailed drawings and specifications of the proposed falsework design and foundations not less than 2 weeks prior to the commencement of erection of falsework.
 The falsework design shall be certified by a design engineer who is a member of Engineers Australia and with a minimum of 5 years experience in the design and construction of falsework of similar complexity. The falsework design shall be verified in accordance with the Contract to confirm that the design satisfies the assumptions and the performance requirements of the falsework. The Design Engineer shall provide a statement that its obligations under Section 22 of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012 have been satisfied. The falsework design shall also be proof engineered by a Proof Engineer who is independent of the design consultant's firm and is prequalified at Level PE under the VicRoads' prequalification scheme or approved by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 613 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Proof engineering shall be based on the construction drawings and specification and without reference to the design engineer's computations.
 HP The Proof Engineering Certificate of Compliance shall be forwarded to the Superintendent not less than five working days prior to the commencement of fabrication of the falsework and at least two days prior to the construction of any falsework foundations. The Proof Engineering Certificate of Compliance shall be in accordance with the form included as Attachment A to this section.
 Evidence of the Proof Engineer's detailed check and acceptance shall be indicated on every drawing and the specification issued for construction.
 The design certification by the Proof Engineer shall state that the design of falsework and all falsework documentation conforms to the performance requirements of the Contract and this section including the Australian Standards and additional documents listed in Clause 613.02. Any amendment to the design after the issue of the Proof Engineering Certificate of Compliance shall be referred to the Proof Engineer for review and written confirmation that the Certificate of Compliance remains valid.
 Falsework shall be erected and dismantled in strict conformance with the design drawings, specification, erection and dismantling procedures and instructions. A copy of all drawings, specification, procedures and instructions duly certified by the design engineer shall be kept on site.
 Erection and dismantling of falsework shall be performed by personnel experienced in the erection and dismantling of falsework, to ensure that it is performed in a safe manner and without risk to personnel and property.
 All proprietary falsework shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and shall comply with the requirements of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
 All falsework shall comply with the requirements of all relevant Codes of Practice approved under the Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
 613.05 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
 Falsework shall be designed to withstand all forces resulting from the loads as specified in this clause or from the loads specified in AS 3610 and AS 1170 Parts 1 and 2, whichever produces the greater effect, and any additional loads that may be imposed on the falsework during construction. The design shall take into account the magnitude, direction and duration of these forces individually and collectively to ensure that on completion of the permanent structural components, the line, levels and dimensions of the constructed component comply with the requirements of the Contract.
 The design loads (other than those specified in AS 3610 and AS 1170) shall be:
 (a) Dead Load
 This shall include the mass of forms, falsework, wet concrete, reinforcement and any other embedded material. The density of wet concrete, including reinforcement, shall be taken as 2700 kg/m3. (b) Superimposed Load
 This shall include the mass of workmen, plant, equipment and runways, stacked material and an impact allowance equal to 25% of the all up weight of any mechanically operated plant.
 In no case shall the superimposed load be less than 2 kPa (plus the mass of stacked material) on the plan area of the finished concrete or a single isolated load of 2.5 kN applied at any point of the structure.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 613 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Wind Load
 This shall be 2.4 kPa minimum acting on the exposed area of falsework, formwork and any object supported by the falsework or formwork.
 (d) Other Loads
 These shall include any special conditions likely to occur during construction, including the redistribution of load due to the effects of prestressing or early application of prestress, construction stages and staged removal of falsework. The falsework design shall also allow where required the effects of stream flow, traffic impact, flooding and any other applicable conditions.
 (e) Horizontal Loading
 This shall include wind loading, horizontal surge loading equal to 25% of the all up mass of any mechanically operated plant and loading occurring during construction.
 In no case shall the design value of the horizontal load acting in any direction be less than 1.5 kN per metre applied at the edge of deck or 3% of the total dead load, whichever is the greater.
 The design of all falsework members and connections shall comply with AS 3610, AS 4100 and AS 1720.
 Guardrailing and access requirements shall comply with AS 1576.
 Falsework members shall be designed and constructed to limit deflections to prevent cracking or settlement of previously cast sections due to subsequent casts. Deflections of beams and dimensional changes in other members and connections shall be limited to ensure that the finished concrete is within the specified tolerances for line and level.
 All permanent structural components which are adjacent to or surrounded by falsework shall be protected to prevent any damage during the execution of the works.
 Falsework shall not be supported or braced from completed permanent structural components unless it can be demonstrated that such temporary loading will not affect the structural integrity of the relevant component or the stability and integrity of the overall falsework system.
 The Contractor shall carry out a site specific geotechnical investigation in addition to the geotechnical investigation required for the design of the permanent structure, to establish the appropriateness of the existing ground conditions for the design and construction of the falsework system.
 Where the falsework settles under load such that the allowable dimensional tolerances on the permanent structural components are exceeded, a non-conformance shall be raised and the falsework shall be modified such that the finished permanent structural components comply with the requirements of the Contract with regard to dimension, position and tolerances.
 Where required, the falsework design shall include hydrologic and hydraulic design parameters to assess the potential for scour and bank erosion and allow for suitable protective measures.
 613.06 FALSEWORK DRAWINGS
 The drawings submitted to the Superintendent shall state all design assumptions and shall include a statement of the loads and any dimensional changes due to loading in all members of the falsework. The drawings shall be fully detailed including all member sizes and materials, dimensions, levels, erection procedures and other relevant details including bracing, connections and foundations, to ensure that erection and inspection of the falsework can be undertaken without reference to any other documentation.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 613 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 613.07 PROVISION FOR ADJUSTMENT TO LEVEL
 The falsework shall have provision for making adjustment to level.
 613.08 PROVISION FOR LONGITUDINAL AND LATERAL MOVEMENTS
 The structural members of the falsework shall be designed for loads which may result from longitudinal or lateral movements caused by temperature effects or shrinkage of concrete. Alternatively, provision shall be incorporated in the falsework to permit these movements.
 613.09 BRACING
 Adequate bracing shall be provided longitudinally and transversely to ensure that the falsework is stable and that significant horizontal movements resulting from the applied loads are limited.
 613.10 FOUNDATIONS
 The foundations of the falsework shall be designed to prevent excessive settlement and rotation of supports and to ensure that the tolerances for the finished structure are satisfied. Individual footings and groups of footings shall be designed also to satisfy stability criteria. Where the foundation material may become saturated with water, allowance shall be made for possible reduction in bearing capacity, consequent changes in stability, and increased settlement or heave of the foundation. Bearing surfaces of footings shall be horizontal. Footings shall not be founded directly on filled ground.
 613.11 FALSEWORK AT ABUTMENT BATTERS
 Footings for falsework shall not be founded directly on abutment fills. Footings on cut batters will only be permitted if the stability of the individual footings or groups of footings on the cut slope, and the stability of the cut slope as a whole, are adequate and incorporate the normal safety factors against possible failure.
 613.12 CERTIFICATION OF AS-CONSTRUCTED FALSEWORK
 The Contractor shall arrange for the design engineer who certified the falsework drawings and the Contractor's Engineer to carry out an on-site inspection and any other activities necessary to certify that the falsework has been erected in accordance with the certified falsework drawings and specification. The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent a Certificate of Compliance  Falsework Inspection for the constructed falsework, signed by the Contractor's Engineer and the Design Engineer who certified the falsework drawings, and shall be in the form shown in Attachment B to this section.
 The Certificate of Compliance  Falsework Inspection for the constructed falsework shall be submitted to the Superintendent not less than two clear business days prior to the application of any dead load.
 HP The application of any permanent load shall not proceed until the signed Certificate of Compliance - Falsework Inspection of the constructed falsework has been reviewed and accepted by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 613 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 613.13 LOADING OF ERECTED FALSEWORK The Contractor shall ensure that the erected falsework is not subjected to any loading that exceeds the loading permitted by the design and as marked on the falsework drawings.
 613.14 DRAINAGE The Contractor shall provide adequate drainage for stormwater to prevent scour of falsework foundations. Foundations on batters shall be protected against scour by directing drainage away from the falsework. All drainage trenches, pipes and diversion channels shall at all times be adequately maintained by the Contractor.
 613.15 ACCESS THROUGH FALSEWORK The Contractor shall provide access at all times through the falsework in accordance with Section 166 or as specified.
 613.16 FALSEWORK RELEASE HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review, details of the
 proposed method of release of the falsework not less than two weeks prior to commencing this operation. Provision shall be made to permit an even and gradual release of the falsework. Where shown on the drawings the Contractor shall provide for the release of defined sections of the falsework.
 613.17 REINSTATEMENT AFTER FALSEWORK REMOVAL After falsework has been dismantled, temporary piles shall be cut back to a depth of 300 mm below ground level. Temporary piles under proposed road pavement shall be cut back to at least 500 mm below subgrade level. All temporary footings shall be removed and all excavations associated with the falsework shall be backfilled in accordance with the specification.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 613 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 613
 PROOF ENGINEERING CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
 (Form to be used by the Proof Engineer at intermediate stages and final completion of design and construction)
 
 I ................................................................................................ certify that I have:
 
 (1) undertaken an independent engineering review in relation to the design represented by the drawings and specifications provided by the Contractor as listed in the attached schedule;
 
 (2) carried out a detailed check of individual structural elements and the structure as a whole
 
 including the specified material properties;
 
 ##(strikethrough (3), (4) and/or (5) below if these aspects are not included in the specified scope
 
 of proof engineering):
 
 ##:(3)
 
 reviewed the Site Conditions Information Report in accordance with AS5100 
 
 Bridge Design, the appropriate foundation investigation, the recommended design values,
 
 material properties and possible failure mechanisms;
 
 ##:(4)
 
 reviewed the hydrologic and hydraulic design parameters including design flood
 
 discharges and levels, stream velocities and afflux as well as evaluation of potential for and
 
 protection against scour and bank erosion;
 
 ##:(5)
 
 reviewed the proposed construction procedure and the aspects of temporary works
 
 critical for structural integrity and safety.
 
 In performing the function of Proof Engineer I have used due skill, care and diligence and from my review and in my opinion as a professional engineer I consider that:
 
 A. all relevant design actions and design criteria are covered by the design and that these actions and criteria and overall concept meet the requirements of the Principal's Project Requirements;
 B. the strength, stability and serviceability and other Limit State requirements as defined in the Principal's Project Requirements are met; and
 C. the construction drawings and specifications accurately describe the following matters critical to the structural integrity 
 ##(strikethrough (c) below if these aspects are not included in the specified scope of proof engineering) : (a) the detailing and dimensions,
 (b) the required material properties, and (c) the construction procedure and temporary works.
 
 Signed
 
 Name (please print)
 
 On behalf of
 
 (Company)
 
 Date
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 613 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 ATTACHMENT B TO SECTION 613
 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE  FALSEWORK INSPECTION
 CONTRACTOR'S ENGINEER
 I ............................................................................................... , the undersigned (Please print person's name)
 am responsible for supervising the construction of falsework detailed on the following listed final drawings and specifications certified by the Proof Engineer. Using due skill, care and diligence, I have reviewed the relevant geometric surveys and test reports and made inspections during the construction of the falsework and certify that the completed falsework complies with the certified drawings and specifications.
 
 Signed
 
 ....................................................................................
 
 On behalf of (Company) ....................................................................................
 
 Date
 
 ...............................................................
 
 DESIGN ENGINEER
 I ............................................................................................... , the undersigned (Please print person's name)
 am responsible for the design of falsework detailed on the following listed drawings and specifications certified by the Proof Engineer. Using due skill, care and diligence, I have made an inspection of the completed falsework and certify that it complies with the certified drawings and specifications.
 
 Signed
 
 ....................................................................................
 
 On behalf of (Company) ....................................................................................
 
 Date
 
 ...............................................................
 
 Contractor to Schedule all Drawings and Specifications of falsework certified by the Proof Engineer, applicable to this joint Certificate of Compliance. ........................................................................................................................
 ............................................................. ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 613 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 SECTION 614 - FORMWORK
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 610 and 689. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 614.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the design and construction of formwork required to produce the finished concrete to the shape, lines and dimensions shown on the drawings, and in accordance with the finishes and tolerances specified in Section 610.
 
 614.02 STANDARDS
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 3610).
 
 AS 1366
 
 Rigid cellular plastics sheets for thermal insulation - Rigid cellular polystyrene  Moulded (RC/PS - M)
 
 AS/NZS 1594 Hot-rolled steel flat products
 
 AS 2271
 
 Plywood and Blockboard for Exterior Use
 
 AS 3610
 
 Formwork for Concrete
 
 AS 5100
 
 Bridge Design Set.
 
 (b) Additional Documents
 Work Health and Safety Act 2012 Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012.
 
 614.03 DEFINITIONS
 Formwork: A temporary structural system comprising the form that contacts the concrete, and includes the supporting members, bracing and other fixtures used to give the required shape, lines and dimensions and to support the freshly placed concrete while it is setting and gaining sufficient strength to be self supporting.
 Void Former: Prefabricated or solid light weight material, including associated anchorages and fixtures for the purpose of forming circular or irregular shaped voids in concrete components.
 
 614.04 FORMWORK DESIGN
 Formwork shall conform to the requirements of AS 3610 and the additional requirements of this section.
 Formwork shall be rigid, watertight, braced and tied together to confine freshly placed concrete and maintain position and shape during construction, and shall be constructed in such a way that it can be removed without damage to the concrete. Where formwork is to be re-used, the formwork design shall allow for the deterioration of materials through use and handling.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 1 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The submission of formwork documentation and certification for the various concrete members shall be in accordance with the requirements of Table 614.041, and Attachments A, B and C to this section.
 
 Table 614.041
 
 Concrete members
 
 Formwork documentation
 
 (a) Abutments, pilecaps, footings, N/A solid piers, pier columns and walls, with heights less than or equal to 2.0 metres
 
 (b) Abutments, pilecaps, footings, Design drawings solid piers, pier columns and and specifications walls, with heights greater than 2.0 metres
 (c) All other concrete members
 (d) Any member for which selfcompacting concrete is proposed
 
 Certification of formwork design N/A
 Design Engineer
 
 Proof Engineering Certification of of formwork design erected formwork
 
 N/A
 
 Contractor's
 
 Engineer
 
 (Attachment C, as
 
 per Clause 614.08)
 
 Proof Engineer (Attachment A, as per this clause)
 
 Contractor's Engineer and Design Engineer (Attachment B, as per Clause 614.08)
 
 Where formwork requires design and the production of design drawings and specifications as stated in Table 614.041, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review its detailed drawings and specifications of the proposed formwork not less than two weeks prior to the commencement of formwork construction.
 The formwork design shall be certified as stated in Table 614.041 by a Design Engineer who is a member of Engineers Australia and with a minimum of 5 years experience in the design and construction of formwork of similar complexity. The formwork design shall be verified in accordance with the Contract to confirm that design satisfies the performance requirements of the formwork.
 The formwork design shall also be proof engineered as stated in Table 614.041 by a Proof Engineer, who is independent of the design consultant's firm and is prequalified at Level PE under the VicRoads' prequalification scheme or approved by the Superintendent.
 HP The Proof Engineering Certificate of Compliance shall be forwarded to the Superintendent at least two days prior to the construction of any formwork. The Proof Engineering Certificate of Compliance shall be in accordance with the form included as Attachment A to this section.
 Any amendment to the design after the issue of the Proof Engineering Certificate of Compliance shall be referred to the Proof Engineer for review and written confirmation that the Certificate of Compliance remains valid.
 The formwork drawings shall include all details of formwork, formwork joints, sealing procedures, ties, size and spacing of framing and details of any proprietary fittings or systems proposed to be used. Where vibration is to be applied externally, the design of formwork shall include details of external vibrators to ensure efficient compaction and to avoid surface blemishes. The requirements of the Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 shall be satisfied with respect to all formwork.
 
 614.05 FORMWORK MATERIALS
 The formwork surface material for exposed concrete surfaces shall be steel plate conforming to AS/NZS 1594 or plywood conforming to AS/NZS 2271, unless otherwise shown on the drawings.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 2 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The type and condition of formwork sheeting and lining, and the ability of the formwork and its supports to withstand distortion caused by the placement, lateral pressure and compaction of the fresh concrete, and the standard of workmanship used in the formwork construction shall be such that a uniform concrete surface texture is produced, and the finished surfaces of the concrete will conform to the requirements of the specifications and drawings.
 All formwork panels shall be placed in a neat, symmetrical pattern such that the exposed panel joints do not detract from the geometry or from the final appearance of the structure. The proposed soffit and side formwork panel arrangements shall be detailed on the formwork drawings.
 Formwork panels shall be supplied in the maximum practicable width and length to minimise the number of joints. Plywood panels shall be placed with the grain of the outer plies in the direction of the span.
 614.06 FORMWORK CONSTRUCTION
 Formwork shall be constructed and shall be of sufficient stiffness to tolerate the rate of concrete placement and high frequency vibration, and shall be of uniform stiffness to avoid causing varying vibration amplitudes over the formwork surfaces during compaction of the concrete. The constructed formwork shall be solidly braced and tight and maintain correct position and shape and achieve the specified dimensions, levels, cover to steel reinforcement and geometry of the finished structural component in accordance with the tolerance requirements of Section 610.
 The use of wires or bolts extended to the surface of the concrete will not be permitted. Any embedded ties shall remain embedded and shall terminate not less than the minimum clear cover specified on the drawings. All recesses shall be filled with a shrinkage compensating cementitious mortar in accordance with Section 689.
 Errors in line or level of the formwork, or positioning and/or quantity of steel reinforcement shall be corrected prior to placing concrete. The Contractor will be responsible for any defects to the formwork, reinforcement, embedded components, or the formed concrete surface, which may become apparent during or after casting the concrete.
 Formwork shall not be placed in locations where steel reinforcement and other fixtures cannot be inspected, until evidence that the reinforcement and other fixtures conform to the requirements of the specifications and the drawings has been obtained and recorded by the Contractor.
 All corners of cast-in-place or precast concrete shall have 20 mm x 20 mm chamfers or fillets. Chamfers and fillets shall be formed and cast integrally with the concrete member. Cutting or grinding of chamfers shall not be allowed.
 The interior surface of formwork shall be thoroughly cleaned out and treated with form oil or lubricant to prevent adhesion of the exposed concrete surface, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The form oil or lubricant shall be of the non-staining type and shall not discolour the surface of the concrete. The oil or lubricant shall be applied uniformly in a thin film and any surplus removed prior the concrete placement. Reinforcement and other embedments shall not be soiled by the form oil or lubricant.
 Prior to commencement of the concreting operations all tie wire ends, wood chips and other debris shall be removed from the forms.
 Formwork shall be sufficiently tight at joints to prevent loss of slurry or mortar while the concrete is in its freshly placed state, consistent with the method of placement and compaction. Formwork shall also be mortar tight where holes are needed to facilitate projecting reinforcement or fixing devices.
 All relevant requirements of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012 and Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 shall be satisfied with respect to all formwork.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 3 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 614.07 VOID FORMERS
 (a) General
 Formers used for the purpose of forming voids in concrete components shall be as follows: (i) prefabricated formers, including associated end caps and anchorages, for circular voids; (ii) solid formers made of lightweight material, including associated anchorages, for voids with irregular shapes.
 (b) Void Former Details
 The Contractor shall submit the void former details for review by the Superintendent not less than 4 weeks prior to the placement of concrete. Concrete shall not be placed until the void former details have been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 The void former details shall include the following: (i) a full technical description of the proposed void former, including documented evidence of previous use and performance; (ii) the material type;
 (iii) the method of construction and installation; (iv) the type and spacing of anchors and supports to hold down the void former; (v) the maximum pressure head and maximum height differential between the two sides
 of the void former which shall be consistent with the most adverse conditions that may exist during the concreting operations.
 (c) Certificates of Compliance of Materials and Components
 The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent not less than 4 weeks prior to the proposed use of materials and components, a signed statement including relevant test reports demonstrating the compliance of the materials and components with the requirements of Clause 614.07(d).
 The Contractor shall also submit for review by the Superintendent not less than 4 weeks prior to the proposed use of materials and components, computations carried out and certified by a design engineer confirming the ability of anchors and supports to securely restrain the void former in position during and after the concreting operations and confirm compliance with this section. The design engineer shall be experienced and qualified in structural design, with a minimum of five years experience in the design and construction of formwork and shall be verified in accordance with the requirements of Section 160.
 (d) Materials
 The void formers shall be made watertight to prevent ingress of concrete slurry and sufficiently strong and tough to withstand handling, transport, storage and installation and the placing and compaction of the concrete without suffering damage or deformation. Void formers and associated fixtures shall remain dimensionally stable and retain their physical properties under normal conditions of use, shall be resistant to fire, shall not cause staining or discolouration and shall not alter physically or chemically by contact with concrete slurry or moisture.
 As a minimum solid formers shall be rigid cellular expanded polystyrene complying with Class S as stated in AS 1366.3.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 4 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (e) Fabrication
 Void formers shall be fabricated such that after the concreting operations they maintain correct position and shape and achieve the specified dimensions, levels and geometry of the finished structural component in accordance with the specified tolerance requirements.
 Any stiffening ribs of prefabricated void formers shall project inwards to ensure a smooth outer surface profile and seams shall be watertight, recessed to present a smooth outer surface and mechanically overlocked when fabricated from spirally-wound strip material. Joints to any fixtures shall be sealed and watertight.
 Void formers and associated fixtures shall not be dented, cracked, spalled or porous, exhibiting signs of corrosion or are otherwise damaged in any way prior to installation, to prevent local instability of the void former under pressure from the wet concrete.
 Void formers shall be fabricated to the following tolerances: (i) outside dimension/diameter to within  3 mm (for cylindrical formers diameters measured at right angles); (ii) overall length, with required fixtures in place to within + 0 to  20 mm;
 (iii) diagonal dimensions for solid void formers to within  3 mm; (iv) for horizontal bow the deviation of the void former from the required profile shall not
 exceed 0.06% of the length of the void former or a maximum of 8 mm.
 (f) Installation
 The void former shall be securely restrained in position during and after the concreting operations. Large uplift forces acting as a result of the buoyancy effect and any lateral pressure due to concrete placement shall be resisted by external means and not by securing the void former to the steel reinforcement.
 Joints between void former segments shall be watertight.
 The tolerance on final position of the void former at any location shall be within  7 mm.
 614.08 CERTIFICATION OF FORMWORK
 Further to the requirements of Clause 614.04 and parts (b), (c) and (d) of Table 614.041, the Contractor shall arrange for the design engineer who certified the formwork drawings to carry out an on site inspection and any other activities necessary to certify that the erection of the formwork has been completed in accordance with the certified design drawings.
 The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent a Certificate of Compliance  Formwork Inspection for the constructed formwork signed by the Contractor and the Design Engineer responsible for the certification of the formwork drawings, and shall be in the form shown in Attachment B to this section.
 Further to the requirements of Clause 614.04 and part (a) of Table 614.041, the Contractor's Engineer responsible for designing, supervising and certifying the erection of the formwork shall be a member of Engineers Australia who is experienced in the design and construction of formwork of similar complexity. As part of the certification, the Contractor's Engineer shall carry out an onsite inspection and any other activities necessary, to certify in accordance with the form included as Attachment C to this section, that the erection of the formwork has been completed in accordance with the specified requirements.
 The relevant Certificate of Compliance  Formwork Inspection for the constructed formwork shall be submitted to the Superintendent not less than two days prior to the application of any load.
 HP The application of any load shall not proceed until the signed Certificate of Compliance - Formwork Inspection of the constructed formwork has been reviewed and accepted by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 5 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth 614.09 REMOVAL OF FORMWORK The period of time before formwork and formwork supports can be removed shall be in accordance with the minimum formwork removal times and requirements as specified in Section 610. Formwork shall be so constructed as to allow for its undisturbed dismantling and removal from the cast concrete without shock or damage. Shock or damage to the cast concrete shall also be prevented when removing formwork in the vicinity of projecting reinforcement or fixing devices. All formwork shall be removed on completion. All relevant requirements of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012 and Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 shall be satisfied with respect to removal of all formwork.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 6 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 614
 PROOF ENGINEERING CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
 (Form to be used by the Proof Engineer at intermediate stages and final completion of design and construction)
 For concrete members as stated in parts (b), (c) and (d) of Table 614.041
 
 I .................................................................................................... certify that I have:
 
 (1) undertaken an independent engineering review in relation to the design represented by the drawings and specifications provided by the Contractor as listed in the attached schedule;
 
 (2) carried out a detailed check of individual structural elements and the structure as a whole
 
 including the specified material properties;
 
 ##(strikethrough (3), (4) and/or (5) below if these aspects are not included in the specified
 
 scope of proof engineering):
 
 ##:(3)
 
 reviewed the Site Conditions Information Report in accordance with AS5100 
 
 Bridge Design, the appropriate foundation investigation, the recommended design values,
 
 material properties and possible failure mechanisms;
 
 ##:(4)
 
 reviewed the hydrologic and hydraulic design parameters including design flood
 
 discharges and levels, stream velocities and afflux as well as evaluation of potential for
 
 and protection against scour and bank erosion;
 
 ##:(5)
 
 reviewed the proposed construction procedure and the aspects of temporary
 
 works critical for structural integrity and safety.
 
 In performing the function of Proof Engineer I have used due skill, care and diligence and from my review and in my opinion as a professional engineer I consider that:
 A. all relevant design actions and design criteria are covered by the design and that these actions and criteria and overall concept meet the requirements of the Principal's Project Requirements;
 B. the strength, stability and serviceability and other Limit State requirements as defined in the Principal's Project Requirements are met; and
 C. the construction drawings and specifications accurately describe the following matters critical to the structural integrity 
 ##(strikethrough (c) below if these aspects are not included in the specified scope of proof engineering) : (a) the detailing and dimensions,
 (b) the required material properties, and (c) the construction procedure and temporary works.
 
 Signed Name (please print) On behalf of Date
 
 (Company)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 7 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ATTACHMENT B TO SECTION 614
 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE  FORMWORK INSPECTION
 For concrete members as stated in parts (b), (c) and (d) of Table 614.041
 CONTRACTOR'S ENGINEER
 I ............................................................................................... , the undersigned (Please print person's name)
 am responsible for supervising the construction of formwork detailed on the following listed final drawings and specifications certified by the Proof Engineer. Using due skill, care and diligence, I have reviewed the relevant geometric surveys and test reports and made inspections during the construction of the formwork and certify that the completed formwork complies with the certified drawings and specifications.
 
 Signed
 
 ....................................................................................
 
 On behalf of (Company) ....................................................................................
 
 Date
 
 ...................................................................
 
 DESIGN ENGINEER
 I ............................................................................................... , the undersigned (Please print person's name)
 am responsible for the design of formwork detailed on the following listed drawings and specifications certified by the Proof Engineer. Using due skill, care and diligence, I have made an inspection of the completed formwork and certify that it complies with the certified drawings and specifications.
 
 Signed
 
 ....................................................................................
 
 On behalf of (Company) ....................................................................................
 
 Date
 
 ...................................................................
 
 Contractor to Schedule all Drawings and Specifications of formwork certified by the Proof Engineer, applicable to this joint Certificate of Compliance.
 
 ........................................................................................................................
 
 ........................................................................................................................
 
 ........................................................................................................................
 
 ........................................................................................................................
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 8 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 ATTACHMENT C TO SECTION 614
 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE  FORMWORK INSPECTION
 For concrete members as stated in part (a) of Table 614.041
 CONTRACTOR'S ENGINEER
 I ............................................................................................... , the undersigned (Please print person's name)
 am responsible for designing and supervising the construction of formwork detailed on the following listed final drawings and specifications. Using due skill, care and diligence, I have reviewed the relevant geometric surveys and test reports and made inspections during the construction of the formwork and certify that the completed formwork complies with the specified requirements.
 
 Signed
 
 ....................................................................................
 
 On behalf of (Company) ....................................................................................
 
 Date
 
 ...................................................................
 
 Contractor to Schedule all Drawings and Specifications of formwork applicable to this Certificate of Compliance. ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................ ........................................................................................................................
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 614 (Page 9 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 619 - MANUFACTURE, TESTING AND DELIVERY OF PRECAST REINFORCED CONCRETE BOX CULVERTS
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 610, 611 and 801. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 619.01 GENERAL
 The supply of materials, manufacture, testing, handling and delivery of precast reinforced concrete box culverts up to 1200 mm in width shall be in accordance with the requirements of AS 1597.1 and this section.
 
 619.02 STANDARDS
 
 Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 1379).
 
 AS 1012 AS 1141 AS 1379 AS 1478 AS 1597.1 AS 2193 AS 2758.1 AS 3582
 AS 3582.1 AS 3582.2 AS 3582.3 AS 3610 AS 3799 AS 3972 AS 5100
 
 Methods of testing concrete Methods of sampling and testing aggregates Specification and supply of concrete Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout Precast reinforced concrete box culverts - Small culverts Calibration and classification of force-measuring systems Aggregates and rock for engineering purposes - Concrete aggregates Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement concrete Part 1 : Fly ash Part 2 : Slag - Ground granulated iron blast furnace Part 3 : Amorphous silica Formwork for concrete Liquid membrane-forming curing compounds for concrete General purpose and blended cements Bridge Design
 
 619.03 DEFINITIONS Definitions of concrete related terms shall be as described in Section 610.
 
 619.04 TYPES OF BOX CULVERTS
 The types of culvert covered by this specification are as designated in AS 1597.1, Clause 1.5: (a) `U' shape consisting of invert and lid. (b) Inverted `U' shape consisting of crown and base.
 Note: Where the word unit appears in this specification, it is deemed to mean a complete box culvert as described above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 1 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 619.05 STANDARD DIMENSIONS AND LENGTHS
 Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings box culvert dimensions shall comply with the requirements of Table 2.5 of AS 1597.1 and the standard nominal length of box culverts shall be as follows: (a) where imperial moulds remain in use, 1.22 m and 2.44 m; (b) where metric moulds are in use, 1.20 m and 2.4 m.
 All references to 1.22 m and 2.44 m units shall equally apply to 1.2 m and 2.4 m units and vice versa.
 619.06 DIMENSIONAL TOLERANCES
 (a) Internal and External Dimensions The actual internal dimensions of a unit shall not differ from the manufacturer's designated dimensions by more than  5 mm.
 (b) Thickness The actual thickness of a unit shall not differ from the specified thickness by more than - 3 to + 5 mm.
 (c) Length The actual length of a unit shall not differ from the manufacturer's designated length by more than  10 mm.
 (d) Straightness When the inner surface of a unit is tested by means of a 1 m long straight edge, the deviation from straightness at any point shall not exceed 5 mm.
 (e) Ends (i) Squareness The end faces shall not depart from planes at right angles to the sides and base by more than 5 mm or 1/200 of the height or width, whichever is the greater. (ii) Straightness The end faces shall not depart at any point from a straight edge held against them by more than 5 mm.
 (f) Section (i) Squareness The external cross-section anywhere in the length of the unit shall at no point depart from a true rectangle by more than 5 mm or 1/200 of the height or width, whichever is the greater. (ii) Straightness When the surfaces of a unit are tested by means of a straight edge, the deviation from straightness at any point shall not exceed 5 mm for a 1.22 m unit or 5 mm for a 2.44 m unit.
 The Contractor shall undertake a check for compliance with dimensional tolerances as stated in this clause at the frequency of one unit for every ten units manufactured of each size class of box culvert units.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 2 of 10) Section 619 (Page 2 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 619.07 DURABILITY REQUIREMENTS
 
 Box culverts shall be designed for a minimum exposure classification of B1 in accordance with AS 5100.5 and AS 1597.1. Box culverts used in saltwater applications shall be designed for exposure classification C in accordance with AS 5100.5 and AS 1597.1. The minimum concrete strength grade and concrete cover to the steel reinforcement shall be as shown in Table 619.071.
 Table 619.071
 
 Exposure Classification
 
 Minimum Cover to Steel Reinforcement (mm), for Characteristic Strength (f'c) at
 28 days
 
 40 MPa
 
 50 MPa
 
 B1
 
 30
 
 25
 
 B2
 
 45
 
 35
 
 C
 
 Not Applicable
 
 50
 
 619.08 MATERIALS
 (a) Concrete General
 Concrete used for the manufacture of precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall comply with the requirements of AS 1379. The concrete shall consist of a mixture of cementitious material, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate and water. The concrete may also contain chemical admixtures, details of which shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent. In its finished state concrete shall be sound and dense and durable and free from honeycombing and shall have the strength and other properties specified.
 (b) Cementitious Material
 (i) Cement
 Cement shall comply with the requirements of AS 3972. Cement per batch of concrete shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand, type and grind. Cement more than three months old shall not be used in the Works unless it is re-tested to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of AS 3972.
 (ii) Fly Ash, GGBF Slag and Amorphous Silica
 Fly Ash, GGBF Slag and Amorphous Silica shall comply with the requirements of AS 3582.1, AS 3582.2 and AS 3582.3 respectively and shall be from one manufacturer and of one brand, type and fineness.
 (iii) Minimum Portland Cement Content
 The minimum mass of portland cement in concrete mixes containing GGBF Slag, Fly Ash or Amorphous Silica shall be 60%, 75% or 90% respectively, of the total mass of cementitious material in the concrete mix. The inclusion of GGBF Slag, Fly Ash or Amorphous Silica in concrete mixes shall only be in single or double combination with portland cement. In a triple blend concrete mix, the portland cement content shall be a minimum of 60% and the individual contribution of GGBF Slag, Fly Ash or Amorphous Silica shall be a maximum of 40%, 25% or 10% respectively, of the total mass of the cementitious material in the concrete mix.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 3 of 10)
 Section 619 (Page 3 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (iv) Cementitious Type and Content for Saltwater Applications and Exposure Classification C
 Box culverts used in saltwater applications or exposure classification C shall be manufactured with concrete containing at least 20% fly ash and 7% to 10% silica fume as a replacement of portland cement, or at least 30% fly ash as a replacement of portland cement.
 
 (c) Chemical Admixtures
 Chemical admixtures when used shall comply with the requirements of AS 1478. They shall be used in accordance with the requirements of Clause 2.5 of AS 1379 and the manufacturer's recommended method of use and shall not reduce the strength of concrete below that specified. Chemical admixtures shall be accurately measured by means of dispensers which are subject to regular maintenance and are calibrated as a minimum at three monthly intervals. Chemical admixtures shall not contain calcium chloride, calcium formate, chlorine, sulphur, sulphides or sulphites.
 
 (d) Aggregates
 Source rock shall comply with the requirements of Section 801 - Source Rock for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates. Fine and coarse aggregate for concrete shall comply with the requirements of AS 2758.1 unless otherwise specified in Table 619.081.
 
 Table 619.081
 Property
 General Requirements 1. Particle density 2. Bulk density 3. Water absorption
 
 Relevant Standard and
 Clauses
 AS 2758 1-7.1 AS 2758 1-7.2 AS 2758 1-7.3
 
 Dimensions 1. Grading
 2. Material finer than 75 microns 3. Particle shape Durability 1. Los Angeles Value 2. Unsound Stone Content
 
 AS 2758 1-8.1 Table 1,2,3 AS 2758 1-8.2 AS 2758 1-8.3
 AS 1141.23 AS 1141.30
 
 Impurities
 
 1. Organic impurities
 
 AS 2758 1-14.1
 
 2. Sugar
 
 AS 2758 1-14.2
 
 3. Alkali-Aggregate Reactivity
 
 610.11(c)
 
 4. Soluble salts
 
 610.07(k)
 
 (% to cementitious material mass)
 
 Test Limits for Product Acceptance
 
 Greater than 2100 kg/m3
 Greater than 1200 kg/m3
 Less than 2.5% for Coarse Less than 1.5% for Fine
 
 Single-sized aggregate Coarse and fine
 Coarse 2% max., Fine 5% max.
 10% max. at 3:1 ratio for misshapen, flat and elongated
 
 35% maximum
 
 Unsound stone content:
 
 5% max.
 
 Total of unsound stone and marginal stone: 10% max.
 
 Not darker than the Standard Reference Colour No. 3
 Less than 1 part in 10,000
 Limits as per 610.11(c)
 5.0% max. Sulphate salts (concrete cured at ambient temperature) 4.0% max. Sulphate salts (steam-cured concrete) 0.15% max. Chloride salts
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 4 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (e) Water The quality of mixing water to be used in the concrete mix shall comply with the requirements of Clause 2.4 of AS 1379. However, the amounts of chloride and chlorine in the water shall be not greater than 0.03%.
 (f) Steel Reinforcement Steel reinforcement used in the manufacture of precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall comply with Section 611.
 
 619.09 PLACING AND COMPACTING CONCRETE
 Concrete shall be deposited in horizontal layers in a manner to avoid segregation and displacement of the steel reinforcement or other embedded items or formwork.
 The compaction of concrete shall be carried out by using external vibrators to achieve the desired level of compaction.
 Immersion vibrators of adequate size, number and frequency shall only be used as back-up when external vibrators fail. Care shall be taken to ensure that no steel reinforcement or embedded items are displaced by vibration.
 
 619.10 CURING, STRIPPING AND REMOVAL FROM FORMWORK
 
 Concrete shall be cured using one or a combination of methods described in this clause.
 
 The concrete shall be protected from moisture loss until commencement of curing, which shall continue until the concrete reaches the age or the maturity, whichever is the lesser, and the compressive strength is as shown in Table 619.101. The concrete compressive strength for checking the adequacy of curing shall be determined by test cylinders cured with and in the same manner as the concrete unit.
 
 The unit shall not be completely stripped from all forms or handled off the base forms until the compressive strength reaches 15 MPa. Curing shall be carried out to meet the requirements of Table 619.101 and where curing is interrupted by more than 30 minutes the unit shall be protected from moisture loss.
 
 Table 619.101
 
 Minimum
 
 Characteristic
 
 Exposure
 
 concrete
 
 Classification compressive
 
 strength (f'c) at
 
 28 Days (MPa)
 
 Required concrete compressive strength at completion of accelerated curing MPa
 
 Required minimum concrete age (days) and minimum maturity (C hrs) at completion of
 curing
 
 Moist
 
 Membrane
 
 Accelerated
 
 Age Maturity Age Maturity Age Maturity Days C hrs Days C hrs Days C hrs
 
 40 B1
 50
 
 25
 
 7
 
 3864
 
 7
 
 3864 0.25
 
 420
 
 32
 
 40 B2
 50
 
 25
 
 7
 
 3864
 
 7
 
 3864 0.25
 
 420
 
 32
 
 C
 
 50
 
 32
 
 7
 
 3864
 
 Not permitted 0.25
 
 550
 
 Notes:
 1. For concrete exposure classification U, curing should be as specified on the drawings and in this specification. 2. The required concrete compressive strengths at completion of curing are based on Table 4.5 of AS 5100.5--2004,
 i.e. compressive strength at completion of curing = 0.625 f'c.
 3. Maturity (C hrs) for moist and membrane curing is calculated by adopting the minimum days x 24 x 23C. Minimum days are based on Table 4.4 of AS 3600--2009.
 4. Maturity (C hrs) for accelerated curing is calculated by adopting the minimum days x 24 x 70C.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 5 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where moist curing is used concrete shall be kept continuously moist and the concrete maintained at a temperature above 5C and all surfaces of the culvert must remain fully saturated.
 Membrane curing in the form of curing compounds may be used in accordance with Table 619.101 for exposure classifications B1 and B2 in lieu of moist curing. Curing compounds shall be applied to all exposed concrete surfaces to manufacturer's specifications. The concrete shall be maintained at a temperature above 5C. Curing compounds shall comply with the requirements of AS 3799.
 Accelerated curing shall be carried out by low pressure steam curing in accordance with Appendix C of AS 1597.1.
 619.11 SAMPLING AND TESTING FOR COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH
 A sample consisting of a minimum of four concrete compression cylinders shall be taken at not greater than ten hours of continuous manufacture of culvert units and tested for strength. The concrete compression cylinders shall be made in accordance with AS 1012.1 and AS 1012.8 and subsequently tested in accordance with AS 1012.9. The minimum compressive strength requirements for each strength grade shall be in accordance with Clause 619.10 and as shown in Table 619.101.
 Curing of concrete compression cylinders shall be carried out in accordance with AS 1012.8. Concrete compression cylinders shall be cured initially with the product. As soon as practicable after a period of 18 hours from moulding, the test cylinders shall be placed under standard moist curing conditions. The time between moulding and entry into standard moist curing conditions shall not exceed 36 hours.
 619.12 CONCRETE COVER TO STEEL REINFORCEMENT
 The tolerance on concrete cover shall be 0 to +5 mm.
 For normal service conditions spacers or bar chairs used to maintain cover to the steel reinforcement shall be made of plastic or steel, provided the box culvert is manufactured using rigid formwork and intense vibration.
 Where box culverts are to be placed in saltwater applications, stainless steel spacers or plastic bar chairs shall be used.
 The concrete cover to the steel reinforcement shall be measured with a calibrated cover meter to ensure compliance with the requirements of Clause 619.07. The Contractor shall select one unit for concrete cover measurements from each 100 units of a batch or a maximum period of 3 months production. The cover meter device shall be capable of detecting the presence of reinforcement and indicating the depth from the concrete surface to the nearest point on the surface of the reinforcement with an accuracy of  1 mm at a depth of 25 mm.
 619.13 PROVISION FOR LIFTING AND HANDLING OF UNITS
 Units shall be handled in a manner which will avoid damage to them and shall be lifted using the lifting points provided.
 Where units are lifted in the legs-up position, a lifting beam shall be used in order to avoid inducing excessive bending moments.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 6 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Precast units shall not be handled before the concrete has reached compressive strength of 15 MPa and stored in a manner such that their: (a) serviceability is not impaired; (b) shape is not distorted to affect installation alignment; and (c) surface and edge finishes are not unduly damaged.
 Provision shall be made for lifting and handling the precast units. Where lifting inserts are provided, they shall be installed in accordance with the lifting inserts supplier's recommendations. All provisions for lifting shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate regulatory authority.
 619.14 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH
 All units shall be free from fractures, cracks and from any other defects.
 (a) Surface Condition The interior and exterior surfaces of the units shall be smooth and dense and free from voids, chipped edges, fins, protrusions, surface roughness and other defects. Blowhole defects 6 mm diameter and 3 mm deep will be accepted provided that there are no more than 5 defects in an area 300 mm square, or an equivalent area of larger or smaller diameter holes providing they are not more than 3 mm deep. Units with defects greater than this allowance shall be rejected. Units shall not be coated with cement wash or any other preparation.
 (b) Dents, Bulges and Defects Dents not exceeding 3 mm deep, and bulges not exceeding 3 mm high, shall be accepted provided they do not extend over the surface for a distance greater than twice the wall thickness of the unit, and provided that the minimum cover is maintained. Dents shall be repaired by the Contractor if necessary to maintain the minimum cover. Units shall be free from fractures and cracks wider than 0.15 mm and residual test cracks wider than 0.08 mm in accordance with the requirements of Clause 619.17 and Appendix E of AS 1597.1.
 619.15 IDENTIFICATION OF UNITS
 All units shall be clearly stencilled by the Contractor with indelible ink on the interior surface of each unit prior to inspection. Lids shall be stencilled on the underside and base slabs on the top side.
 Information required on each unit shall be as follows: (a) nominal dimensions (b) date of manufacture and identification number (c) name of the manufacturer and/or its registered trade mark (d) locality of the supplying factory (e) maximum mass of the unit (f) number of the relevant Australian Standard, i.e. AS 1597.1.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 7 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 619.16 TESTING AT THE MANUFACTURERS WORKS
 A batch is defined as a maximum of 50 number units of the same size and manufactured and cured at the same works within two calendar months.
 Units supplied from more than one source, or manufactured outside of a two month period, then those units shall be deemed to be more than one batch and the requirements of the specification shall apply to each separate batch.
 619.17 PROOF LOAD TEST
 From each 25 units of a batch, the Contractor shall select one unit as defined in Clause 619.04 for proof-load testing in accordance with AS 1597.1. The two test units shall represent the first sample for the batch.
 For batches of less than 25 units, a sample of one unit shall be selected by the Contractor for proof-load testing.
 Every selected unit not more than 1.22 metres long shall sustain a vertical force of 112 kN without developing a test crack as defined in Note 1, and on removal of the load, no crack caused by the load shall be greater than that defined in Note 2 below as a residual test crack.
 For batches greater than 25 units, if: (a) in the first sample two non-conforming units are found, then reject the batch; or (b) one unit in the first sample is non-conforming, select a second random sample of two units,
 one unit from each 25 units of the same batch, and subject them to the same crack load test in accordance with AS 1597.1. If any unit in the second sample fails, then reject the batch. If no units in the second sample fail, accept the batch.
 For batches of less than 25 units, should the sample test unit fail to comply then select a random second sample of one additional unit from the same batch and subject it to the same crack load test in accordance with AS 1597.1. If the unit in the second sample fails, reject the batch. If no non-conforming unit is found in the second sample, accept the batch.
 Note 1: A test crack is defined as one into which the point of a test crack measuring gauge conforming to the details given in Figure E1 of AS 1597.1 may be inserted to a depth of 2 mm over a length of at least 300 mm at intervals not exceeding 50 mm.
 Note 2: A residual test crack is defined as one into which the point of a residual test crack measuring gauge conforming to the details given in Figure E1 of AS 1597.1 may be inserted to a depth of 2 mm over a length of at least 300 mm at intervals not exceeding 50 mm.
 619.18 ULTIMATE LOAD TEST
 From each 25 units of a batch, the Contractor shall select one unit as defined in Clause 619.04 for ultimate-load testing in accordance with AS 1597.1. The two test units shall represent the first sample for the batch.
 For batches of less than 25 units, a sample of one unit shall be selected by the Contractor for ultimate-load testing.
 Every selected unit not more than 1.22 metres long shall sustain a vertical force of 202 kN.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 8 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 For batches greater than 25 units, if: (a) in the first sample two non-conforming units are found then reject the batch; or (b) one unit in the first sample fails to comply, select a second random sample of two units, one
 unit from each 25 units of the same batch, and subject them to the same ultimate load test in accordance with AS 1597.1. If any unit in the second sample fails, then reject the batch. If no units in the second sample fail, accept the batch.
 For batches of less than 25 units, should the sample test unit fail to comply with the requirements of this clause then select a random second sample of one additional unit from the same batch and subject it to the same ultimate load test in accordance with AS 1597.1. If the unit in the second sample fails, reject the batch. If no non-conforming unit is found in the second sample, accept the batch.
 619.19 LOAD TESTING OF 2.44 METRE UNITS
 For unit sections of 2.44 m, the loads specified for proof and ultimate test shall be applied over each 1.22 m end of the culvert either separately or at both ends simultaneously.
 When the unit is loaded at both ends simultaneously, the specified load for proof and ultimate shall be doubled.
 619.20 CALIBRATION OF TESTING MACHINE
 The testing machine used for load testing shall meet the requirements of AS 2193 Class B and shall be calibrated in accordance with the terms of laboratory accreditation for the specific testing machine type. A jack and pressure gauge system may be used provided that calibration is carried out at not more than six monthly intervals.
 619.21 TRANSPORT AND STORAGE
 (a) Transporting Units shall not be transported from the precast yard within seven days after casting and the curing has been completed in accordance with Clause 619.10. Units shall be supported on timber bearers which are fitted with rubber strips on top. Rubber strips shall also be placed between units, both laterally and longitudinally. All tie down straps and chains shall have rubber protection strips over box culvert edges. The legs of all box culverts shall be adequately braced to prevent whipping and bending. The precast invert base slabs and lids to be transported shall be loaded in the laid position.
 (b) Stacking (i) Inverts or crowns shall be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of 2 metres or two units high separated by timber packers. (ii) Lids or base slabs shall be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of six units separated by timber packers.
 (c) Final Visual Inspection of Units upon Delivery to Site The Contractor shall undertake a final visual inspection of units upon transport and delivery to site and the findings of such inspection shall form part of the acceptance requirements of Clause 619.22.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 9 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth 619.22 ACCEPTANCE Box culverts shall be accepted on the basis of full compliance with the requirements of this section and AS 1597.1. Documentation supporting the following quality requirements shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent upon transport and delivery of units to site: (a) visual inspection (b) dimensional measurements (c) measurements of clear cover to steel reinforcement (d) concrete compressive strength test results (e) proof load test results (f) ultimate load test results.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 619 (Page 10 of 10)
 
 SECTION 620 - PRECAST CONCRETE UNITS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 610, 611 and 614. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 620.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the manufacture, storage, handling and delivery of precast concrete units. Concrete for these units shall be in accordance with Section 610 `Structural Concrete' and reinforcement shall be in accordance with Section 611 `Steel Reinforcement'.
 
 620.02 FORMS
 Forms shall be manufactured from steel, except where otherwise approved by the Superintendent.
 The formwork shall be constructed so as to produce the finished concrete to the shape, lines and dimensions shown on the drawings, and in accordance with the surface finish and tolerances specified in Section 610 `Structural Concrete'.
 Void formers shall be securely restrained in position vertically against the action of placing concrete and subsequent flotation under vibration. The void former shall likewise be laterally restrained against forces arising from differential pressures during placing of concrete. Void formers shall comply with the requirements of Section 614.
 The use of wires or bolts extended to the surface of the concrete will not be permitted except where shown on the drawings. Any embedded ties shall remain embedded and shall terminate not less than the specified concrete cover. All recesses shall be filled in accordance with the surface finish provisions of Section 610.
 
 620.03 REMOVAL OF UNITS FROM FORMS
 Individual precast units with mass of five tonnes or less shall have a minimum concrete compressive strength of 10 MPa for removal of units from forms. For individual precast units of mass greater that five tonnes, the minimum concrete compressive strength shall be 20 MPa for removal of units from forms.
 Lifting of precast units at a minimum concrete compressive strength other than that specified in this clause shall be supported with structural calculations and maturity testing for estimating the in situ strength of concrete in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.16(l). The structural calculations shall be certified by an Engineer who has qualifications admitting to Corporate Membership of the Institution of Engineers, Australia, with a minimum of five years experience in structural design.
 
 620.04 PROJECTING REINFORCEMENT
 Where shown on the drawings, steel reinforcement shall be left projecting for the purpose of bonding on subsequent work. Care shall be taken to avoid disturbing the bars during the specified period for curing of the concrete. Projecting reinforcement which has been damaged or dislodged or which is loose in the concrete will be cause for rejecting of the units.
 Continuity bars shall be positioned within 3 mm of the positions shown on the drawings. The relative deviation of any two bars cross sections, taken at right angles to the longitudinal centreline of the unit over the projecting length of bar, shall be within 3 mm.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 620 (Page 1 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 620.05 SOLE PLATES AND BEARING RETAINERS
 Material for sole plates and bearing retainers shall be of structural grade steel complying with the requirements of AS 3678. All surfaces and edges of sole plates shall be finished smooth and bearing surfaces shall have a maximum out of flatness of 0.4 mm unless otherwise specified on the drawings. Prior to galvanizing, the surface finish on edges shall be equivalent to a Class 1 flame cut surface as specified by the Australian Welding Research Association. Welding shall comply with the requirements of AS/NZS 1554, Part 1.
 Unless otherwise specified, steel sole plates shall be galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 4680. The minimum mass of zinc coating shall be 0.6 kg/m2 of surface.
 Sole plates shall be set to the required grades shown on the drawings, or as specified by the Superintendent. They shall be arranged so that the bearing surfaces are at right angles to the vertical axis of the unit.
 620.06 MARKING
 The identification number, date of casting, the manufacturer's name or registered mark and the maximum mass shall be marked on every precast unit.
 Temporary identification shall be made on the top surface of the unit near an end, except for parapet units. Final marking shall be made by indelible marking material, using letters approximately 40 mm high.
 For parapet units, temporary identification shall be made on the broomed surface of the parapet as shown on the drawings. Final markings shall be made on one end of each unit.
 Piles shall be marked and numbered at 500 mm increments starting from the toe with an indelible marking material.
 620.07 HANDLING AND STORAGE
 Units shall not be stored in areas subject to flooding.
 Units shall not be stored within 10 m of existing or proposed overhead power or telephone lines, or over service conduits, drainage pipes or uncompacted fill.
 The units shall be supported on bearers clear of the ground. Bearers shall support the units over their full width and be placed perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the unit. Unless specified otherwise, bearers shall be placed beneath the specified or approved lifting points clear of any sole plates. The ground or space between the bearers supporting the units shall be carefully cleared and levelled so as to prevent the unit from being supported other than on the bearers. The bearers shall rest on a firm foundation, and adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent subsidence from occurring and to prevent the units bearing other than at the specified support positions.
 Any units damaged or distorted in excess of the specified tolerances prior or during installation shall be replaced at the Contractor's expense.
 Where the method of handling and supporting is not specified, the Contractor shall submit, for review by the Superintendent, details of his proposals 14 days prior to lifting and supporting the units.
 Unless otherwise specified, precast units shall be lifted using the lifting points provided and supported with the top surface uppermost at all times. The angle subtended by the slings and the longitudinal axis of the unit shall be not less than 60.
 Beams shall be stored and handled with webs vertical at all times.
 All beams shall be laterally supported. The lateral bracing shall be designed for 10% of the dead load of the beam at the mid height of the beam.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 620 (Page 2 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth Beams and parapet units shall not be stored in stacks. Slabs, planks and piles may be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of 2 m, or two units high, whichever is greater. Crown units may be stored in separate stacks of identical units up to a maximum height of 3 m. The upper layers shall be separated from the lower layers by suitable timber bearers in line vertically at the specified supporting points. Timber supports for upper layers shall be placed directly above the supports of the layer below. 620.08 TRANSPORTING Units shall not be transported from the precast yard until specified 28 day concrete compressive strength has been achieved, and not before 7 days after casting. Units shall be securely fixed to the transporter and provision shall be made to protect the units from damage caused by lashings. During transport of beam units the Contractor shall provide end bracing and, if necessary, top flange bracing. Bearings and supports shall allow for longitudinal rotation of the unit in transport and have adequate width and bearing capacity. No beam shall be transported and erected if it has a bow in excess of 1 in 400 of the length or 75 mm whichever is the lesser. Should the bow at any time exceed the maximum allowable limit steps shall be taken to ensure the safety of the unit throughout the journey. 620.09 TRACEABILITY OF PRECAST CONCRETE UNITS All manufactured precast concrete units shall be traced from the completion of manufacture to their final location by a unique identification number.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 620 (Page 3 of 3) )
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 622 - PRE-TENSIONING OF CONCRETE UNITS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 610 and 620. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 622.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply, placing and stressing of pre-tensioning systems.
 Cast-in-place concrete for pre-tensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of Section 610 - Structural Concrete.
 Precast concrete units for pre-tensioned construction shall comply with the requirements of Section 620 - Precast Concrete Units.
 622.02 SUPPLY OF TENDONS
 (a) Materials High-tensile steel wires and strands for use in pre-tensioning and the testing of these materials shall comply with AS/NZS 4672 Steel prestressing materials. Strand and wire for use in pre-tensioning shall be relaxation class 2 and shall be tested for compliance with the requirements for class 2 relaxation with an initial load of 80% of the specified minimum breaking force. Strand shall be obtained from an Australian Certification Authority for Reinforcing Steel (ACRS) accredited supplier. The Contractor shall submit the following for the material in each coil of wire or strand:  test certificates for tensile testing;  load-extension graphs; together with:  the manufacturer's certificate of compliance of the tendon material with the Australian Standard;  a stress-relaxation test certificate for material taken from the same production facility and of the same type of material as that proposed for use in the works (stress relaxation-test certificates for similar tendons produced within the calendar year prior to the proposed use will be accepted); to the Superintendent at least seven days prior to the delivery of the coil or lot to its place of use. Tests shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate Australian Standard:  in a laboratory accredited by the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) or approved equivalent for those test methods;  by personnel experienced in the test-methods described in the Contract. Additional relaxation testing of samples may be required by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 622 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 All test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA terms of accreditation for that laboratory.
 High-tensile steel wires or strands shall be supplied in coils of sufficiently large diameter to ensure that the wires or strands are straight when unwound from the coil.
 (b) Sampling and Testing if Required Under Clause 622.06
 Sampling Where required under Clause 622.06(c) the Contractor shall arrange for the tendon material to be tested. Samples of wire or strand shall be taken by the Contractor at the site of the works or at the supplier's fabrication shop, provided that the tendons fabricated from one coil or lot are bundles together and clearly identified with the coil or lot number. The Contractor shall arrange testing of test samples representative of each coil. These samples shall be taken not less than 1.5 metre from the end of any coil. For split coils, comprising two or more production runs of wire or strand, each production run shall be sampled and tested separately.
 Testing Samples shall be tested in a NATA-accredited laboratory for compliance with the Australian Standard for steel pre-stressing materials. All test reports shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA terms of accreditation for that laboratory.
 (c) Assembly of Tendons
 Splicing of strands or wires to form a tendon is not permitted.
 Welding is not permitted on or near tendons, nor shall any heat be applied to tendons. Tendons which have been affected by welding, weld splatter and/or heat shall be rejected.
 Flame-cutting of wire or strand within 75 mm of an anchorage or jack is not permitted.
 (d) Storage and Surface Condition
 Coils of wire and strand and assembled tendons shall be stored above ground level and shall be protected from mechanical damage, contamination with harmful substances or other damage until their incorporation into the works.
 Wires and strands that show any evidence of damage, kinks or bends shall not be used.
 Wires and strands which are heavily corroded or visibly pitted will not be accepted.
 Slight surface rusting shall not be a reason for rejection provided that no pitting is visible.
 Wire and strand shall be kept free from loose rust, oil, grease, tar, paint, soil or any other harmful substances.
 If the wire or strand become contaminated with any substance, it shall be cleaned with suitable equipment and appropriate detergents and/or clean water until all of the contaminant and any detergent has been removed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 Loose rust shall be removed by mechanical or manual methods that do not cause damage to the wire or strand or which impair the bond between the wire or strand and the concrete.
 Wire or strand that remains contaminated or that has suffered damage or impairment during cleaning will not be accepted.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 622 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 622.03 TRACEABILITY OF MATERIALS Wire strand shall be labelled in accordance with AS/NZS 4672. Individual lengths of wire and strand shall be traceable from the point of manufacture of coils to their final location by a unique identification number. Pre-tensioned concrete units shall be traceable in accordance with the requirements of Section 620.
 622.04 PLACING TENDONS Tendons shall be placed in continuous lengths in the positions shown on the drawings and shall be held in the required position by end-blocks of sufficient strength and stiffness to safely maintain the required force in the tendons. Tendons shall be debonded in the positions shown on the drawings by the use of close-fitting plastic tubing which shall be sealed to prevent grout leakage into the tube. Grease or other coatings shall not be used for debonding. Tendons shall not be allowed to come into contact with the oiled surface of the formwork. If a tendon is contaminated with oil or other harmful substance it shall be cleaned using an appropriate method in order to ensure that the bond between the tendon and the concrete is unimpaired. Tendons that cannot be cleaned shall be replaced. Tendons shall not be welded or exposed to heat from welding or other sources. Where deflected tendons are shown on the drawings, tendons shall be restrained with devices of sufficient strength to hold the tendons in their proper positions without displacement during the placing and compaction of concrete.
 622.05 STRESSING PRECAUTIONS Stressing of tendons, measurement of elongation and associated operations shall be conducted in a safe manner. The pre-cast concrete manufacturer shall comply with the requirement of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012 to provide a safe workplace. The stressing jack shall be adequately supported and restrained in order to ensure that it cannot cause injury to personnel operating the jacking equipment should the jack lose its grip on the tendons or should the tendon fail. No-one shall stand behind the jack or in a position where a broken tendon could cause injury when stressing is in progress. Should a tendon break during stressing, adequate restraint shall be provided to prevent lateral or vertical movement of the broken tendon. Robust barriers shall be provided in order to prevent a broken or loose tendon from recoiling into the working area. Warning signs that conform to AS 1319 - Safety signs for the occupational environment - shall be displayed at both ends of the member being tensioned during stressing operations.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 622 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 622.06 TENSIONING
 (a) Equipment
 The Contractor shall maintain current calibration certificates conforming to the requirements of AS 2193 Grade B for the jack and pressure gauges or other force measuring devices. Jacks and pressure gauges and other devices shall be calibrated and used as a single unit. Calibration to AS 2193 shall be carried out by a laboratory that is NATA-accredited for that method, and at the appropriate force range.
 The power unit shall be adjusted so that the rate of extension of the tendon is within the specified limits. The measuring equipment shall permit measurement of the tendon force prior to lock-off to the degree of accuracy required by AS 2193 Grade B. The measuring equipment used shall permit elongation to be determined to an accuracy of 2%. The equipment shall prevent unwinding of the strand during tensioning.
 The sag take-up force in the tendons shall be measured with equipment which complies with the repeatability and accuracy requirements of AS 2193 Grade B, at a scale mark at which the equipment has been calibrated. The readability requirements of AS 2193 Grade B shall be ignored for the purpose of establishing sag take-up. Sag take-up force shall not exceed 20% of the required tendon force, and shall be not less than 10% of the required tendon force or 10% of gauge capacity, whichever is the greater.
 (b) Anchorages
 Anchorages shall be of a type that prevents the occurrence of slip during casting and curing operations.
 (c) Tendon Force
 Before tensioning commences, the Contractor shall calculate the extension corresponding to the required tendon force shown on the drawings. The calculation shall be based on the measured length of the tendon between the tendon anchorages at the end blocks and the modulus of elasticity determined from the sample tested in accordance with Clause 622.02.
 The calculations shall include allowances for all losses including slip at anchorages, elastic shortening of the stressing bed, pull-in on transfer of prestress, friction losses and temperature changes.
 The calculations shall be reviewed by the designer of the pre-tensioned concrete units who shall certify that the calculations meet the requirements of the specification and the drawings. The Contractor shall provide a copy of the designer's certification to the Superintendent.
 After all tendons have been anchored to the end-blocks (locked-off), the force remaining in the tendons at mid-span of the unit shall be the required tendon force stated on the drawings.
 The allowable variation of the tendon force shall be 2%.
 Under no circumstances shall the maximum tensioning force exceed the lesser of the rated capacity of the jacking equipment or 80% of the tensile strength of the tendon.
 The tensioning force required to achieve the design tendon force shall be determined from the calibration certificate and the actual elongation of the tendon corresponding to the tensioning force shall be recorded. Alternatively, the Superintendent may approve determination of the tensioning force by measurement of the elongation, provided that the limits of variation of the modulus of elasticity of the tendons are satisfactory. In this case, the jacking force shall be recorded.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 622 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Should the modulus of elasticity of batches of tendons differ by more than 3%, the required elongation shall be adjusted accordingly.
 Where the difference between the force determined from the calibration certificate and the tensioning force calculated from the elongation exceeds 4%, the Contractor shall nominate some or all of the following remedial steps subject to review by the Superintendent. The Contractor shall suspend stressing until the completion of the Superintendent's review:  re-calibration of tensioning equipment;  testing of tendon material to check the modulus of elasticity;  that tendons be released and restressed (with the adoption of a modulus of elasticity applicable to the second stressing);  other steps as agreed by the Superintendent.
 (d) Tensioning Procedure
 The Contractor shall give the Superintendent seven days notice of stressing operations.
 HP All stressing operations shall take place in the presence of the Contractor's Precast Concrete Surveillance Officer.
 Tensioning operations shall be performed by suitably trained and experienced personnel.
 Where the sag take-up force is not measured, the slack shall be taken up by means of a pulling device pre-set to the sag take-up force. An allowance (based on elongation measurements) shall be made for sag take-up force in calculating the tensioning force. Tendons shall be marked for measurement of elongation after this sag take-up force has been applied. In order that slip may be observed, each tendon shall be marked at both the jacking end and the dead end of the stressing bed prior to the commencement of tensioning. Should slip occur in any one of a group of tendons being tensioned together, provided that not more than two tendons have slipped, tensioning of the group including the slipped tendons may be completed. If more than two tendons have slipped, the whole of the group shall be relaxed, the tendons shall be re-set and the whole group tensioned again.
 The prestressing force shall be transferred from the tensioning jack to the stressing-bed endblock immediately after the required tendon force prior to lock-off (or the required elongation) has been reached in the tendons. The hydraulic pressure in the jack shall then be relaxed before any other operation is commenced.
 (e) Action if Concreting is Delayed
 If placing of concrete does not commence within 24 hours of completion of tensioning of the tendons, the Contractor shall re-establish the jacking equipment and check the force in each of the tendons. If the measured force in any of the tendons is less than the required tendon force, the tendon stressing procedure shall be repeated. Placing of concrete may commence on completion of checking of tendon forces and re-tensioning (if required).
 622.07 FAILURE OF TENDONS
 Should a tendon fail after the concrete has been placed, the unit shall be rejected.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 622 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 622.08 TRANSFER OF PRESTRESS
 The Contractor shall submit details of the proposed method of transfer of prestress to the Superintendent for review not less than 14 days prior to the commencement of tensioning.
 
 (a) Procedure
 
 Transfer of prestress shall not take place:
 
  until the concrete has reached the transfer strength stated on the drawings or in
 
 the
 
 specification; and
 
  before the steam covers have been removed.
 
 Prior to transfer of the prestressing force to the units all tendons shall be:  tested for tightness; and  marked at each end of the unit to enable pull-in of the tendons to be measured.
 
 Tendon pull-in shall be recorded and the record shall be supplied to the Superintendent on completion of the unit.
 
 Transfer shall be gradual, continuous and simultaneous from each end of the unit, and shall be performed in the shortest practicable time.
 
 Transfer by cutting of tendons that are still under tension is not permitted.
 
 If it is proposed to transfer prestress by applying heat, the Contractor shall submit details of the method of transfer of prestress to the Superintendent, including:
 (i) the lengths of free tendons between units and at both ends of the bed; (ii) the locations where the heat will be applied; (iii) the order of severance of tendons and of release of devices for deflecting tendons; (iv) the method of applying heat and the proposed equipment.
 
 Heat shall be applied over a portion of the exposed tendon and for a period of time sufficient to ensure that the tendon is entirely relaxed before it is severed. Care shall be taken to prevent heat-damage to the concrete. Heat shall not be applied directly to any part of any tendon within 100 mm of the concrete surface of the units.
 
 Unless otherwise specified, on completion of the transfer of prestress the projecting lengths of tendons shall be cut-off flush with the end of the unit using a mechanical cutter. Care shall be taken to avoid damage to the concrete surface. Should damage to the concrete surfaces around the tendon anchorages occur during cutting, the Contractor shall submit proposals for its repair to the Superintendent.
 (b) Pull-in of Tendons
 
 The maximum pull-in of any tendon shall not exceed 6 mm. If pull-in exceeds 6 mm, the degree of variation shall be recorded and the cause shall be investigated by the Contractor and the results shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 
 If the unit does not meet strength and serviceability requirements of the design, it shall be rejected.
 
 (c) Hog
 Hog shall be measured at mid-span of the unit immediately after transfer of prestress has been completed. The actual hog shall be compared to the anticipated hog and to the hogs of other units intended for the same structure. If the hog varies by more than  25% from the anticipated hog, the effects of this variation shall be investigated by the Contractor and the results shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 622 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 If the unit does not meet strength and serviceability requirements of the design or if the geometrical variation between adjacent units is unacceptable, it shall be rejected. Unacceptable geometrical variation is defined as a difference in the levels of groups of units or between adjacent units that requires a change in grade-line to accommodate the variation allowing for the required thickness of asphalt surfacing.
 622.09 DATA TO BE RECORDED The following data shall be recorded:  identification number of the unit;  identification number of each dynamometer, gauge, and jack;  calibration certificates for each dynamometer, gauge, and jack;  identification details for each tendon;  sag take-up force (or pressure) when tendons are marked for measurement of elongation;  elongation obtained at intervals during tensioning, together with corresponding force
 (or pressure gauge reading);  tendon force (or pressure) and elongation obtained on completion of tensioning prior to lock-off;  elongation after release of jack;  pull-in;  compressive strength of concrete at time of transfer of prestress;  steam curing charts;  measurement of hog following transfer of prestress. Completed records shall be forwarded to the Superintendent prior to delivery of the pre-stressed units to the site.
 622.10 PROTECTION OF EXPOSED ENDS OF TENDONS If the end face of the unit and the tendons are to be cast into a diaphragm, the concrete surface surrounding the ends of the tendons and the tendons themselves shall be prepared as required on the drawings. If the ends of tendons are to remain exposed, they shall be wire-brushed to remove rust, loose mortar, grease, dirt and all other harmful material and shall then be coated with a minimum 6 mm thickness of epoxy compound.
 622.11 PROTECTION OF SURFACE-MOUNTED STEEL EMBEDMENTS On completion of the unit, tapped holes for steel embedments such as tendon hold-downs shall be patched with a low-shrinkage mortar or epoxy mortar. Patching shall be finished flush with the surface of the unit.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 622 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 626 - INSTALLATION OF PRECAST CONCRETE CROWN UNIT CULVERTS
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 204, 602, 610, 611, 613, 614, 687, 689 and 812. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 626.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies requirements for the installation of reinforced precast concrete crown unit culverts and the associated cast-in-place concrete, including excavation, bedding preparation, placing of units, backfilling and compaction.
 
 626.02 CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURE
 HP Culvert construction shall not commence until the Contractor's construction quality procedure and inspection and test plan(s) addressing all requirements of this section have been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 
 626.03 TOLERANCES FOR PLACEMENT OF UNITS
 
 The culvert shall be constructed in the location, to the alignment, cross sectional shape, dimensions and levels shown on the drawings with the following tolerances:
 
 Grade
 
 5 mm in 5 m (1 in 1000)
 
 Overall plan position
 
 50 mm
 
 Gap between adjacent units
 
 12 mm maximum
 
 Step at joint between adjacent units 12 mm maximum horizontal or vertical.
 
 626.04 DIVERSION AND DISPOSAL OF WATER
 Before obstructing or diverting any waterway, stream or channel for construction purposes, the Contractor shall obtain and provide to the Superintendent the written approval of the relevant authority to construct the obstruction or diversion. The Contractor shall observe all requirements imposed by the relevant authority and included in the written approval.
 The Contractor shall:
 (a) Divert or dispose of water where necessary to enable construction of the culvert. The diversion shall be in the form of temporary channels or temporary pipes. Pumping options shall not be used.
 Culvert construction shall not commence until water flow has been diverted to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 (b) Devise and install measures to prevent the escape of sediment and/or construction materials into the watercourse.
 (c) Implement appropriate measures to prevent damage to other parts of the works or surrounding properties that might result from the temporary modification of flows. The Contractor shall rectify any damage that may occur to the works or to adjacent properties to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall produce a written declaration from the relevant authority that the waterway has been left in a satisfactory condition prior to Practical Completion.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 626 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where a cofferdam is constructed to facilitate construction of the culvert, the cofferdam shall be extended below the foundation to prevent loosening of the foundation materials by water rising through the bottom of the excavation and it shall be watertight to prevent seepage of water from the sides and damage to the concrete.
 Cofferdams shall be adequately braced and the cofferdam details including supporting calculations shall be proof engineered in accordance with Section 613 and Section 614.
 Removal of the cofferdam shall be such that the in situ structure is not damaged or weakened.
 626.05 EXCAVATION
 Excavation shall be as shown on the drawings and shall comply with Section 204.
 The required ground bearing pressure shall be as stated on the drawings.
 Excavation for the culvert shall include all excavation necessary to provide the specified depth of bedding to place the units and associated walls, working space and space required for filling, including the removal and replacement of unsuitable material below the level of the underside of the bedding.
 The foundation material at the level of the underside of the bedding shall be test rolled in accordance with Section 173. Foundation material that is soft, excessively wet, unstable, does not comply with the requirements for test rolling, or does not achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings, shall be treated as unsuitable material. Such unsuitable material shall be excavated and replaced with 40 mm Class 3 crushed rock, spread in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness and compacted to achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings.
 When the foundation is in rock, all loose rock and pockets of unsound material, mud or water, shall be removed to expose the sound rock and the surface shall be brought to level as necessary with blinding concrete.
 The excavation shall be supported in accordance with Section 602.
 626.06 BEDDING
 Bedding material shall comply with Section 812.
 Bedding for the cast-in-place concrete base slab shall consist of a compacted layer of 20 mm Class 3 crushed rock, of not less than 150 mm compacted thickness. Where shown on the drawings, this material shall be placed on 40 mm Class 3 crushed rock spread in layers not exceeding 150 mm compacted thickness and compacted to achieve the required bearing pressure specified on the drawings.
 HP No bedding material shall be placed until the foundation or foundation materials have been inspected and approved by the Superintendent.
 626.07 CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE
 All cast-in-place concrete for culvert construction shall comply with the drawings and Section 610.
 Steel reinforcement shall comply with the drawings and Section 611.
 HP Construction of the concrete base slab shall not commence until the bedding has been approved by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 626 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 626.08 PLACING CROWN UNITS
 The cast-in-place concrete base slab shall be cured in accordance with Section 610. Precast concrete units shall not be placed on the concrete base slab prior to 7 days after casting and shall also ensure that the minimum curing periods of Clause 610.23, Table 610.231 are satisfied. Placement of precast concrete units earlier than 7 days shall comply with Clause 610.16(l) or Clause 610.16(m) for early application of loading.
 Crown units shall not be moved sideways along the ground during handling or installation. Crown units shall be lifted clear off the ground when moved, to prevent inducement of any lateral stresses in the legs.
 Immediately prior to placing crown units, including link slab units, the surfaces of the bearing areas which support the crown units or link slab units shall be cleaned, wetted and then covered with a sufficiently stiff cementitious mortar to give a continuous finished thickness not less than 5 mm and not more than 10 mm after the crown units or link slab units have been placed.
 The cementitious mortar shall comply with Clause 610.32 and shall be mixed with only sufficient water to a moist dry-pack consistency that can be displaced to provide an even bearing.
 The crown units or link slab units shall be placed in position before the mortar has stiffened to ensure that a uniform bearing is achieved.
 All surplus mortar shall be removed from the installation before the mortar hardens.
 After placing the crown units, any gap between the inside bottom of the crown unit leg and the side of the base recess or upstand shall be filled with cementitious mortar.
 All mortar joints shall be protected and cured in accordance with Section 610.
 Cast-in lift anchors shall be cut off flush with the concrete substrate, and recesses filled to the surface with shrinkage compensating proprietary polymer modified cementitious mortar in accordance with Section 689.
 626.09 COVERING OF EXTERNAL SURFACES OF JOINTS BETWEEN ADJACENT UNITS WITH FABRIC COVER
 External surfaces of joints (top and sides) between adjacent units shall be covered full length with one layer strips of 150 mm wide synthetic nonwoven fabric, factory impregnated with a rubberised bitumen or a neutral petrolatum based compound, to seal the joints and prevent loss of fines.
 The nonwoven fabric shall have the following properties:
 (a) breaking tensile strength not less than 200 N (50 mm wide strip)
 (b) thickness not less than 1.25 mm, and (c) mass not less than 1.4 kg/m2.
 The fabric covers shall not be wrinkled and shall be applied on surfaces free of foreign matter in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations to ensure effective adhesion onto the outer surfaces of the adjacent units.
 In the case of multi-cell culverts, fabric covers are not required where the gap between adjacent cells is filled with cementitious mortar or grout which complies with Clause 610.32.
 HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review all test certificates related to the supply of fabric cover material at least 14 days prior to commencement of installation.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 626 (Page 3 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 626.10 STRUCTURAL FILLING Structural filling shall comply with the drawings and Section 204.
 626.11 CONSTRUCTION LOADING ON CULVERTS If construction vehicles or plant are required to cross the culvert at any time before completion of the road construction, the Contractor shall construct a temporary riding surface over the culvert. Construction vehicles or plant with axle load-effects (including the load due to the actual depth of construction or temporary riding surface) that exceed the design load-effect shall not be permitted to pass over the culvert at any time without the approval of the Superintendent. The Contractor shall submit its proposals (including supporting calculations) to move such vehicles to the Superintendent for review not later than two weeks prior. Supporting calculations shall be proof engineered in accordance with Section 613. The temporary riding surface shall have a smooth profile to produce a surface free from ruts and bumps. The depth of the temporary riding surface shall be determined by the Contractor but shall be not less than 600 mm. Construction vehicles or plant shall not pass over the culvert or base slab until at least 7 days has elapsed following casting of the base slab, and provided that the cylinder compressive strength of the base slab concrete has achieved 32 MPa. The minimum curing periods of Clause 610.23, Table 610.231 shall also be satisfied. If vibrating rollers are required to work on or move over the temporary riding surface, the axle load for determining the required depth of cover shall be the combined static and dynamic load. The Contractor shall maintain the temporary riding surface for the period during which construction traffic is required to pass over the culvert and shall remove it prior to construction of the final embankment and pavement. The temporary materials may be left in place at the discretion of the Superintendent subject to the suitability of the material, its density and condition.
 626.12 REPAIR OF CONCRETE Repair of damaged or defective cast in situ or precast concrete shall be undertaken in accordance with Section 610, Section 687 and Section 689.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 626 (Page 4 of 4)
 
 SECTION 630 - FABRICATION OF STEELWORK
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 160 and 175. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 630.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies requirements for the fabrication of steelwork, including materials, fabrication, welding, handling and transport to site of girders, columns and other structural members. The steelwork materials may include either steel plates, hot-rolled open steel sections, welded steel sections and structural steel hollow sections.
 The section is limited to the use of steel parent material with a specified minimum yield strength not exceeding 500 MPa, and applies to all work on the steel after manufacture to final size at the originating steel mill.
 
 630.02 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
 Australian Standards (AS), Australian/New Zealand Standards (AS/NZS), International Standards (ISO) and other documents referred to in this section are listed in Section 175.
 
 630.03 QUALIFICATION, TESTING AND ACCREDITATION
 The Contractor shall nominate in the quality plan the responsibilities, names and qualifications of all personnel associated in the planning, production and inspection of all welds in the work, including welding supervisor(s), welding inspectors and non-destructive testing technicians.
 The Contractor shall conduct surveillance of the fabrication and welding of structural steelwork in accordance with VicRoads Technical Bulletin TB 46. This surveillance shall be carried out by a person (the Surveillance Officer) accredited for surveillance of structural steelwork to VicRoads Technical Bulletin TB 46 by an organisation certified to AS/NZS ISO/IEC 17020.
 All welding procedures shall be authorised by and welding supervised by a qualified Welding Supervisor, who is qualified in accordance with Clause 4.11.1(a) of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1.
 All welding shall be inspected by a qualified Welding Inspector who is qualified in accordance with Clause 7.2 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1.
 All non-destructive inspections shall be performed by certified technicians who are qualified in accordance with Clause 7.4 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1.
 Testing shall conform to the requirements of the relevant Australian Standards.
 
 630.04 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS
 Welding shall be carried out in accordance with the safety requirements of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1.
 Precautions shall be taken to protect all persons working or present near welding operations, including visitors and the public. Precautions include the control of exposure to arc radiation, hot metal and welding fumes as well as the prevention of electric shock and fire.
 Suitable opaque welding screens shall also be provided to protect workers and other people in the vicinity of welding, against stray radiation.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where non-destructive tests employing industrial x-ray plant or radioactive isotopes are used, special precautions shall be observed to ensure that people in the vicinity are not subjected to direct or scattered radiation. The relevant regulations governing the use of radioactive sources and x-ray plant and equipment shall be complied with.
 630.05 DRAWINGS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the preparation and verification of shop drawings. Welding symbols used on drawings shall comply with AS 1101.3.
 Further to the requirements of Section 160, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent two copies of `as-constructed' drawings for steelwork.
 630.06 DIMENSIONAL TOLERANCES
 The dimension of structural members shall be within the tolerances specified on the drawings. Where tolerances are not specified, tolerances shall be in accordance with the requirements of AS 4100 Clause 14.4 or AS 5100.6 Appendix G4.
 630.07 MATERIAL COMPLIANCE AND TRACEABILITY
 All materials shall comply with the standards and specifications shown on the drawings. All structural steel, associated components and welding consumables shall be manufactured by companies that hold quality systems certification to AS/NZS ISO 9001.
 The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent the steel manufacturer's Certificate of Product Compliance and related test certificates. The test certificates shall be related to the steel by trade marks and heat number.
 All steel incorporated into the steelwork shall be identified in accordance with the marking requirements as specified in AS 1163, AS/NZS 1594, AS/NZS 3678 or AS/NZS 3679. The steel shall be traced from the point of manufacture to its final location in the structure.
 Steelwork shall be deemed to be non-conforming where defects or imperfections due to the manufacture of the steel become evident at any stage of fabrication. Any defects or imperfections in the steel shall be assessed against the Freedom from Defects clause in AS 1163, AS/NZS 1594, AS/NZS 3678 or AS/NZS 3679.
 The Contractor shall submit details of any proposal to use weld repaired steel, including the proposed location in the structure and post-weld inspection requirements, at least five working days prior. Weld repaired steel shall include lengths of plates or sections containing welds to make up member lengths with welds not otherwise shown on the drawings. These welds shall be inspected in accordance with Table 630.171. All grinding of surface imperfections and weld repairs shall produce a surface roughness similar to and blend in with the surface finish of surrounding areas. Grinding marks shall be parallel to the direction of principal stress and shall be produced using a grinding disc of grain size number 40 or finer.
 HP The use of any weld repaired steel, including welding to make up member length, shall not commence until approval to proceed is given by the Superintendent.
 Unidentified steel shall not be used.
 630.08 STORAGE OF MATERIALS
 All steel, whether fabricated or not, shall be stored above the ground and adequately protected against corrosion and damage.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 2 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 630.09 HANDLING, TRANSPORT AND ERECTION
 The method of handling, transporting and erection of the steelwork shall be such that the members are not stressed or deformed beyond the design limit and that there is no damage to the protective coating during these operations.
 
 630.10 CUTTING
 
 Cutting of steel shall be carried out by methods that will not be detrimental to the finished product. Cutting shall be by sawing, shearing, plasma cutting, or flame cutting using machines which are mechanically guided and move at uniform speed, unless otherwise specified below. The Contractor shall perform cutting of members in accordance with work instructions for cutting. Hand-held or hand-guided cutting shall not be permitted.
 
 Shearing or cropping shall not be used for main plates, reinforcing plates, main gussets, splice plates, rolled sections and shapes or any steel thicker than 16 mm. Distortions caused by shearing shall be removed.
 
 Plasma or flame cutting procedures for tension members shall not produce heat affected zone hardness exceeding 350 HV (Vickers Hardness Number) along the cut edges, as evidenced by the Vickers hardness testing of a cutting procedure test specimen.
 
 Unless otherwise shown on the drawings, all plates shall be finished square, straight and in plane without burrs or imperfections.
 
 Any cut surface not incorporated in a weld shall have a surface roughness not greater than the appropriate value given in Table 630.101. A cut surface to be incorporated in a weld shall comply with AS/NZS 1554 Part 1.
 
 Table 630.101 Maximum Cut Surface Roughness
 
 Application
 
 Maximum Roughness, CLA (m)
 
 Normal applications, i.e. where the face and edges remain as-cut or with minor dressing
 
 25 (Roughness Class 3 specified in WTIA Technical Note 5)
 
 Fatigue application (detail categories as specified in AS 5100.6)
 
 AS 5100.6 Detail Category  80 MPa
 
 12 (Roughness Class 2 specified in WTIA Technical Note 5)
 
 AS 5100.6 Detail Category < 80 MPa
 
 25 (Roughness Class 3 specified in WTIA Technical Note 5)
 
 Notes: 1 Guidance on flame cutting of steels can be obtained in WTIA Technical Note 5.
 2 Roughness values may be estimated by comparison with surface replicas, such as the WTIA Flame Cut Surface Replicas.
 3 CLA = Centre Line Average Method
 4 Flame cut surfaces may require some surface grinding to make the surfaces suitable for the application of protective coating treatments.
 
 Cut surfaces with roughness exceeding the values in Table 630.101 shall be repaired by grinding to give a value less than the specified roughness. Grinding marks shall be parallel to the direction of the cut.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Any cut steel surface having notches, gouges or other imperfections with a depth of 2 mm or greater shall be repaired by welding in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 1. Notches, gouges or other imperfections with a depth of less than 2 mm shall be removed by machining or grinding, and the depression shall be tapered out smoothly for a distance of at least 75 mm on both sides of the defect. Notches, gouges or other imperfections with a depth of less than 1mm on an otherwise satisfactory surface are acceptable provided that they are not closer than 20 times the thickness of the component. The finished product shall be within the specified tolerances.
 Where steelwork is to be given protective coating, all edges shall be ground or machined to a smooth even surface finish with a minimum radius of 2 mm. Rolled edges need not be ground provided that the corners are rounded and that the edges are square and straight.
 All re-entrant corners shall have a radius of not less than 20 mm and shall be shaped to be smooth and without notches.
 630.11 CAMBERING, STRAIGHTENING OR FORMING
 Cambering of members, and measurement of camber, and straightening or forming shall be performed in accordance with a work instruction, prepared and issued by the Contractor in accordance with the quality system.
 HP The work instruction for cambering, straightening or forming, as appropriate shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review at least seven working days prior to commencement of these activities.
 In the measurement of camber, where the member spans between supports, allowance shall be made for the deflection due to self weight. This allowance shall be calculated by an experienced structural engineer who is eligible for Corporate Membership of Engineers Australia.
 The methods used to camber or straighten materials shall not reduce the properties of those materials below the minimum property values as specified in the relevant Australian Standards.
 Cold forming of materials (i.e. forming at temperatures below 250C) shall be carried out within the deformation range recommended by the steel manufacturer.
 Distortion resulting from welding and fabrication may be corrected by either or a combination of, mechanical or thermal means, provided that the process used does not damage the components or restrict the intended use. The temperature of the steel shall not exceed 600C. Forced cooling by water or other fluids shall not be used until the temperature of the steel is below 200C.
 630.12 HOLING
 Round holes may be either: (a) drilled full size; or (b) reamed to full size after sub-drilling or sub-punching at least 3 mm undersize; or (c) machine flame or plasma cut to full size, and shall be pierced within the removed material.
 Slotted holes may be either: (a) machine flame or plasma cut; or (b) formed by drilling two adjacent holes and completed by machine flame or plasma cutting.
 Hand flame cutting of holes shall not be permitted.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Punching of holes to full size will not be permitted for any grade of steel. Sub-punching will only be permitted in grade 250 steel and only in material less than 20 mm in thickness. Sub-punching will not be permitted for Grade 250 L15 or for any higher grade of steel.
 All holes shall be cylindrical and perpendicular to the face of the member. The nominal diameter of a completed hole other than a hole in a base plate shall be 2 mm larger than the nominal bolt diameter for a bolt not exceeding 24 mm in diameter, and not more than 3 mm larger for a bolt of greater diameter.
 All holes shall be located so that after the holes have been reamed or drilled, 85% of the holes in any group shall show no offset greater than 1 mm between adjacent thicknesses of metal. Connecting parts shall be assembled and held securely while being drilled or reamed and shall be match-marked before separating the parts. All burrs shall be removed, including if necessary taking apart assembled parts for the removal of burrs caused by drilling and reaming.
 Drifting to enlarge holes shall not be permitted.
 An oversize or slotted hole shall be permitted, provided that the requirements of and limitations on use given in AS 5100.6, Appendix G3.5.2 are satisfied.
 630.13 WELDING
 All welding shall be in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 1. All welding of studs shall comply with AS/NZS 1554 Part 2.
 Weld category SP of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 shall apply when Part 1 is applicable, unless otherwise specified on the drawings or within this specification.
 630.14 WELDING OPERATOR QUALIFICATION
 Welders shall be suitably qualified to carry out the welding procedures on which they will be employed. Qualified welders shall either: (a) have welded the test plate manufactured as part of the weld procedure qualification process;
 or (b) satisfy the requirements of Clause 4.11.2 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 and can produce
 documented evidence of having successfully and consistently produced welds in compliance with Category SP requirements during the previous twelve months; or (c) demonstrate compliance with Category SP requirements by means of a weld macro test, or ultrasonic or radiographic test, for the welding procedures similar to and representative of those procedures to be used in the contract steelwork, and including any special or restrictive influences.
 630.15 WELDING PROCEDURE QUALIFICATION
 For the purpose of qualification, welding procedures include procedures for the welds detailed on the drawings, welds joining sub-lengths of material, field or site welding, stud shear connector welding and tack welding.
 All welding procedures shall be qualified as follows: (a) all Category SP welds, including, but not limited to, flange butt welds, T-butt welds, partial
 penetration welds, corner welds, field splice welds, web to flange welds and all tack welds for these joints - method (d) of Clause 4.2 of AS 1554 Part 1; (b) all stud welding - AS/NZS 1554 Part 2 Section 4; (c) other welds (Category GP) - Clause 4.2 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The welding of all test pieces shall be done under the direct supervision of the Welding Supervisor, and witnessed by the Surveillance Officer.
 Welding Procedure Qualification Tests shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements for `Weld Category SP' and `Not Prequalified Consumables' in Table 4.6.2 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1. These tests shall be performed on test pieces cut from a weld test plate of the full section under consideration and with a minimum welded length of 300 mm, except for a built-up girder web to flange connection in which case the test piece shall be cut from a welded test plate of a minimum welded length of 2000 mm.
 When fillet welds are the subject of welding procedure qualification, a fillet break sample shall be prepared from the test plate and tested as described in AS 2205.4.2. If the fillet break test is not witnessed by the Surveillance Officer, the test piece shall be submitted with the macro sample for assessment and report.
 Welding procedures previously qualified and used on other work shall be deemed qualified for use upon certification of the relevant documentary evidence by the Surveillance Officer, provided that:
 (a) the procedure is being used within the limits of changes in essential variables permitted by AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 and within the limits of the Welding Procedure Specification; and
 (b) all qualification documents as required by AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 are available to support the procedure qualification record; and
 (c) non-destructive examination records are available to demonstrate successful use of that procedure.
 HP Documentary evidence of the results of testing and an approved Welding Procedure Specification for each of the weld procedures to be used in the welding of the steelwork shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review at least five working days prior to commencement of welding.
 HP A photograph of the etched surface of all weld macro-tests, to AS 2205.5.1, at a magnification of x1, or greater, shall be submitted to the Superintendent with the test results.
 630.16 SPECIFIC WELDING REQUIREMENTS
 All welding consumables shall be stored, handled and used in accordance with AS/NZS 1554 Part 1. Electrodes shall be used in accordance with the recommendation of the manufacturer.
 Preparation, assembly, preheating and welding shall be carried out in accordance with the relevant sections of AS/NZS 1554, Part 1, as specified, and the following requirements:
 (a) Hydrogen controlled welding processes shall be used for all butt welds for flange and web splices in main girders and columns, for extending members, for splices in bridge barrier railing, and for T-butt welds.
 (b) Low hydrogen electrodes shall be used for all manual metal arc butt welds.
 (c) Minimum length of tack weld shall be 50 mm for a 5 mm fillet weld or 80 mm for a 4 mm fillet weld.
 (d) Suitable run-on and run-off tabs shall be used for all butt welds and web to flange fillet welds. Each weld pass shall be terminated on the run-on/run-off tabs at least 20 mm beyond the edge of the parts to be joined.
 (e) Root runs of double sided butt welds shall be back-gouged sufficient to ensure full penetration. A 20% sample of back-gouged preparations shall be examined and reported by the Welding Inspector.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) The maximum size of electrode for down hand position welding, excepting root runs of multiple pass welds, shall be 6 mm unless the work is in the natural-vee position where 8 mm electrodes may be used. For welds made in all other positions and the root runs of multiple pass welds, the maximum size of electrode shall be 5 mm.
 (g) The maximum size of fillet weld which may be made in one pass shall be 8 mm, except that 10 mm fillet welds may be made in the natural-vee position.
 (h) A single layer of weld metal, whether deposited in one pass or made up of several parallel beads, shall not exceed 4 mm in thickness except that the bead at the root may be 6 mm in thickness if the position of welding and viscosity of the weld metal is such that it does not overflow onto unfused parent metal.
 (i) When welding in the vertical position the direction of welding for all passes shall be upward. For all vertical up welding, the width of the deposited weld metal shall not exceed three times the diameter of the electrode.
 (j) Exposed faces of welds shall be made reasonably smooth and regular. Weld size shall conform as closely as practicable to specified dimensions and shall not at any place be less than the specified dimensions.
 (k) Butt weld run-on and run-off tabs shall be removed after the joint has cooled and the ends of the weld shall be finished smooth and flush with the faces of the abutting parts.
 (l) Butt welds shall be finished smooth and flush with abutting surfaces where required for assembly, or specified on the drawings, or where the welds are to be non-destructively inspected and are on the exterior faces of exterior girders.
 (m) All weld spatter shall be removed from the surfaces of the weld and the parent metal.
 (n) Preheat temperatures shall be confirmed by contact thermometers or temperature indicating crayons. Preheat temperatures shall be confirmed if welding is suspended for more than 20 minutes, and if necessary further preheating shall be applied.
 (o) Stud welding and stud shear connectors shall comply with the requirements of AS/NZS 1554 Part 2.
 (p) Ground or earth clamps shall be connected directly to the work piece being welded.
 
 630.17 VISUAL INSPECTION OF WELDS
 
 The extent of visual scanning and visual inspection of welding shall be in accordance with Table 630.171. The acceptable limits for imperfections shall be in accordance with Table 6.2.2 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1. Lengths of weld containing the imperfections exceeding the limits in Table 6.2 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 shall be repaired. The repair procedure shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review at least five working days prior to commencement of repair work.
 
 Table 630.171 Extent of Visual Scanning and Visual Inspection of Welding
 
 Method
 
 Location of Weld
 
 Percentage of Total Length or Number
 
 Visual scanning of all welds All welds
 
 100%
 
 Visual inspection of Category SP welds
 
 Butt welds, T-butt welds, including column to base plate Web to Flange Splices Butt or T-butt splices between RHS, SHS or CHS sections; or hot-rolled open sections
 
 50%
 
 Field Butt Welds
 
 100%
 
 Column or post to base plate fillet welds
 
 30%
 
 Other Welds
 
 as specified in the special clauses; or as required to demonstrate compliance with the limits for imperfections
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 630.18 NON-DESTRUCTIVE INSPECTION OF WELDS
 The extent of non-destructive inspection using methods of radiography, ultrasonics, magnetic particle, or liquid penetrant shall be in accordance with Table 630.181.
 All welds shall comply with the acceptance limits for imperfections in welds given in Table 6.2 or Table 6.3 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1. Lengths of weld containing imperfections exceeding the limits in Table 6.3 of AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 shall be repaired. The repair procedure shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review for at least three working days prior to commencement of repair work. The full lengths of repaired weld shall be re-inspected.
 
 Table 630.181 Extent of Non-Destructive Inspection
 
 Method
 
 Location of Weld
 
 Percentage of Total Length
 
 Radiography AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 Clause 6.3
 
 FABRICATED BRIDGE GIRDERS The reinforcement of built-up bridge girder flange butt
 
 welds that are to be examined by ultrasonic methods shall be ground smooth and flush.
 
 Flange splices
 
 100%, full length
 
 or
 Ultrasonics AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 Clause 6.4
 
 Web splices All field butt splices Web to flange splices - fillet welded
 
 25% (300 mm on tension side of each web butt) 100% 50% of the total weld length for welds incorporating steel Grade 350, or a higher steel grade, in flange plates 25 mm or thicker
 
 Web to flange splices - T-butt welded
 
 20% of the total weld length
 
 OTHER COMPONENTS (e.g. SIGN GANTRIES / CANTILEVERS, LIGHT TOWERS AND POLES, BARRIER RAILING, ETC.)
 
 Column to base plate joint of cantilever signs, sign gantries and lighting towers or masts
 
 100%
 
 Butt or T-butt splices between: RHS, SHS or 50% where backing material is not used CHS sections; or hot rolled open sections 25% where backing material is used with flange thickness of less than 16 mm
 
 Welds attaching lifting brackets or loops
 
 100%
 
 Barrier rail posts to base plate T-butt weld
 
 Post Numbers
 
 Posts Where Backing Material is Used
 
 Posts Where Backing Material is Not Used
 
 1 - 40
 
 25% of number
 
 100% of number
 
 41 - 100
 
 20% of number
 
 50% of number
 
 Above 100
 
 10% of number
 
 33% of number
 
 Where more than one post from each batch inspected requires repair, the inspection rate shall revert to that for posts 1-40
 
 Barrier railing - butt welded splices
 
 50% where backing material is not used 25% where backing material is used
 
 Other butt and T-butt welds, including welds 50% of total weld length to repair or make up member lengths
 
 Other Welds
 
 As required to demonstrate compliance with the limits for imperfections, noting that the minimum extent of inspection shall be not less than 10% of weld length
 
 Magnetic Particle AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 Clause 6.5
 or
 Dye Penetrant AS/NZS 1554 Part 1 Clause 6.5
 
 Field Butt Welds of main girders Web to Flange Splices First 10 girders
 
 Barrier rail post to base plate, fillet welded only
 
 Subsequent girders
 Post Numbers 1 - 40
 41 - 100
 
 100% 20% of each girder length, made up of equal sub-lengths at each end of the girder, over piers and at points of maximum moment One girder in every three, 20% of girder length as above Inspect for each for full circumference:
 20% of number 10% of number
 
 Above 100
 
 5% of number
 
 Where more than two posts from each batch inspected requires repair, the inspection rate shall revert to that for posts 1-40
 
 Other Welds
 
 As specified in the special clauses; or as required to demonstrate compliance with the limits for imperfections
 
 Note: The percentage of total length is applied to the number of items, with each item fully inspected.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where the total of defective portions exceeds 10% of the weld length inspected, the total weld length for that weld detail shall be inspected.
 The Contractor shall submit test certificates for all non-destructive inspections to the Superintendent for review.
 
 630.19 STUD SHEAR CONNECTORS
 
 Stud shear connectors and the welding of these shall conform to the requirements of AS/NZS 1554 Part 2. After welding, testing shall be carried out as detailed in Table 630.191.
 
 Table 630.191 Welding Test Requirements
 
 Method
 
 Location of Weld
 
 Percentage of Total Length or Number
 
 Daily preproduction test: Stud welded shear connectors
 
 All members with stud welds
 
 Daily preproduction test, AS 1554 Part 2, Section 4, including hammer bend test to 30 of first two stud welded shear connectors, or as necessary.
 
 Visual scanning of all stud welds
 
 All welds
 
 100%
 
 Stud weld ring test, made using All stud welds a steel 1 kg hammer, swung freely to strike the stud in two opposite directions
 
 100%, each stud shall give a clear ring. All studs which do not give a clear sound in the ring test shall be subjected to the 10 bend test.
 
 Stud welded shear connector  10 bend test
 
 All members with stud welds
 
 5% of studs on each member (1 in each 20), including studs with missing weld flash.
 Studs with less than 360 of weld flash shall be bent 10 in a direction opposite to the missing portion of the flash.
 If any stud fails, all studs on the member or element shall be visually inspected and any stud with less than 360 of weld flash shall be tested.
 
 630.20 BOLTING
 (a) General
 All bolts and associated nuts and washers shall comply with the appropriate bolt material standard specified on the drawings. Bolts, nuts and washers for Property Class 4.6/S bolting shall be supplied in accordance with AS 1111 and AS 1112. Bolts, nuts and washers for Property Class 8.8 bolting shall be supplied in accordance with AS/NZS 1252.
 All material within the grip of the bolt shall be steel and no compressible material shall be permitted within the grip. Each bolt and nut shall be assembled with at least one washer. One washer shall be provided under the rotated part.
 Locknuts, when specified, shall be placed between the main nut and the components being gripped.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The length of a bolt shall extend entirely through the nuts and be such that at least one clear thread shows beyond the nut, but not more than 12 mm beyond the nut. The shank shall be threaded to such a length that not less than one thread shall be within the grip of the bolt after tightening.
 All bolts and nuts shall have a protective coating, unless otherwise specified. The coating on hot-dip galvanized bolts and nuts shall comply with AS 1214. The coating on hot-dip galvanized washers shall comply with AS/NZS 4680.
 Where bearing faces of bolted parts are not parallel and exceed a taper of 1:20, a suitably tapered washer shall be provided against the tapered surface and placed under the non-rotating component where possible.
 (b) Preparation of Surfaces in Contact
 All oil, dirt, loose scale, loose rust, burrs, fins and any other defects on the surfaces of contact, that will prevent solid seating of the parts in the snug-tight condition, shall be removed.
 For a friction-type connection, the contact surfaces shall be clean as-rolled surfaces or equivalent and, in addition to satisfying the provisions above, shall be free from paint, lacquer, galvanizing or other applied finish unless the applied finish has been tested to establish the friction coefficient or slip factor. Values of slip factor for clean steel surfaces and abrasive blasted surfaces coated with zinc silicate coating are given in AS 5100 Part 6. Slip factor for other surfaces shall be evaluated in accordance with the standard test in AS 5100 Part 6.
 (c) Assembly and Alignment of Connections to Snug Tight Condition
 Each part of the structure shall be aligned as soon as practicable after erection. Permanent connections shall not be made until sufficient of the structure has been aligned, levelled, plumbed and temporarily connected to ensure that members will not be displaced during subsequent erection or alignment of the remainder of the structure.
 Hardened or plate washers shall be used under both the bolt head and nut for any slotted and oversize holes.
 During assembly, drifting shall not enlarge the holes or distort the metal. Holes which do not match shall be reamed or drilled, and if necessary bolts of a larger diameter shall be used.
 Bolting categories 4.6/S and 8.8/S shall be installed to the snug-tight condition to ensure that the load-transmitting plates are brought into effective contact. Snug-tight is the tightness attained by a few impacts of an impact wrench or by the full effort of a person using a standard podger spanner.
 All workshop-assembled joints should be match marked before the structure is dismantled.
 (d) Assembly of a Connection Involving Tensioned Bolts
 This sub-clause applies to bolting categories 8.8/TB and 8.8/TF.
 Bolts, nuts and washers shall be supplied in accordance with AS/NZS 1252. They shall be placed so that the marks identifying a high strength fastener are visible after tightening.
 Nuts for high strength bolts shall be of the double faced or washer faced hexagon type.
 Bolts and nuts shall always be tightened in accordance with a prescribed sequence. Where the sequence is not shown on the drawings a staggered pattern shall be adopted with tightening proceeding from the centre of the joint out towards the free edges.
 Bolt heads and nuts shall be tightened and the nuts shall be effectively locked where specified.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 High strength structural bolts that are to be tensioned may be used temporarily during erection to facilitate the assembly. However, if so used, they shall not be finally and fully tensioned until all bolts in the connection have been snug-tightened in the correct sequence.
 The slackening off and re-tensioning of fully-tightened bolts is not permitted. Bolts shall not be re-used. Adjusting tension of previously tensioned bolts that may have been loosened by the tensioning of adjacent bolts is not considered as re-tensioning
 
 (e) Method of Tensioning
 
 All bolts shall be tightened either by the `part-turn' method or by the use of a direct-tension indicator device to produce, on completion of the joint, to not less than the minimum bolt
 tension appropriate to the particular bolt diameter as specified in Table 630.201.
 
 Table 630.201 Minimum Bolt Tension
 
 Nominal Bolt
 
 Minimum Bolt
 
 Thread Diameter Tension (kN)
 
 M16
 
 95
 
 M20
 
 145
 
 M24
 
 210
 
 M30
 
 335
 
 M36
 
 490
 
 (i) Part-Turn Method of Tensioning
 
 On assembly, all bolts in the connection shall be first tightened to the snug-tight condition to ensure that the load-transmitting plates are brought into effective contact.
 
 The relative position of the bolt and nut shall be established by permanent mark.
 Bolts shall be finally tensioned by rotating the nut by the amount given in Table 630.202. Table 630.202 Nut Rotation for Full Tensioning from the Snug-Tight Condition
 
 Bolt length (underside of head to
 end of bolt)
 
 Disposition of outer face of bolted parts
 
 Both faces normal to bolt axis
 
 One face normal to bolt axis and other sloped
 
 Both faces sloped
 
 Up to and including 4 diameters
 
 1/3 turn
 
 1/2 turn
 
 2/3 turn
 
 Over 4 diameters but not exceeding 8 diameters
 
 1/2 turn
 
 2/3 turn
 
 5/6 turn
 
 Over 8 diameters but not exceeding 12 diameters
 
 2/3 turn
 
 5/6 turn
 
 1 turn
 
 Exceeding 8 diameters
 
 Determine by test
 
 Notes: 1 Tolerance on rotation for  turns or less, one-twelfth of a turn (30) over and under tolerance; for /3 turns or more, one-eighth of a turn (45) over and nil under tolerance.
 2 The bolt tension achieved with the amount of nut rotation specified in Table 630.201 is deemed to be at least equal to the minimum bolt tension specified in Table 630.202.
 3 Nut rotation is the rotation relative to the bolt, regardless of the component turned.
 4 The nut rotations specified are only applicable to connections in which all materials within the grip of the bolt are steel.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth (ii) Direct-Tension Indicator Device HP Approval to use direct-tension indicator devices shall be obtained from the
 Superintendent at least 14 days prior to the use of such devices on bolting on the steelwork. When their use is approved, direct-tension indicator devices shall be used in accordance with the device manufacturer's instructions. A minimum of two calibration tests using a calibrated bolt tension gauge shall be carried out on each day that direct-tension indicator devices are used.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 630 (Page 12 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 631 - PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 630 and 685. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent: 631.01 GENERAL
 (a) Scope This section covers the requirements for surface preparation, coating systems including hotdip galvanizing, and paint application for the protective treatment of structural steelwork and metalwork. The section requires that protective coating works shall be carried out using an agreed coating system that includes the specified level of surface preparation, certification of all coatings by the Australian Paint Approval Scheme (APAS), and inspection of the surface preparation and coating application by an accredited coatings inspector. Unless otherwise specified, all work required to achieve the specified protective treatment of steelwork in the completed structure shall be carried out in accordance with the recommended procedures and guidelines set out in AS/NZS 2312.
 (b) Exclusions This section does not cover the requirements for anti-graffiti protection of steelwork, which are included in Section 685 - Anti-Graffiti Protection and Graffiti Removal. This section does not cover the removal or partial removal of either existing lead-based coating systems containing more than 1% by weight of lead, or other hazardous materials. Works involving the maintenance or removal of coatings that contain lead compounds or other hazardous substances is specified separately to this Section. All such Works shall only be undertaken by coatings contractors who hold accreditation from the Painting Contractor Certification Program (PCCP) for Class 5, Removal of Hazardous Coatings.
 631.02 STANDARDS
 Australian Standards (AS), Australian/New Zealand Standards (AS/NZS), Australian Paint Approval Scheme Specifications (APAS), and International Standards (ISO) referred to in this Section are listed in Standard Section 175.
 631.03 DEFINITIONS
 Definitions of painting terms contained in AS/NZS 2310 shall apply where these terms are used in the Specification.
 Coating film thickness is specified in microns, in accordance with industry practice, where one micron is equal to one micrometre.
 631.04 ACCREDITATION AND INSPECTION
 Protective coating works carried out in situ on existing structures shall be preformed by coatings contractors who hold accreditation from the PCCP for Class 3 Field Application  Atmospheric Exposure Service.
 Accreditation is not required for protective coating works, including hot-dip galvanizing, carried out as a controlled workshop application in either an open yard or an enclosed building or facility.
 All phases of the surface preparation and coating application shall be monitored and inspected. Coating inspectors shall hold accreditation from an inspector training organisation recognised by the PCCP, or another certifying body acceptable to the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 1 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 631.05 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED
 HP At least 14 days prior to commencing the protective treatment of steelwork, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review the following information on all proposed coating systems:
 (a) coating system, including hot-dip galvanizing if specified on the drawings. If hot-dip galvanizing is the only coating required, no further information is required to be submitted;
 (b) type of coatings; (c) name of paint manufacturer; (d) product names of paints; (e) technical data sheets and Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) for all paints; (f) documentary evidence from the manufacturer certifying compliance of paints with relevant
 specifications; (g) details of work to be carried out by shop treatment and those to be carried out by field
 treatment; (h) for field works, details of work methods, containment processes and environment controls; (i) details of solvent cleaning solution and soluble salt removal procedures; (j) abrasive to be used for abrasive blast cleaning; (k) analysis certificate for non-metallic abrasives; and (l) paint application conditions, including but not limited to -
 (i) the maximum and minimum ambient temperature, (ii) the maximum and minimum temperature of surfaces to be painted, (iii) maximum and minimum (if applicable) relative humidity, (iv) minimum difference between temperature of surface to be painted and the dew point,
 and (v) minimum and/or maximum time between application of successive coats.
 631.06 HOT-DIP GALVANIZED (ZINC) COATING
 For steel components that are detailed on the drawings to be hot-dip galvanized, this shall be carried out in accordance with AS 4680. All requirements for hot-dip galvanizing for surface preparation, application of coating, film thickness and acceptance are included in AS 4680. Galvanized components that are subsequently required to be coated with paint shall be coated in accordance with this section.
 631.07 COATING SYSTEMS
 Paint coating systems for steelwork shall comply with the requirements nominated on the drawings or as specified elsewhere. The paint coating system shall comply with the requirements detailed in Table 631.071 A-I for the selected coating system. These coating systems are designed to achieve 25 to 40 years durability to first maintenance under exposure to the low category of atmospheric corrosivity, or 15 to 25 years durability to first maintenance under exposure to the medium category of atmospheric corrosivity, as defined in AS/NZS 2312.
 All surfaces of the steelwork and metalwork components shall be coated with the specified system or systems, and achieve the specified minimum dry film thickness, as nominated on the drawings or in the specification.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 2 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 For coating works in which the specified or nominated coating system is a single coat of solventborne inorganic zinc silicate supplied to AS/NZS 3750.15, Type 4; this coating shall be applied in accordance with AS 4848.1, except that the minimum DFT shall be 80 microns minimum.
 Zinc-based primers shall not be used in coating systems at locations where the coating will be subjected to water ponding or immersion, or to a consistent long time-of-wetness, irrespective of whether topcoats are to be applied.
 Where colours are specified, colours shall be in accordance with AS 2700.
 
 631.08 COATING MATERIALS
 All materials (including thinners) for the coating system shall be supplied by the same paint manufacturer.
 Conditions of application and curing shall comply with the requirements of this specification and the paint manufacturer's written recommendations.
 Unless otherwise specified, coating materials shall have approval to the APAS specification listed in the applicable Coating System Specification.
 The zinc primer used on the Works shall have a minimum zinc dust pigment content of 80% by mass.
 All coating materials shall be compatible with each other and the substrate surface on which they are to be applied. Where more than one coat of paint is to be applied, the colour of successive coats shall be different to aid application and inspection.
 The Superintendent shall nominate the colour(s) to be used for topcoats.
 All paint of a particular type for a topcoat of a particular structure shall be from the same batch.
 All paint shall be stored, handled and used in accordance with the paint manufacturer's recommendations, including for storage conditions, shelf life and pot life restrictions, and mixing and straining requirements.
 The Contractor shall record details of all paints used, including manufacturer's name, product name and batch number of all products, and results of all testing carried out by the Contractor to assess conformity of the product.
 
 631.09 PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
 (a) General
 All equipment used for the Works shall be maintained in good working order and of suitable quality to carry out the specified work.
 (b) Blasting and Painting Equipment
 Oil and water traps shall be fitted to all air lines used for abrasive blast cleaning, blowing down after blasting and spraying of paint. The traps shall be maintained to ensure that clean, dry air is supplied for all operations.
 
 631.10 SURFACE PREPARATION
 
 (a) General
 
 Abrasive blasting shall be carried out in accordance with theWork Health and Safety
 
 Regulation 2012.
 
 The surface preparation process shall be managed to ensure that
 
 debris emissions comply with Environment Protection Authority and Local Municipal
 
 Authority's requirements.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 3 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Steel components shall be free of surface defects including deep pitting, weld defects, weld spatter, slag, burrs, and fins. Sharp edges shall be ground to a minimum radius of 2 mm to meet the requirements of Preparation Grade P2 as defined in ISO 8501.3. The steelwork to be coated shall be inspected for compliance with VicRoads Standard Specification Section 630 before protective coating works commences.
 Surfaces being prepared and coated shall be protected from the weather.
 All surfaces to be coated shall be free of all oil and grease. Where appropriate, contaminated surfaces shall be cleaned by solvent washing in accordance with AS 1627.1 prior to commencement of surface preparation by abrasive blast cleaning. All solvents or degreasing agents shall be approved by the coating manufacturer. Anionic detergents shall not be used.
 (b) Abrasive Blast Cleaning
 All surfaces to be coated shall be cleaned by dry abrasive blasting in accordance with this specification, AS 1627 Parts 4 and 9, to achieve the specified class of surface cleanliness and profile.
 Surface preparation shall be an abrasive blast cleaning process using crushed, sharp angular grit. Ilmenite, garnet, staurolite or steel grit abrasive may be used. Spherical shot or cut wire abrasives are not to be used.
 Abrasives shall not contain more than one (1.0) percent of free crystalline silica, nor more than 0.01 percent of lead. Materials containing radioactive substances, and recycled materials that have not been treated to minimize respirable dust, shall not be used as blasting media.
 Non-metallic abrasives shall be analysed for the presence of water-soluble materials, including salts. The maximum permitted level of water-soluble salts in samples of the abrasive shall be 50 parts per million by weight, or an upper limit of conductivity of 30 mS/m when assessed in accordance with ISO 11127-6.
 (c) Requirements for Surface Preparation Class and Surface Profile
 The steel surfaces shall be cleaned by abrasive blasting to achieve a minimum of a Class 3 surface finish in accordance with AS 1627, Part 4 and Part 9. All cleaned surfaces shall be assessed for compliance. AS 1627 Part 9 makes further reference to ISO 8501-1 for guidance of pictorial representation of the class of surface preparation.
 All welds, edges and other areas with surface imperfections shall be prepared to comply with preparation Grade P3 (Very Thorough Preparation) of ISO 8501-3.
 The surface profile height shall be in the range of 35 to 65 microns (0.035 to 0.060 mm) when sampled and measured in accordance with AS 3894.5. One evaluation should be performed for each 50 square metres of cleaned surface, with at least three evaluations made for each day's production.
 The achievement of the surface preparation and the measured surface profile height shall be recorded on the Daily Inspection Report by the Contractor's representative.
 (d) Cleaning After Blasting
 Before applying the protective coating, all surfaces shall be cleaned free of any traces of blast product and debris by brushing with clean brushes and blowing down with clean dry compressed air or by vacuuming. Air used to blow down surfaces shall be free of oil and moisture. The effectiveness of the dust removal process shall be verified in accordance with Method C of AS 3894.6. A result equal or better than Rating 1 shall be achieved on all surfaces.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 4 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (e) Surface Cleanliness All surfaces to be painted shall have less than 7 micrograms per square centimeter (g/cm2) of chloride contaminants, and less than 10 g/cm2 of ferrous ion levels, as verified by field analysis using reliable, reproducible test equipment. The procedures for extracting and analysing soluble salts shall be selected from Method A of AS 3894.6.
 No oil or grease shall remain on the blasted surface. Testing for the absence of these contaminants shall be as per Method B of AS 3894.6.
 Testing for the level of surface contaminants shall be carried out at a rate of one test per 50 square metres of cleaned steel, or part thereof. The results of testing for surface contaminants shall be made available to the Superintendent.
 If the level of contaminants exceeds the limits specified above, the affected area shall be cleaned, degreased and re-blasted as appropriate in accordance with this specification.
 631.11 PAINT APPLICATION
 (a) Workmanship
 Painting shall be performed by competent and experienced personnel.
 Coatings shall not be applied until the specified standard of surface preparation has been achieved, and weather conditions are suitable for coating application and curing. The manufacturer's coating application instructions and the specified film thickness requirements shall be strictly followed.
 The applied coating shall be uniform in thickness and appearance and shall be free of defects such as runs, blisters, pinholes, holidays, overspray, inclusions, etc. All over-spray shall be removed by sanding from the surface of primer or intermediate coats before overcoating commences.
 The Contractor shall record all details of surface preparation, paint application, ambient weather conditions, and film thickness measurements on Daily Inspection Reports. As a guide, suitable forms are available in AS 3894.10 to 14.
 Airborne dust and other foreign matter that settles onto and is protruding from the wet primer or intermediate coat surface shall be removed by sanding, without reducing film thickness, once the coating has sufficiently hardened.
 (b) Time Requirements for Coating Application
 The application of the first coat of paint or primer paint to a blast-cleaned surface shall be completed before discolouration or deterioration of the blast-cleaned surface occurs, and the application of the primer shall be completed on the same day as surface preparation. If the required surface preparation standard does not exist at the time that the primer is to be applied, the abrasive blasting shall be repeated.
 Surfaces not primed in accordance with these requirements shall be re-blasted at the Contractor's expense. Applying a part or mist coat of primer to hold the blast is not permitted.
 The manufacturer's recommended recoating times shall be strictly observed, taking into account the existing climatic drying/curing conditions.
 Steelwork shall not be handled until the applied coating has dried sufficiently to resist damage.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 5 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Application Conditions and Method of Application Paint shall be stored, mixed and applied under conditions of temperature and humidity recommended by the paint manufacturer for each product. Substrate temperatures shall not be less than 3C above the dew point. When moisture-cured urethane (single-pack) coatings are applied, there is no restriction on the dew point temperature differential if the surface is visibly dry and free from condensation. Paint shall be prepared for application in accordance with the paint manufacturer's instructions and Technical Data Sheets, including requirements for mixing and accurate proportioning for multiple pack paints. Paint shall be applied in accordance with the paint manufacturer's instructions and Technical Data Sheets. Unless clearly stated in the technical data sheets submitted as part of the information required by a previous clause, the Contractor shall submit written documentation prepared by the paint manufacturer, setting out the conditions recommended by the manufacturer for the application of each coating material.
 (d) Brushing The brush type shall be appropriate to the paint type and the shape and size of component to be painted. Brushes shall be used for working the paint into all corners, crevices, lapped joints, rivets, bolt heads, nuts, washers etc. These requirements shall apply for each application of primer and topcoat paint. For all brush applications, the primer shall be applied as supplied by the manufacturer without the addition of thinners.
 (e) Spraying Spraying of paint shall be carried out using conventional, airless or air-assisted airless spray equipment, generally using equipment that meets or equals the recommendations contained in the manufacturer's Technical Data Sheets. For spray application of primer, thinning shall be permitted only with the type and amount of thinner specifically recommended by the manufacturer.
 (f) Stripe Coats Stripe coats of all paints shall be applied to all edges, welds, bolt heads, nuts, rivets and pitted areas before the application of each full coat, except for primers, where the stripe coat is to be applied after the full coat is sprayed. Inorganic zinc silicate primers are generally not to be brush-applied as stripe coats. Stripe coats shall be applied by brush or spray.
 (g) Support Points The complete coating system shall be applied to all locations on the structure that are used for support or bracing points, or for scaffolding support points. The same level of corrosion protection and aesthetics shall be achieved as on adjacent surfaces.
 631.12 REQUIREMENTS FOR FILM THICKNESS
 (a) Wet Film Thickness Wet film thicknesses shall be monitored by the Contractor to ensure that the nominal DFT shall be achieved and that the maximum wet film thickness recommended by the coating manufacturer is not exceeded. Wet film thickness gauges with worn `feet' shall be discarded.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 6 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Dry Film Thickness (DFT)
 (i) Calibration of DFT Gauges
 A calibrated DFT gauge shall be on site at all times. Magnetic, electromagnetic, magnetic induction and eddy current DFT gauges shall be calibrated and used in accordance with the relevant sections of AS 3894.3. In all cases, calibration and verification of calibration shall be over a smooth, polished test plate, using nonconductive and non-magnetic test shims or a reference standard as recommended by the gauge manufacturer.
 (ii) Correction Factors
 The DFT values specified in this specification are based on the use of a magnetic, electromagnetic or magnetic induction DFT gauge using the appropriate magnetic base reading correction factor as described in AS 3894.3 for the depth of profile for all coating systems (or parts of systems) with specified minimum DFT of up to three times the profile height. When measuring DFT values, allowance shall be made for the thickness of the previous coating layer.
 (iii) Measurement
 The Contractor shall measure and record the DFT of the area coated each day. The inspection plan for measurement of DFT for the area coated on each day shall be in accordance with AS 3894.3 Section 7.3 for large surface areas. One point reading shall consist of the average of three individual readings taken at equal spacings along a line 200 millimeter in length.
 (iv) Dry Film Thickness Requirements
 The primer coat of the coating system shall be applied to achieve, at all point locations tested in accordance with AS 3894.3 Method A or B, the minimum dry film thickness (DFT) as nominated in the applicable Coating System Specification. For atmospheric exposure, the primer film thickness shall comply with the following requirements:
 (1) the average of five point readings for each 10 square metre area of coating surface should not be outside the specified coating DFT range, and
 (2) no single point reading in any 10 square metre area shall be less than 100% of the specified minimum coating thickness.
 The average DFT of intermediate and top coats and the average total coating thickness shall be not less than the specified minimum when tested in accordance with AS 3894.3, except that up to one single point reading in any 10 square metre area may be less than 80% of the specified minimum coating thickness, and the average of the point readings for each 10 square metre area of coating inspected shall be within the range specified for the coating layer.
 631.13 SPECIAL AREAS
 (a) Friction-Grip Joints
 Regardless of the coating system used elsewhere on the structure, the faying surfaces of friction-grip bolted joints shall be treated as follows:
 (i) dry abrasive blast clean to AS 1627.4 Class 3, with surface profile in the range 35 to 65 microns; and
 (ii) application of one 80 micron coat of solvent-borne inorganic zinc silicate primer, complying with AS 3750.15, Type 4.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 7 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Hollow Members
 The inner surfaces of fully sealed hollow sections shall be dry and free of all loose material. Protective coatings are not required for the internal surfaces of fully sealed hollow sections.
 (c) Steelwork in Contact with Concrete
 For steelwork in contact with concrete, the surface preparation and shop-applied coatings shall extend beyond the edge of the exposed surface in the completed structure for a minimum distance of 50 mm beneath the concreted portion. Areas further than 50 mm from the exposed surface shall receive the same surface preparation and primer as the exposed steelwork, but the subsequent coatings, if any, may be reduced to give a total minimum DFT of 150 microns, unless specified otherwise.
 Areas of steelwork in contact with concrete in the completed structure and adjacent to surfaces subject to immersion in water shall receive the full protective treatment as that used on the adjacent exposed steel areas, for a minimum distance of 200 mm from the exposed surface.
 (d) Stud Shear Connectors
 Stud shear connectors shall have a mist coat of the zinc primer applied. (Mist coat  a thin coat of paint, applied by spraying, not intended to form a protective film but to enhance the performance of subsequent coatings AS/NZS 2310.)
 631.14 PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO PROTECTIVE COATINGS
 Care shall be taken at all times during all phases of construction to avoid damage to the protective treatment of steelwork. Measures shall be taken to ensure that debris from other construction activities such as welding, cutting grinding, drilling, concreting, asphalting, etc., shall be prevented from contaminating or damaging the protective coating.
 Coated steelwork in storage, transport or in laydown prior to erection; shall be supported, positioned and covered so that ponding of water or contact with damp or wet soil or packing materials does not occur.
 631.15 REPAIR OF PROTECTIVE COATINGS
 Areas of defective protective coating, including field weld areas, shall be correctly and fully repaired. The repair coating shall overlap and blend with the original or intact coating. The completed work shall be uniform in appearance and colour.
 All edges of intact coatings adjacent to damaged areas or uncoated areas shall be tapered from full thickness to zero thickness over a width of 20 mm, by for example, brush blasting or sanding with 120 grit paper, creating a feathering of the edge.
 If the completed paintwork on the outer face and soffit of the exterior girders and other surfaces in general public view is not uniform in appearance and colour, a further light application of the final coat of finishing paint shall be applied, at no extra cost, for the full length of the member or to the boundary of each affected, continuous area, if considered necessary by the Superintendent.
 Areas of rust staining, staining from hardwood, formwork or other staining on painted surfaces shall be removed by solvent or detergent washing.
 Following the completion of construction works, all painted surfaces shall be washed clean using low pressure water washing at a nozzle pressure greater than 14 MPa (2000 psi) and less than 34 MPa (5000 psi), to remove construction debris.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 8 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 631.16 PAINT IDENTIFICATION
 The Contractor shall provide to the Superintendent written confirmation of full details of the paint system(s) applied to surfaces of steelwork, including manufacturer's product names, nominal DFT values and date of application.
 For bridge girders, the Contractor shall neatly and legibly stencil, on the inside web of one exterior abutment girder at the abutment end, the type of paint and number of coats applied, the nominal DFT values and the dates of application of coatings. The Superintendent will indicate the exact information to be stenciled. Paint used for stenciling shall be compatible with the topcoat.
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 A INORGANIC ZINC SILICATE (Single Coat)
 System IZS1 to AS/NZS 2312 Table 6.3 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description, Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with AS 1627.4 to remove all mill scale, rust, any existing paint coating and foreign matter.
 Surface preparation grade: AS 1627.4 Class 3.
 Surface profile height: 35 to 65 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Colour and Gloss
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns)
 
 Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.15 Inorganic zinc silicate paint, solvent-borne Type 4 APAS 2908
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: Grey or Pastel Green
 DFT: 80 microns minimum
 Application: Spray application to all surfaces, followed by stripe coat as appropriate.
 
 Special Requirements
 
 Inorganic zinc silicate paint, solvent-borne
 
 Total DFT: 80 microns
 
 Type 4, to AS/NZS 3750.15 shall be applied in minimum
 
 accordance with AS 4848.1, except that the
 
 minimum dry film thickness shall be 80 microns
 
 minimum.
 
 Repair Treatment
 
 Small areas: If applicable, remove affected coating, prepare surface and area edges; and apply AS/NZS 3750.9 Organic zinc-rich primer
 Large areas: Re-prepare by abrasive blasting and re-coat with AS/NZS 3750.15 Inorganic zinc silicate paint, solvent-borne Type 4, as for full system above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 9 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 B INORGANIC ZINC SILICATE / MIO EPOXY / MIO POLYURETHANE (Three Coats)
 System PUR4 to AS/NZS 2312 Table 6.3 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description, Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with AS 1627.4 to remove all mill scale, rust, any existing paint coating and foreign matter.
 Surface preparation grade: AS 1627.4 Class 3.
 Surface profile height: 35 to 65 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Colour and Gloss
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns)
 
 Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.15 Inorganic zinc silicate paint, solvent-borne Type 4 APAS 2908
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: Grey or Pastel Green
 DFT: 80 microns minimum
 Application: Spray application to all surfaces, followed by stripe coat as appropriate
 
 Intermediate coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.14 High-build epoxy (two-pack) APAS 2973
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: Metallic Grey or Bridge Grey
 DFT: 120 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces
 
 Third Coat / Top Coat / Finish Coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.6 High build, MIO polyurethane (two-pack) APAS 2911/1
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified, semigloss
 DFT: 80 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces
 
 Total DFT: 280 microns minimum
 
 Special
 
 Micaceous iron oxide (MIO) shall be included in the paint formulation for both
 
 Requirements the intermediate and top coats
 
 Repair Treatment
 
 Small areas: If applicable, remove affected coating, prepare surface and area edges; and apply AS/NZS 3750.9 Organic zinc-rich primer, followed by top coats
 Large areas: As for full system, above
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 10 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 C ORGANIC ZINC / MIO EPOXY / MIO POLYURETHANE (Three Coats)
 System PUR4 to AS/NZS 2312 Table 6.3 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description, Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with AS 1627.4 to remove all mill scale, rust, any existing paint coating and foreign matter.
 Surface preparation grade: AS 1627.4 Class 3.
 Surface profile height: 35 to 65 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Colour and Gloss Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns) Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.9 Organic zinc-rich primer APAS 2916/1
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: Grey or Pastel Green
 DFT: 70 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat as appropriate, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Intermediate coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.14 High-build epoxy (two-pack) APAS 2973
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: Metallic Grey or Bridge Grey
 DFT: 150 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces
 
 Finish coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.6 High Build MIO polyurethane (two-pack) APAS 2911/1
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified, semigloss
 DFT: 60 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces
 
 Total DFT: 280 microns minimum
 
 Special
 
 The zinc primer used on the Works shall have a minimum zinc dust pigment
 
 Requirements content of 80% by mass, in accordance with ISO 549.
 
 Micaceous iron oxide (MIO) shall be included in the paint formulation for both the intermediate and top coats.
 
 Some colours of the polyurethane topcoat may require additional coats to achieve full opacity.
 
 Repair Treatment
 
 As for full system, above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 11 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 D MOISTURE-CURE URETHANE ZINC / MCU MIO INTERMEDIATE / MCU MIO
 POLYURETHANE TOPCOAT (Three Coats) System MCU2 to AS/NZS 2312 Table 6.3
 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description, Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with AS 1627.4 to remove all mill scale, rust, any existing paint coating and foreign matter.
 Surface preparation grade: AS 1627.4 Class 3.
 Surface profile height: 35 to 60 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Colour and Gloss
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns)
 
 Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 AS 3750.18 Moisture cure urethane (single pack) systems  zinc primer with not less than 83% zinc in the dry film APAS 2930
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: Grey
 DFT: 80 microns
 Application: Stripe coat as appropriate, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Intermediate coat
 
 AS 3750.18 Moisture cure urethane (single pack) systems  Aromatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented intermediate coat APAS 2930
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified
 DFT: 120 microns
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Finish coat
 
 AS 3750.18 Moisture cure urethane (single pack) systems  Aliphatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented polyurethane topcoat APAS 2930
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified
 DFT: 80 microns
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Total DFT: 280 microns minimum
 
 Special
 
 Micaceous iron oxide (MIO) shall be included in the paint formulation for both
 
 Requirements the intermediate and top coats
 
 Repair Treatment
 
 As for full system, above
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 12 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 E ZINC METAL SYSTEM (zinc only)
 System to AS/NZS 2312 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description, Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with AS 1627.4 to remove all mill scale, rust, any existing paint coating and foreign matter.
 Surface preparation grade: AS 1627.4 Class 3.
 Surface profile height: 50 to 70 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Colour and Gloss Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns) Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 (Australian Standard number not applicable) Zinc metal system paint, single component APAS 2916/2
 
 e.g. Zinga Liquid Galvanizing
 
 Colour: Grey
 DFT: 80 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat as appropriate, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Finish coat
 
 (Australian Standard number not applicable) Zinc metal system paint, single component APAS 2916/2
 
 e.g. Zinga Liquid Galvanizing
 
 Colour: Grey DFT: 80 microns minimum Application: Spray application to all surfaces
 
 Special Requirements
 
 Total DFT: 160 microns minimum
 
 Repair Treatment
 
 Small areas: If applicable, remove affected coating, prepare surface and area edges; and apply zinc metal system paint.
 Large areas: Re-prepare by abrasive blasting and re-coat with Zinc metal system paint, as for full system above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 13 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 F ZINC METAL SYSTEM (with Topcoat)
 System to AS/NZS 2312 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description, Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with AS 1627.4 to remove all mill scale, rust, any existing paint coating and foreign matter. Surface preparation grade: AS 1627.4 Class 3. Surface profile height: 50 to 70 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Colour and Gloss
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns)
 
 Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 (Australian Standard number not applicable) Zinc metal system paint, single component APAS 2916/2
 
 e.g. Zinga Liquid Galvanizing
 
 Colour: Grey
 DFT: 60 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat as appropriate, followed by Spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Intermediate coat
 
 (Australian Standard
 
 number not applicable)
 
 UV resistant solvent borne e.g. Zingametall
 
 acrylic finishing coat,
 
 Acryltop
 
 single component
 
 Colour: As specified
 DFT: 60 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat as appropriate, followed by Spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Finish coat
 
 (Australian Standard
 
 number not applicable) UV resistant solvent borne acrylic finishing coat,
 
 e.g. Zingametall Acryltop
 
 single component
 
 Colour: As specified DFT: 60 microns minimum Application: Spray application to all surfaces
 
 Special Requirements
 
 Total DFT: 180 microns minimum
 
 Repair Treatment
 
 Small areas: If applicable, remove affected coating, prepare surface and area edges; and apply zinc metal system paint.
 Large areas: Re-prepare by abrasive blasting and re-coat with Zinc metal system paint, as for full system above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 14 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 G COATING OF HOT-DIP GALVANIZED STEEL (to be coated with EPOXY PRIMER and POLYURETHANE) System HDG600P7 to AS/NZS 2312 Table 5.3
 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description / Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Initial treatment Steelwork hot-dip galvanized to AS 4680
 
 Surface preparation
 
 One of:
 (a) Light abrasive blast cleaning (sweep blasting) in accordance with AS 1627.4 Appendix D, or AS/NZS 4680 Appendix I.
 Surface preparation grade: Clean and texture the hot-dip galvanized surface, to AS 1627.4 Class 1, and ensure that no more than 10 microns of zinc is removed.
 Surface profile height: 10 to 25 microns.
 (b) Treatment as specified by the paint manufacturer.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Colour and Gloss Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns) Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.13 Epoxy zinc phosphate primers (two-pack) APAS 2971
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified
 DFT: 70 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat as appropriate, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Finish coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.6 Full gloss polyurethane (two-pack) APAS 2911/1
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified
 DFT: 80 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Total DFT: 150 microns minimum
 
 Special Requirements
 
 Surfaces where the coating will be subjected to a consistent long time-ofwetness or a marine environment shall have the total film build increased to a minimum of 200 microns using a high build epoxy (two-pack) to AS/NZS 3750.14 as the finish coat (System HDG600P5 of AS/NZS 2312).
 
 Repair Treatment Repair of galvanized coating: If applicable, remove affected coating, prepare surface and area edges; and apply AS/NZS 3750.9 Organic zinc-rich primer, followed by top coats.
 Repair of paint coating only: As for full system, above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 15 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 H COATING OF HOT-DIP GALVANIZED STEEL (to be coated with MCU PRIMER and MCU TOPCOAT) System HDG600P8 to AS/NZS 2312 Table 5.3
 Requirements for Coating System
 
 Activity
 
 Description / Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Initial treatment Steelwork hot-dip galvanized to AS 4680
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Light abrasive blast cleaning (sweep blasting) in accordance with AS 1627.4 to clean and texture hot-dip galvanized surface. Surface preparation grade: Visually meeting AS 1627.4 Class 1.
 Surface profile height: 10 to 35 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Colour and Gloss Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns) Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.18 Moisture cure urethane (single pack) systems  Aromatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented primer APAS 2930
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified
 DFT: 70 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces
 
 Finish Coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.18 Moisture cure urethane (single pack) systems  Aliphatic micaceous iron oxide pigmented polyurethane topcoat APAS 2930
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified
 DFT: 80 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces
 
 Total DFT: 150 microns minimum
 
 Special Requirements
 
 Surfaces where the coating will be subjected to a consistent long time-ofwetness or a marine environment shall have the total film build increased to a minimum of 220 microns.
 Micaceous iron oxide (MIO) shall be included in the paint formulation for both the intermediate and top coats.
 
 Repair Treatment Repair of galvanized coating: If applicable, remove affected coating, prepare surface and area edges; and apply AS/NZS 3750.18 MCU zinc-rich primer, followed by top coats.
 Repair of paint coating only: As for full system, above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 16 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SECTION 631 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT OF STEELWORK
 
 Table 631.071 I  Requirements for Coating System ORGANIC ZINC / ACRYLIC or EPOXY POLYSILOXANE (Two Coats)
 System PSL1 to AS/NZS 2312 Table 6.3
 
 Activity
 
 Description, Class and Profile
 
 Features
 
 Surface preparation
 
 Dry abrasive blast clean in accordance with AS 1627.4 to remove all mill scale, rust, any existing paint coating and foreign matter.
 Surface preparation grade: AS 1627.4 Class 3.
 Surface profile height: 35 to 65 microns.
 
 Coating
 
 Australian Standard number and Paint Type APAS Specification
 
 Product (Typical)
 
 Colour and Gloss Minimum Dry Film Thickness (DFT) (microns) Application
 
 Primer coat
 
 AS/NZS 3750.9 Organic zinc-rich primer APAS 2916/1
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: Grey or Pastel Green
 DFT: 70 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat as appropriate, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Finish coat
 
 (Australian Standard number not applicable) APAS 2920/2  Atmospheric durability organic modified Acrylic Polysilxane or Epoxy Polysiloxane (two-pack)
 
 ##:
 
 Colour: As specified, Gloss
 DFT: 130 microns minimum
 Application: Stripe coat, followed by spray application to all surfaces.
 
 Total DFT: 200 microns minimum
 
 Special
 
 The zinc primer used on the Works shall have a minimum zinc dust pigment
 
 Requirements content of 80% by mass, in accordance with ISO 3549.
 
 Repair Treatment
 
 As for full system, above.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 631 (Page 17 of 17)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 632 - BURIED CORRUGATED METAL (STEEL) STRUCTURES
 ##This section cross-references Sections 204, 610 and 611. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 632.01 GENERAL This section covers the supply of buried corrugated metal structures (BCMS) of the following types:  bolted steel plates or sheets in accordance with AS/NZS 2041  long-span corrugated steel structures in accordance with AS/NZS 2041. Except as otherwise stated in Bridge Technical Note BTN2005-009 Buried Corrugated Metal Structures, all BCMS shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AS 2041:2011 the Australian Standard for Buried Corrugated Metal Structures. All BCMS shall be provided with a reinforced concrete invert lining in accordance with Bridge Technical Note BTN2005-009 Buried Corrugated Metal Structures. BCMS made from continuous helically-wound galvanised steel strips with lock-seams or other proprietary helically-wound profiles are not permitted. BCMS are not permitted if the culvert will be permanently inundated and water will be in constant contact with the galvanised steel structure. BCMS shall have a design life of 100 years. At the end of the design life the structure shall have a residual thickness of steel with sufficient capacity to safely support the design dead and live loads current at the time of design in accordance with the relevant Australian Standard. BCMS of less than 1200 mm diameter are not permitted.
 Where the required design life cannot be achieved using steel, consideration must be given to the use of alternative materials for example aluminium or pre-cast concrete pipes and box culverts.
 632.02 STANDARDS The definitions and requirements in AS/NZS 2041 Buried corrugated metal structures shall apply where appropriate.
 632.03 MATERIAL COMPLIANCE Materials shall comply with the requirements of the relevant Australian Standard. Steel plates shall be hot-dip galvanised in accordance with AS/NZS 4680. Materials shall be tested for conformity with the specified requirements.
 Testing of materials shall be conducted by a NATA-accredited laboratory or an equivalent testing establishment that meets with the approval of the Superintendent. The Contractor shall submit the following to the Superintendent for each lot of steel plate material used in the fabrication of the culvert:  test certificates for the required material properties in accordance with the relevant
 Australian Standard  the manufacturer's certificate of compliance of the material with the relevant
 Australian Standard. Test certificates for other materials shall be supplied to the Superintendent on request.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 632 (Page 1 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 All materials shall be traceable from the point of manufacture to the point of use and appropriate supporting documentation shall be supplied to the Superintendent on request.
 632.04 CUTTING AND FORMING PLATES
 The edges of plates shall be cut straight and finished square.
 Distortions caused by cutting or shearing shall be removed.
 Any sharp edges shall be ground or machined to a smooth even surface finish with a minimum radius of 1.5 mm. Rolled edges need not be ground provided that the corners are rounded and that the edges are square and straight.
 Plates shall be mechanically curved to the required radius in order to ensure that the specified cross-sectional dimensions of the finished culvert are achieved in a manner that does not damage the material or its coating.
 632.05 END TREATMENT
 Ends of culverts shall be plain. If required, skewed, stepped, bevelled and step-bevelled ends shall be fabricated to the shapes and dimensions shown on the drawings.
 632.06 MINIMUM THICKNESS
 BCMS shall be designed in accordance with AS/NZS 2041 and shall be made from galvanised steel with a minimum wall thickness of 5 mm which shall be shown on the drawings.
 Otherwise, for structures designed by the Contractor, BCMS shall be designed in accordance with AS/NZS 2041 and shall be made from galvanised steel with a minimum wall thickness of 5 mm.
 HP Not less than four weeks before delivery of the BCMS to site, the Contractor shall submit details of the proposed thickness of culvert wall to the Superintendent for review. The submission shall include:
  calculations for the thickness required to support dead and live loads  calculations for both the earthside and waterside surfaces that demonstrate how the design life
 requirement will be achieved  the assumed annual rates of loss of galvanising for both soil-side and waterside surfaces
 together with the assumed annual rates of loss of steel for both soil-side and water-side surfaces when the galvanising has been expended  details of the soil and water chemistry, pH and soil resistivity obtained from site investigations and how these have been used in the determination of thickness  considerations of present and future use of the BCMS and upstream land land-use that may effect soil and water chemistry and that can reasonably be determined at the time of design  drawings showing the BCMS, the structural concrete lining complete with details of inlet and outlet structures, cut-off and end-walls  evidence that the design has been proof-checked by a proof-engineer who is pre-qualified in accordance with the VicRoads Pre-qualification Scheme or approved by the Superintendent.
 Design calculations shall ignore the effect of the concrete lining required by Clause 632.09.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 632 (Page 2 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 632.07 BOLTS Temporary bolts may be used to draw plates together during assembly but shall be replaced by the permanent bolts in the final assembly. Bolts and nuts shall comply with the requirements of AS/NZS 2041.
 632.08 HANDLING, STORAGE AND ASSEMBLY Components shall be handled, stored and assembled with care to avoid distortion and damage to the galvanised surfaces or other coatings. Culverts shall be assembled in accordance with AS/NZS 2041. If pre-fabricated culverts are transported in completed lengths, temporary bracing shall be used as necessary to prevent permanent distortion. Pre-fabricated culverts and bevelled ends shall be internally braced during transport and lifting as necessary to prevent permanent distortion of the culvert. Should damage or permanent deformation occur to a completed structure, it shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Failing that, the distorted length of culvert or plates shall be replaced. Damage to galvanised surfaces shall be repaired in accordance with AS/NZS 4680. Other coatings shall be repaired in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Galvanised components shall be transported and stored in conditions that minimise the risk of zinc oxide formation (otherwise known as white rust or wet-storage stain). The Contractor shall inspect all galvanised components for the presence of white rust. The Contractor's inspection report together with its proposals for the removal of zinc oxide shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review. Superficial deposits of zinc oxide shall be removed prior to the incorporation of the galvanised components into the structure. If the galvanised coating thickness has been reduced below the appropriate minimum requirement of AS/NZS 4680, remedial action shall be taken to restore the thickness of the galvanised coating to the minimum requirement. The Contractor shall submit its proposals for restoration of the required galvanised coating thickness to the Superintendent for review.
 632.09 INVERT LINING The inverts of all culverts shall be lined with reinforced concrete in accordance with the drawings and Bridge Technical Note BTN 2005-009 Buried corrugated metal structures.
 The extent of the concrete invert lining shall be determined in accordance with Bridge Technical Note BTN 2005-009 Buried corrugated metal structures.
 Lining concrete shall comply with Section 610.
 Reinforcement for use with concrete linings shall comply with Section 611 and shall be galvanised in accordance with AS/NZS 4680.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 632 (Page 3 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Concrete lining shall not be cast until 28 days has elapsed following the completion of backfilling and road construction. The lining together with its attachments to the culvert walls shall be of sufficient strength to enable the culvert to support the design loads in the event that the steel loses its load-carrying capacity. Attachment of reinforcement to the culvert walls shall be by welding. The temperature of the steel components during welding must not exceed 450C. Galvanised surfaces which have been damaged by heat must be repaired by the application of two coats of a proprietary zinc-rich coating which complies with Clause 8 of AS/NZS 4680. Welding must be in accordance with AS 1554 using a qualified welder together with appropriate welding materials and welding procedures. Threaded fasteners may be used for attachment to the culvert walls provided that a continuous structural connection between the concrete lining and the culvert wall can be achieved. Fasteners for attachment shall be hot-dip galvanized. Holes for fasteners shall be drilled, de-burred and treated with two coats of zinc-rich paint.
 If required, secondary coatings shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Culverts with secondary coatings shall be handled, stored and assembled in accordance with Clause 632.08.
 632.10 FOUNDATIONS, APRONS, HEADWALLS, WINGWALLS AND CUT-OFF WALLS
 Headwalls, wingwalls, foundations for arches, aprons, beaching, and cut-off walls shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings.
 632.11 BEDDING, FILL MATERIALS AND FILLING
 Fill material shall be Class A to Section 204, graded in accordance with Table 2.4.1B of AS/NZS 2041.2:2011 with a pH in the range of 6 to 8 and a minimum resistivity of 10,000 ohm.cm.
 The levels of chloride and sulphate ions in the fill material shall not exceed 200 ppm and 1000 ppm by weight respectively in accordance with AS/NZS 2041.1:2011.
 Filling and installation shall comply with the requirements of AS/NZS 2041.2:2011. Fill shall be laid progressively to both sides of the culvert and shall be compacted by mechanical means with the appropriate level of energy to achieve the required density without permanent distortion or damage to the culvert.
 To avoid permanent distortion or damage to the culvert, fill over the structure shall be compacted with low-energy devices until the depth of fill is to the lesser of half the culvert diameter or 600 mm.
 Internal bracing shall be provided during filling as necessary to prevent distortion or damage to the culvert.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 632 (Page 4 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 632.12 CONSTRUCTION TRAFFIC If construction vehicles or plant are required to cross the culvert at any time before completion of the road construction, the Contractor shall construct a temporary riding surface over the culvert. Construction vehicles or plant with axle load-effects (including the load due to the actual depth of construction or temporary riding surface) that exceed the design load-effect shall not be permitted to pass over the culvert at any time. The Contractor shall submit proposals (including supporting calculations) to the Superintendent for the movement of permitted vehicles for review not later than two weeks prior to the proposed movement. Supporting calculations shall be proof-checked in accordance with the requirements for proof-checking stated in Clause 632.06. The temporary riding surface shall have a smooth profile with a surface free from ruts and bumps. The depth of the temporary riding surface shall be determined by the Contractor but shall be not less than 1000 mm. If vibrating rollers are required to work on or move over the temporary riding surface, the axle load for the purposes of this clause shall be the combined static and dynamic load of the roller. The Contractor shall maintain the temporary riding surface for the period during which construction traffic is required to pass over the culvert and shall remove it prior to construction of the final embankment and pavement. The temporary materials may be left in place at the discretion of the Superintendent subject to the suitability of the material, its density and condition. On completion of the concrete invert lining in accordance with Clause 632.09, construction vehicles or plant shall not pass over the culvert until at least:  28 days has elapsed following casting of the concrete invert lining; or alternatively  seven days has elapsed following casting, provided that the cylinder strength of the concrete
 has achieved 20 MPa.
 Department of StateViGcrRoowatdhs August 20162 Section 632 (Page 5 of 5)
 
 SECTION 640 - SHEET PILES
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 630, 631 and 685. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 640.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the supply and installation of steel sheet piles for permanent works.
 This section also covers specific requirements for sheet pile retaining structures.
 The supply and installation of sheet piles for temporary works is covered by Section 602 and Section 603.
 
 640.02 DEFINITIONS
 Sheet piles
 Interlocking steel sections driven to form a continuous line. Sheet piles may be used for landscaping, erosion control, containment barriers for contaminated materials, noise attenuation walls and retaining structures.
 Sheet pile retaining structure
 A cantilever or anchored retaining structure constructed from sheet piles, 1.5 m or greater in height and steeper than 0.66(H):1(V), or which would result in a traffic or pedestrian hazard or damage to neighbouring property upon failure.
 
 640.03 SHEET PILES
 
 Sheet piles shall be manufactured in accordance with AS/NZS 3679.1. Steel used for the manufacture of sheet piles shall be minimum Grade 350. Sheet piles that have previously been used for temporary works shall not be used for permanent works.
 
 The dimensions and properties of sheet piles shall comply with the relevant requirements of Table 640.031.
 
 *** Table 640.031 Dimensions and Properties of Sheet Piles
 
 Length (m)
 
 Width (mm)
 
 Thickness (mm)
 
 Section
 modulus (cm3/m)
 
 Mass (kg/m)
 
 Interlock to be sealed
 
 Number
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 Sheet piles may be cut to length on site as required by saw cutting or flame cutting. The ends of all sheet piles shall be square, straight and in plane without burrs or imperfections.
 Interlock seals shall be applied to the sheet piles before installation where specified. Sheet piles shall not be coated for any other purpose prior to installation.
 HP Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall supply a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer confirming that the sheet piles comply with this specification for approval by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 640 (Page 1 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 640.04 SHEET PILE INSTALLATION
 (a) Transport and handling Care must be taken to ensure that sheet piles are not damaged during transport and handling. Handling holes shall not be cut in sheet piles. Sheet piles that are damaged shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Sheet piles that the Superintendent considers cannot be repaired shall be replaced.
 (b) Marking Sheet piles shall be clearly marked at 500 mm intervals starting from the sheet pile toe.
 (c) Driving guide and sheet pile threader A driving guide shall be used to ensure that sheet piles achieve the specified tolerance of position and verticality. The driving guide shall be constructed from steel and shall be fixed in place to prevent movement during driving of sheet piles. A sheet pile threader shall be used to ensure that sheet piles are interlocked prior to the commencement of sheet pile driving. The details of the driving guide and sheet pile threader shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review not less than 14 days prior to commencement.
 (d) Driving system Sheet piles shall be driven to the level shown on the drawings without causing damage to the sheet piles, and without inducing ground vibrations with a peak particle velocity greater than 15 mm/s. Sheet piles may be driven with a vibratory pile driver or with a drop hammer. If a drop hammer is used, the drop hammer shall be guided by a helmet fixed to the head of the sheet pile, the sheet pile head shall be protected by a cushioning material, and the drop height shall not exceed 2 m to avoid damage to the sheet pile. The Contractor shall provide details of the driving system including the frequency and centrifugal force of vibratory pile drivers and the make, model and rated energy of drop hammers and the dimensions and materials of the helmet and cushion. These details, including calculations which demonstrate that the proposed driving system is capable of driving the sheet piles to the level shown on the drawings, shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review not less than 14 days prior to commencement.
 (e) Driving sequence All sheet piles shall initially be driven halfway to the level shown on the drawings.
 HP On completion of driving the sheet piles halfway to the level shown on the drawings, the Contractor shall obtain the approval of the Superintendent to drive the sheet piles to the level shown on the drawings.
 The sheet piles shall then be driven to the level shown on the drawings. Sheet piles drawn down below the level shown on the drawings by the driving of adjacent sheet piles shall be extended. Sheet piles that cannot be driven to the level shown on the drawings shall be cut off subject to approval of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 640 (Page 2 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) Extension of sheet piles Sheet piles shall be extended in situ by means of full strength butt welds. Welding of joints shall be undertaken in accordance with AS/NZS 1554.1. The Contractor shall provide details of the welding procedure for review by the Superintendent not less than 14 days prior.
 HP Welding shall not commence until the welding procedure has been qualified as specified in Section 630.
 (g) Acceptance of sheet piles The following tolerances shall apply to sheet piles after driving: (i) deviation from the plan position shall not exceed 50 mm at the sheet pile head (ii) deviation from the vertical shall not exceed 5 mm per metre length of sheet pile. Where a sheet pile is not interlocked, is damaged during driving, exceeds the specified tolerances of position and verticality, or is otherwise defective, the sheet pile shall be repaired or replaced subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 640.05 COATING OF SHEET PILES Protective coatings applied to exposed sections of sheet piles after installation shall comply with Section 631. Anti-graffiti coatings applied to exposed sections of sheet piles after installation shall comply with Section 685.
 640.06 SHEET PILE RETAINING STRUCTURES Sheet pile retaining structures shall be designed in accordance with AS 5100.3, and the following requirements: (a) the design life shall be 100 years; (b) the worst case depth of scour anticipated over the design life shall be used to determine the
 retained height, or alternatively scour protection shall be installed and the retained height fixed at the underside of the scour protection; (c) the minimum thickness required for structural strength shall be increased to allow for uniform corrosion and resulting loss of section over the design life. The corrosion allowance shall be determined in accordance with AS 2159. Alternative corrosion protection systems including higher grade steel, protective coatings applied before or after installation and cathodic protection systems shall not be used instead of the corrosion allowance and shall not be considered when determining the corrosion allowance; (d) weep holes consisting of 15 mm diameter holes drilled through the centre of exposed sections of sheet piles after installation shall be provided on a minimum 1 m by 1 m centre grid. ##(strikethrough the remainder of this clause if not required):In addition, for sheet pile retaining structures with a retained height of 6 m or more the design shall be proof-engineered by a Proof Engineer who shall be prequalified at Level PE in accordance with the VicRoads prequalification scheme or approved by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 640 (Page 3 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 652 - SUPPLY OF ELASTOMERIC BEARINGS
 652.01 GENERAL This section covers the manufacture and supply of laminated elastomeric bearings. The manufacture and supply of elastomeric bearings shall be in accordance with AS 5100.4 Bridge design: Bearings and deck joints.
 652.02 MATERIALS Materials and components for use in bearings shall comply with AS 5100.4 Bridge design: Bearings and deck joints. The completed bearings shall satisfy the structural performance and dimensional requirements of the design.
 652.03 TOLERANCES Dimensional tolerances for bearings shall be in accordance with AS 5100.4 Bridge design: Bearings and deck joints Appendix C.
 652.04 BEARING TESTS Bearings shall comply with the testing requirements of AS 5100.4 Bridge design: Bearings and deck joints and shall be tested in accordance with Appendix D. All bearings shall be tested in compression and examined for splits, uneven bulging, delamination and other irregularity of shape. Bearings that are split or which exhibit uneven bulging, delamination or other irregularity of shape shall be rejected. Representative samples of bearings shall be subjected to shear stiffness testing. Elastomeric bearings that do not meet shear stiffness testing criteria shall be rejected. HP Copies of all test certificates shall be provided to the Superintendent for review.
 652.05 TRACEABILITY Bearings shall be marked with a unique identification number and with the AS part number as listed in AS 5100.4 Bridge design: Bearings and deck joints Appendix A. It shall be possible to identify bearings with the batch number of the elastomer and the associated test certificate number via the unique identification number. Bearings shall be traceable from the point of manufacture to their final location via the unique identification number. Copies of all traceability documents shall be provided to the Superintendent for review.
 652.06 HANDLING, PACKING AND STORAGE Elastomeric bearings shall be transported, stored and handled in a manner that prevents damage to the bearings. Bearings that are damaged shall be rejected.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 652 (Page 1 of 1)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 653 - POT TYPE CONFINED ELASTOMERIC BEARINGS
 
 653.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the design, manufacture, testing, protective treatment, supply and installation of confined elastomeric (pot type) bearings.
 Pot type bearing shall consist of a disc-shaped elastomeric pad confined within a steel pot and piston.
 Horizontal movement, if required, shall be provided by means of a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) pad sliding against a smooth, truly plane stainless steel mating surface.
 Bearings shall be designed to support the loads and to accommodate the movements and rotations shown on the Drawings.
 This section also applies to the manufacture, protective treatment and supply of any bearing attachment plate assemblies required to anchor the (pot type) bearing to a substructure or superstructure component.
 
 653.02 STANDARDS
 
 Standards are referred to in abbreviated form (e.g. AS 1214).
 
 AS 1180.3 AS 1180.7F AS 1195 AS 1196 AS 1214 AS 1237 AS 1252 AS 1627.4
 AS 1683 AS 1683.11 AS 1683.12 AS 1683.13 AS 1683.15.2
 AS 3678 AS 3750.15 AS 5100 ASTM A480/A480M
 
 Accelerated Ageing Resistance of Lining and Cover to Ozone PTFE Skived Tape PTFE Cast Sheet Hot-dip Galvanized Coatings on Threaded Fasteners Flat Metal Washers for General Engineering Purposes High Strength Steel Bolts with Associated Nuts and Washers Metal finishing, Preparation and pre-treatment of surfaces - Abrasive blast cleaning of steel Methods of Test for Elastomers Tension Testing of Vulcanised Rubber Tear Resistance of Vulcanised Rubber Compression Set of Vulcanised Rubber under Constant Deflection Indentation Hardness of Rubber and Plastics by means of a Durometer Structural steel  Hot-rolled plates, floorplates and slabs Paints for Steel Structures  Part 15 : Inorganic Zinc Silicate Paint Bridge Design Specification for General Requirements for Flat-Rolled Stainless and Heat-Resisting Steel Plate, Sheet, and Strip
 
 Unless otherwise stated, the applicable issue of a standard shall be the issue current at the date one week before the closing date for tenders.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 653 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 653.03 INFORMATION TO BE SUPPLIED
 The Contractor shall submit the following information for each bearing type: (a) name of manufacturer (b) rated load and movement capacities (c) overall height of bearing (d) diameter and thickness of elastomeric disc (e) dimensions and thickness of PTFE sliding pad for sliding bearings (f) previous performance history.
 HP At least 10 working days before the proposed commencement of manufacture the Contractor shall forward to the Superintendent, a certificate together with necessary calculations from a practising structural engineer experienced in the design of pot bearings who is eligible for corporate membership of the Institution of Engineers, Australia which details the information required above and which verifies their suitability and likely satisfactory performance and their compliance with this part of the Specification.
 653.04 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
 (a) Pot and Elastomer
 Each bearing shall be proportioned so that at the maximum serviceability limit state vertical load shown on the Drawings, the average pressure on the elastomeric disc does not exceed 40 MPa.
 The dimensions of the elastomeric disc shall be such that, the ratio of the diameter to thickness is less than 20 and at the design rotation, the vertical strain at the edge of the disc does not exceed 0.15.
 The requirements of AS 5100 shall be complied with, viz. shift in the centre of pressure due to rotation, measures to prevent extrusion of the elastomer and anchorage of the bearing.
 (b) Sliding Bearings
 For sliding bearings, the PTFE pad shall have a minimum thickness of 4 mm and a maximum thickness of 6 mm and shall be restrained by recessing it into the backing material to a depth of half the thickness of the PTFE.
 The mating surface shall consist of stainless steel sheet with a minimum thickness of 1.5 mm.
 The backing material to the PTFE and mating surface shall be sufficiently rigid to ensure that the PTFE layer is uniformly loaded. The average pressure on the PTFE layer shall not exceed 30 MPa under the minimum vertical load and 45 MPa under the maximum vertical load. The peak pressure under combined vertical and side loads and concurrent rotation shall not exceed 35 MPa under minimum vertical load and 55 MPa under maximum vertical load. All pressures are related to serviceability limit state loads.
 Guides, where provided on sliding bearings, shall be recessed into the top bearing plate to withstand the design forces shown on the Drawings. The guide shall be faced with a stainless steel sliding surface fixed along the length of the guide, and the opposing surface on the bearing faced with filled PTFE or similar material which shall be fixed to the face of the bearing.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 653 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 653.05 PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS
 
 (a) Elastomer
 
 The elastomer shall be tested in accordance with the Australian Standards shown in Table 653.051 and the properties of the compounded and cured elastomeric material shall comply with the requirements of Table 653.051.
 
 Three samples shall be tested from every 250 kg batch (or part thereof) of mixed elastomer material and each sample shall meet the requirements specified.
 
 Table 653.051 - Properties of Elastomer
 
 Property
 
 Requirements
 
 Method of Test
 
 Hardness
 
 60 +/- 5
 
 AS 1683.15.2
 
 Ultimate Tensile Strain
 
 4.75 min
 
 AS 1683.11
 
 Tensile Strength
 
 17.0 MPa min
 
 AS 1683.11
 
 Tear Resistance
 
 40.0 kN/m min
 
 AS 1683.12 (Die.B)
 
 Compression Set 30% max
 
 AS 1683.13 (22 hours 70C)
 
 *Ozone Resistance No cracking visible by eye after 100 hours.
 
 AS 1180.7F 20% strain at 40C  1C and 1 ppm
 
 Accelerated Ageing
 
 Maximum permissible change in
 
 properties:
 
 Hardness
 
 +4
 
 Tensile Strength
 
  10%
 
 Ultimate Tensile Strain 15%
 
 AS 1180.3 (160 hrs at 70C)
 
 * Evidence of recent testing of identical materials may be accepted by the Superintendent.
 
 (b) PTFE (Polytetrafluoroethylene)
 The PTFE sliding pad shall consist of unfilled PTFE sheet.
 The resin used in the manufacture of PTFE sliding pads shall be 100% virgin material with a relative density between 2.13 and 2.23 and durometer hardness of 50 to 65.
 The requirements of AS 1196 Grade A or AS 1195 Grade A shall be complied with.
 The PTFE pad shall be permanently lubricated in accordance with Clause 14.2(a) to (e) of AS 5100, Part 4.
 
 (c) Steel other than Stainless Steel
 The steel, other than stainless steel, used in the manufacture of the bearing shall conform to AS 3678.
 All high strength bolts shall comply with AS 1252 and washers with AS 1237.
 
 (d) Stainless Steel
 The stainless steel used in the manufacture of the sliding surface shall conform to AS 1449/316, 2B or BA finish having a surface finish not rougher than 0.4 micron CLA and a Brinell Hardness not less than 125.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 653 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 653.06 DESIGN AND FABRICATION Design and fabrication, where applicable, shall be in accordance with AS 5100.
 
 653.07 TESTING OF BEARINGS
 
 (a) General
 A minimum of one representative bearing in ten (10) of each size and type to be used in the works shall be tested.
 
 (b) Equipment for Testing
 Testing shall be carried out at a laboratory accredited by NATA for those test methods. The equipment for testing bearings shall be capable of determining compressive and shear loads to an accuracy of 3% and deflections to within 1%.
 
 (c) Test Loads
 Bearings shall be loaded in compression to 1.5 times the maximum vertical serviceability limit state load shown on the Drawings and the load shall be maintained for a minimum of three minutes.
 Bearings which are required to resist lateral forces shall be further tested to 1.5 times the lateral serviceability limit state load stated on the Drawings while loaded in compression to the minimum vertical serviceability limit state load shown on the Drawings. The load shall be maintained for three minutes.
 
 (d) Test for Co-efficient of Friction
 In addition to testing to the requirements of Clause 653.07(c) for vertical and lateral forces, the co-efficient of friction of sliding surfaces of sliding bearings shall be determined. The value of the co-efficient of friction shall be taken as the average result of five tests and shall be determined for both maximum and minimum vertical serviceability limit state loads shown on the Drawings.
 The sliding surfaces shall be tested as manufactured, with the lubrication reservoirs filled with the long life silicone grease used to permanently lubricate the bearings.
 The friction co-efficient of the sliding surfaces shall not exceed the values given in Table 653.071 for the relevant stresses on the PTFE surface. Values shall be interpolated for intermediate bearing pressures.
 Table 653.071 - Friction Co-efficient of Sliding Surfaces
 
 Bearing Pressure Friction Co-efficient
 
 5 MPa 0.04
 
 15 MPa 0.025
 
 20 MPa 0.02
 
 30 MPa or greater 0.015
 
 (e) Test for Rotation
 One bearing of each type shall be tested for rotation to the value shown on the Drawings, rounded upwards to the nearest 0.005 radians while being loaded in compression to the maximum vertical serviceability limit state load shown on the Drawings. Bearings which are required to resist lateral forces shall also have the specified lateral serviceability limit state load stated on the Drawings applied during this test.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 653 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) Failure to Meet Requirements After testing, bearings shall be dismantled and examined for distress, warping, scoring or other effects which may affect the durability of the bearing. A bearing will be rejected if it exhibits any signs of failure such as: (i) extrusion of the elastomer from the pot; (ii) tearing, cracking or permanent deformation of the PTFE sliding surface; (iii) cracking or permanent deformation of the sealing ring or other part of the bearing; or (iv) abrasive marks indicating abnormal contact between the metal surfaces of the bearing plates or piston, and the pot. If a bearing is rejected, two additional bearings from the batch it represents shall be tested. If both bearings meet the requirements of this Specification, the remaining bearings in the batch will be accepted. Otherwise each remaining bearing in the batch shall be tested to determine its compliance with the Specification.
 653.08 TEST CERTIFICATES Prior to the installation of the bearings the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent copies of the test certificates showing details of the test results of each sample of elastomer and each bearing tested. The test certificates shall show whether any tolerances have been exceeded or faults have been observed.
 653.09 PROTECTIVE COATING Bearings shall be coated with zinc-in-silicate in accordance with AS 3750.15. Bearings shall be prepared by grit blasting to AS 1627.4 Class 2.5, followed by the application of zinc-in-silicate undercoat (75 microns DFT); exposed edges shall have a further two coats of micaceous iron oxide epoxy, M1OE, (100 micron each coat). Colour M1OE Mid Grey. All paint coats shall be factory applied prior to assembly of the bearings. All bolts, nuts and washers shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AS 1214. Stainless steel sliding surfaces of expansion bearings shall receive no protective treatment and care shall be taken to protect these surfaces from being damaged or coated during the application of the protective treatment.
 653.10 SHOP ASSEMBLY The bearings including all parts as shown on the Drawings shall be fully shop assembled at the manufacturer's works to ensure proper fitting of all parts.
 653.11 MOVEMENT INDICATOR Where shown on the drawings or specified elsewhere, a movement indicator and suitably located scale shall be securely fixed to the bearings to enable shear movements to be monitored.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 653 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth 653.12 MARKING AND DELIVERY All bearings shall be suitably marked to identify their location in the bridge. When bearings are required to be preset for shear movement, they shall be clearly marked to ensure they are installed with the correct orientation. Mating parts of bearings shall be suitably and permanently marked, and shall be supplied in sets held together with metal transit clips and/or bolts to prevent misalignment and/or damage of the components during transport and erection. The transit clips and/or bolts shall not be removed until final installation in the bridge or when specified on the drawings. 653.13 SITE STORAGE Bearings stored on site prior to installation shall be protected from exposure to chemicals, fuel, oil, water, mud or dust, and shall not be stored in areas subject to flooding. 653.14 INSTALLATION (a) General
 The Contractor shall ensure that the specified installation tolerances are allowed for during the manufacture of the bearings and attachment plates. (b) Tolerances Bearings shall be installed to the correct position and orientation as shown on the Drawings and, where applicable, in accordance with the bearing supplier's installation procedures. Bearings shall be installed level, or where indicated on the drawings to a grade, within a tolerance of 0.5%.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 653 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 656 - INSTALLATION OF ELASTOMERIC BEARINGS AND PADS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 610 and 652. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 656.01 GENERAL
 Elastomeric bearings shall comply with Section 652 read in conjunction with AS 5100 Bridge design  Part 4: Bearings and deck joints.
 To ensure that the bearings function as designed, they shall be of the sizes and at the positions, orientations and levels stated on the drawings.
 656.02 PREPARATION
 Concrete pedestals for bearings shall be of the sizes and at the positions, orientations and levels stated on the drawings and shall extend a minimum of 25 mm beyond the edge of bearing.
 Pedestals shall have sufficient strength to transmit the forces, movements and rotations required by the design to the bridge sub-structure. Construction joints at the interface between pedestals and the bearing-shelf shall be recessed a minimum of 20 mm below the top surface of the crosshead or bearing shelf. If shown on the drawings, dowels shall be provided at the construction joints to transmit horizontal design loads.
 Concrete for pedestals shall comply with the requirements of Section 610 and shall have a minimum age of 7 days before load is transferred to the bearings from the beams.
 If horizontal loads are to be transmitted by friction alone, the concrete surface on which elastomeric bearings, pads and strips are to be placed shall have sufficient surface roughness to develop the friction required by the bearing design. A wood-float finish will generally satisfy this requirement.
 656.03 INSTALLATION
 If required on the drawings, dowels shall be provided to transmit horizontal design loads in accordance with AS 5100.4. Dowels shall have sufficient strength to satisfy the requirements of the design and shall be made from durable materials and be de-mountable to allow removal and replacement of the bearings.
 All bearings shall be restrained from moving by the use of stainless-steel brackets attached to the bearing-shelf and the beam or diaphragm. Brackets shall not be directly connected to the bearing nor shall they prevent or interfere with its normal functioning. Brackets and their fasteners shall have sufficient strength to satisfy the requirements of the design and shall be made from durable materials be de-mountable to allow removal and replacement of the bearings. Care shall be taken during the installation of fasteners to prevent damage to the beams and other structural components and in particular to prestressing strands and reinforcement.
 If bearings are installed level and the bottom flange of the beam above is sloping in transverse, longitudinal or both directions, machined plates or other spacing devices shall be manufactured and installed between the top surface of the bearing and the underside of the beam in accordance with the geometrical and strength requirements of the design.
 656.04 POSITION AND ALIGNMENT
 Bearings and pads shall be level and square to the longitudinal axis of the beam.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 656 (Page 1 of 2
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 656.05 TOLERANCES
 
 Plan position  2 mm in any direction
 
 Level
 
  2 mm
 
 656.06 HANDLING, PACKING AND STORAGE
 Elastomeric bearings shall be transported, stored and handled in accordance with the requirements of Section 652.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 656 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 SECTION 660 - BRIDGE EXPANSION JOINTS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 660.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the supply and installation of bridge expansion joints.
 660.02 MATERIAL SUPPLY
 The Contractor shall supply all expansion joint components including joints, seals, inserts, anchorages, cover plates, waterproofing membrane, drainage system, bedding mortar, nosing, edging and all adhesives and sealants required for the installation of the joint system in conformity with the supplier's recommendations.
 660.03 JOINT SYSTEMS
 Bridge expansion joints shall comply with the drawings.
 Alternative Designs
 If an alternative bridge expansion joint is proposed it shall be designed in accordance with Bridge Technical Note 1999-002 Design of deck joints for road bridges, in conjunction with the requirements of the AS 5100, the Australian Standard for bridge design.
 The Contractor shall submit proposals for joints and their installation (including items (b) to (f) listed below) to the Superintendent for review within four weeks of acceptance of tender.
 Where an alternative system is proposed by the Contractor, the submission shall include the following: (a) design basis for the joint in accordance with the Australian Standard for bridge design (b) details of provisions for inspection, maintenance and replacement (c) anchorage system details (d) geometry for blockout (if required) (e) a drawing showing typical cross-sections including cover plates where applicable (f) treatment at kerb, pedestrian footpaths and barriers (g) alterations or modifications to deck reinforcement and/or embedments (h) details of nosing material, adhesive, backing rod, sealant and seal (i) evidence of satisfactory performance and durability of the product under equivalent
 conditions.
 660.04 JOINT INSTALLATION
 The expansion joint shall be installed in accordance with the supplier's recommended procedure.
 Installation Temperature
 Expansion joint gaps shall be designed and dimensioned for installation at a mean temperature of 20C. HP In the event that the ambient temperature differs from 20C by more than 5C, it
 may be necessary to vary the joint gap. The Contractor shall seek a direction from the Superintendent and shall vary the joint-gap if required.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 660 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Installation Tolerances
 The following tolerances shall apply to joint installation: (a) joint gap 3 mm (b) deviation from plan alignment 5 mm maximum over the total length of the joint (c) the top surface of the joint shall be level with the adjacent road surface with a tolerance of
 0 to -2 mm when measured with a 2.5 m straight edge at 90 to the joint
 The upper surfaces of the joint shall be parallel with the longitudinal grade and cross-fall of the completed road or footpath surface.
 Reinforcement for Deck Joints
 Reinforcement for deck joints shall comply with the requirements of Bridge Technical Note 2002/001 Reinforcement of deck joints.
 Reinforcement surrounding embedded anchorages shall be in accordance with the drawings and shall be fixed to ensure that the strength of the anchorage meets the requirements of the joint design.
 HP Prior to casting deck concrete, the Contractor shall ensure that there is no conflict between the joint anchors, the deck reinforcement and any embedment. Where conflict does occur, the Contractor shall submit proposals for resolving the conflict to the Superintendent.
 In situ Concrete
 If the joint detail includes a raised concrete plinth that sits above the level of the adjacent deck surface, the concrete in the plinth shall be cast monolithically with the deck concrete.
 For joints that are recessed into the end of the bridge deck and the adjacent fender-wall, concrete immediately under and around the joint shall be placed and compacted in a manner that ensures that there is full contact with the underside of the expansion joint and its components and that the concrete is free of voids.
 If the joint is to be fixed to the deck concrete after the concrete has been cast, the seating surface shall be accurately formed to the required finished profile. Should depressions or high spots be present in the formed concrete surface, these shall be filled, cut or ground to the required finished profile prior to installation of the joint. Depressions shall be filled with a high-strength (minimum 50 MPa) non-shrink mortar that is compatible with the expansion joint. The expansion joint shall not be fixed in place and holding-down bolts shall not be tensioned until the mortar has achieved its nominal strength.
 HP After concreting and prior to installation of the joint seal, the vertical face of the concrete under the full length of the joint shall be inspected for the presence of voids and other imperfections. If voids are discovered, the Contractor shall remove the affected section of the joint to enable a full inspection of the concrete and shall submit proposals for repair to the Superintendent.
 HP Following completion of the joint assembly and tensioning of all anchor bolts, the full length of the joint shall be tested by tapping with a hammer. Should any part of the joint exhibit a hollow-ring or movement, the affected length shall be removed and re-bedded and all bolts replaced and re-tensioned. If the concrete under the joint is found to have voids or other imperfections or any of the anchor bolts are not properly restrained, the Contractor shall submit proposals for repair to the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 660 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Tensioning of Anchor Bolts
 HP Not later than two weeks prior to installation of the bridge joint, the Contractor shall submit proposals for tightening of anchor bolts to the Superintendent.
 Anchor bolts for bridge joints shall be tensioned to a maximum of 65% of the ultimate strength of the bolt in accordance with the requirements of the joint design and the supplier's recommendations either by the use of a calibrated torque-wrench, the part-turn method, or other approved method.
 If a torque-wrench is used to tension the anchor bolts, appropriate allowances shall be made in the calculation of the required torque for friction losses in the anchor bolt assembly taking into account the condition of the threads on the bolts and ferrules and the use of lubricants.
 Torque-wrenches and other similar devices shall be calibrated in accordance with AS 4115 or ISO 6789 and shall be capable of generating the required torque with an accuracy of 1 Nm.
 The Contractor shall supply a copy of the torque-wrench calibration certificate to the Superintendent on request.
 Anchor bolt tensioning records shall be maintained by the Contractor and supplied to the Superintendent on completion of installation.
 If the required tension cannot be achieved, the Contractor shall submit proposals to the Superintendent for rectification of the defect.
 If it is necessary to de-tension (partly or wholly) or remove an anchor bolt of the single-use type that has been tensioned, the used anchor bolt shall be discarded and replaced with a new bolt.
 Anchor bolts for expansion joints on post-tensioned bridges shall not be fixed in position until at least four weeks after post-tensioning of the deck. Joint levels for post-tensioned bridges shall be adjusted for variation from the design hog.
 Compression Seals, Inserts and Membranes
 Compression seals, inserts and membranes shall be installed in one continuous piece for the full length of the joint including footpaths and barriers.
 If seals are bonded to the nosing, the surface shall be prepared and primed and the adhesives placed in accordance with the supplier's recommendations.
 Completed joints shall be watertight.
 Nosing Materials
 Nosing materials shall be mixed, poured and cured in accordance with the supplier's recommendations.
 Trafficking of Joints During Construction
 Joints shall not be trafficked until all components of the joint have achieved adequate strength to support traffic loads without being damaged.
 Joints, seals, inserts and membranes shall be protected from damage due to construction activities and the passage of site vehicles.
 If the joint or any of its component parts is damaged during construction, the Contractor shall repair the damage to the satisfaction of the Superintendent or replace the joint.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 660 (Page 3 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth 660.05 REPLACEMENT JOINTS The replacement joint system shall: (a) be designed in accordance with AS 5100 *** (b) have a minimum design life of ##: years (c) be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations by an experienced
 installer.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 660 (Page 4 of 4)
 
 SECTION 670 - STEEL BRIDGE BARRIERS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 610, 630, 631 and 675. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 670.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the fabrication and installation of steel barriers for road and pedestrian bridges. Section 175 details the relevant references to Australian Standards (AS) in this section.
 670.02 MATERIALS AND FABRICATION
 Materials and fabrication of steel components shall be in accordance with Section 630. Materials and fabrication of cast steel posts and sleeves shall be in accordance with Section 675. Where the drawing requires the steel barrier posts to be cut before welding to the structure, the Contractor shall make an allowance (not exceeding 20 mm) for packing or cutting the posts to allow for variation of camber.
 670.03 INSTALLATION OF BARRIERS
 The barrier shall be installed in accordance with Section 630 and to the tolerances specified in Clause 670.05, to a smooth alignment both vertically and horizontally independent of any irregularities that may exist in the alignment of the deck. Barrier posts, panels, balusters and openings shall be vertical. Bolts, nuts, washers, base plates and welds shall be of the correct sizes and shall be correctly assembled. Retrofitted bonded anchors shall not be used in anchor-bolts for steel barriers. Sleeves at expansion joints shall be connected to the rail on the lower side of the joint. Bolted joints at sleeves joints and rail splices shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified. Hole drilling shall be in accordance with Section 630 and any cut surfaces (holes) shall have a protective coating treatment applied in accordance with Section 631. After the barrier has been installed and all connections made, the gap between the base plate and the top of concrete footing shall be completely filled with a flowable dual shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious grout in accordance with Clause 610.32. Dry pack mortar shall not be used. HP Railing posts shall not be grouted until the Contractor provides a Survey
 Certificate verifying compliance with the specified tolerances on lines and levels.
 670.04 BARRIER FINISH
 The type and extent of the primary protective coating and additional paint finish shall be as shown on the contract drawings and as specified. The finished surface of barriers shall be smooth, non-abrasive and non-snagging.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 670 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth Both internal and external surfaces of barrier railing and posts shall have a hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coating applied in accordance with AS/NZS 4680. Where the barrier is completely sealed by welding against the ingress of water and other corrosive agents, a zinc silicate primer may be applied for external protection in lieu of galvanising. The primer shall be applied in accordance with Section 631. Where required, additional paint finishes for secondary protective coatings or aesthetic and other reasons shall be applied in accordance with Section 631. 670.05 TOLERANCES Barriers shall be installed within the following tolerances: (a) Departure from plan position .................................... 25 mm (b) Departure from alignment ........................................ 5 mm (c) Irregularities in alignment ........................................ 3 mm in 3 m (d) Variation in joint gap width ...................................... 3 mm (e) Verticality of posts, panels, balusters and openings .....  2 mm.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 670 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 671 - CONCRETE AND COMBINED CONCRETE AND STEEL BRIDGE BARRIERS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 610, 611, 630, 631 and 675. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 671.01 GENERAL This section covers the installation of precast concrete and combined precast concrete and steel traffic barriers on road and pedestrian bridges. Section 175 details the relevant references to Australian Standards (AS) in this section.
 671.02 MATERIALS AND FABRICATION Materials and fabrication of steel post and rail components shall be in accordance with Section 630. Materials and fabrication of cast steel posts and sleeves shall be in accordance with Section 675.
 671.03 CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF BRIDGE BARRIERS Cast-in-place concrete barriers and precast concrete barrier units shall be constructed and installed as shown on the contract drawings. Cast-in-place concrete for barriers shall be constructed in accordance with Section 610, and to the requirements of this section. Steel reinforcement for cast-in-place concrete shall comply with Section 611. Concrete deck surfaces in contact with cast-in-place portions of the concrete barriers shall be treated as a construction joint in accordance with Clause 610.20. Cast-in-place concrete or precast concrete bridge barrier units shall not be placed before the corresponding deck concrete achieves the 7-day compressive strength corresponding to the concrete grade in Table 610.051. Barriers on cast-in-place post-tensioned concrete superstructures shall not be installed or cast until all prestressing operations have been completed. All barrier surfaces including the precast units, where required, and the cast-in-place concrete shall have a Class 3 surface finish as specified in Section 610. Installation of precast concrete barrier units shall comply with the tolerances specified in Section 610 prior to construction of the cast-in-place sections of the barriers. The sloping portion of the cast-in-place section of the precast concrete barriers shall be partially formed. Three millimetre diameter galvanized wires or synthetic cords shall be threaded through each service duct in the concrete barrier and shall be continuous for the full length of the bridge. Cast-in-place concrete barriers and stitch pours shall not be subjected to vibration from adjacent construction operations for a minimum period of 24 hours following completion of the associated concrete pour.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 671 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 671.04 INSTALLATION OF STEEL POSTS AND RAILS All barrier posts shall be vertical. Panels of posts and rails shall have a smooth even alignment both vertically and horizontally which shall be free from any steps or imperfections that could cause a vehicle to snag on the barrier. Bolts, nuts, washers, base plates and welds shall be of the correct sizes and shall be assembled in accordance with the drawings. Sleeves at expansion joints shall be connected to the rail on the lower side of the joint. Bolted joints at sleeves joints and rail splices shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified. Hole drilling shall be in accordance with Section 630 and any cut surfaces (holes) shall have a protective coating treatment applied in accordance with Section 631. After the barrier has been installed and all connections made, the gap between the base plate and the top of concrete footing shall be completely filled with a flowable dual shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious grout in accordance with Clause 610.32. Dry pack mortar shall not be used. HP Railing posts shall not be grouted until the Contractor provides a Survey
 Certificate verifying compliance with the specified tolerances on lines and levels.
 671.05 STEEL POST AND RAIL FINISH Requirements for protective coating finishes for steel components shall be as shown on the drawings. The finished surface of posts and rails shall be smooth, non-abrasive and non-snagging. Both internal and external surfaces of barrier railing and posts shall have a hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coating applied in accordance with AS/NZS 4680. Where the barrier is completely sealed by welding against the ingress of water and other corrosive agents, a zinc silicate primer may be applied for external protection in lieu of galvanizing. The primer shall be applied in accordance with Section 631. Where required, additional paint finishes for secondary protective coatings or aesthetic and other reasons shall be applied in accordance with Section 631.
 671.06 TOLERANCES Posts and rails shall be installed within the following tolerances:
 Departure from plan position .............. 25 mm Departure from alignment .................... 5 mm Irregularities in alignment ......... 3 mm in 3 m Variation in joint gap width .................. 3 mm
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 671 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 675 - CAST STEEL BARRIER RAILING POSTS
 
 675.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the manufacture of cast steel barrier railing posts, the properties of the cast steel and the testing procedures required.
 Cast steel for railing posts and sleeves shall conform to the requirements of AS 2074.
 
 675.02 MATERIALS SPECIFICATION
 Cast steel with minimum yield stress of 245 MPa shall conform to AS 2074 Grade C4-1. Cast steel with minimum yield stress of 340 MPa shall conform to AS 2074 Grade L1A.
 Technical requirements for steel castings shall comply with AS 4738.1.
 
 675.03 HEAT TREATMENT All castings shall be heat treated in accordance with Clause 2.3.2 of AS 2074.
 
 675.04 SHAPE AND TOLERANCES
 
 The castings shall be made to the shape and dimensions shown on the drawings and within the tolerances specified:
 
 thickness of members +2 mm / -0 mm
 
 diameter of holes
 
 +2 mm / -0 mm
 
 overall dimensions
 
 +2 mm / -0 mm
 
 flatness of base
 
 2 mm maximum on convex surface (measured along all edges and diagonals of base plan area).
 
 The web centreline shall not be out of square with the plane of the base by more than 1 mm per 100 mm height of the web.
 
 The recess for the rail shall not be out of parallel with the plane of the base by more than 1 mm per 100 mm width of the base.
 
 All edges shall be smooth, true and rounded to 2 mm radius.
 
 675.05 IDENTIFICATION MARKS
 Each casting shall be legibly marked, with a number or identification mark by which it can be traced to the cast and heat treatment batch from which it was made. All test samples, made in accordance with AS 2074, shall be similarly marked.
 
 675.06 ACCEPTANCE OF SURFACE FINISH QUALITY BY VISUAL INSPECTION
 Steel castings shall be visually inspected by the Contractor in accordance with AS 3978 Non destructive testing - Visual inspection of metal products and components.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 675 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The texture and surface finish of all castings shall not exceed the following maximum levels of acceptable defect:
 
 Surface Feature Surface texture Non-metallic inclusions Gas porosity Metal removal marks
 Thermal Mechanical Welds Hot tears and cracks Shrinkage Veining Rat Tails Wrinkles, Laps, Folds and Coldshuts Scabs Chaplets
 
 Maximum acceptable level 1
 
 Source of acceptance criteria 2
 
 Level I : A1
 
 ASTM A802/A802M - 95
 
 Level I : B1
 
 ASTM A802/A802M - 95
 
 Level I : C2
 
 ASTM A802/A802M - 95
 
 Level I : G1 Level I : H1 Level I : J1
 
 ASTM A802/A802M - 95
 
 None acceptable
 
 MSS SP 55:2011
 
 Better than reference photograph a (Type II) MSS SP 55:2011
 
 Better than reference photograph a (Type V) MSS SP 55:2011
 
 Better than reference photograph a (Type VI) MSS SP 55:2011
 
 Better than reference photograph a (Type VII) MSS SP 55:2011
 
 Better than reference photograph a (Type IX) MSS SP 55:2011
 
 Better than reference photograph a (Type X) MSS SP 55:2011
 
 Note 1: The maximum acceptable levels are consistent with surface discontinuity comparators for a reduced discontinuity size, as described in AS 4738.1 (Appendix F).
 Note 2: Sources of acceptance criteria are as follows:
  ASTM A802/A802M - 95 Standard Practice for Steel Castings, Surface Acceptance Standards, Visual Inspection, ASTM (2006)
  MSS SP 55:2011 Quality Standard for Steel Castings for Valves, Flanges and Fittings and Other Piping Components, - Visual Method for Evaluation of Surface Irregularities, Manufacturers Standardisation Society
 
 675.07 WORKMANSHIP
 Where the maximum levels of acceptable defects as given in Clause 675.06 are exceeded, the defects in the castings shall be rectified. Where appropriate, castings may be welded in accordance with the requirements of AS 1988.1 - Welding of ferrous castings - Steel castings. After welding, all weld-repaired castings shall be given a stress relieving heat treatment.
 
 675.08 TESTING AND TEST CERTIFICATES
 Testing for chemical composition and tensile properties shall be carried out for each cast or heat treatment batch. Charpy V-notch impact testing shall be carried out for the first batch cast, and then for at least every third batch. The Charpy impact average value, for testing of three specimens, shall be not less than the value nominated in AS 2074 for the relevant grade.
 Test certificates which demonstrate compliance of the steel with chemical composition and mechanical property requirements of AS 2074 Grade C4-1 or Grade L1A cast steel, and the results of visual inspection shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
 
 675.09 PROTECTIVE TREATMENT All cast steel posts shall be coated in accordance with the drawings and specification.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 675 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 SECTION 680 - BONDED ANCHORS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175 and 611. If either of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification.
 If either of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 680.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for supply of materials, installation, workmanship and testing of bonded anchors installed in concrete..
 The design of bonded anchors shall comply with the VicRoads Bridge Technical Note BTN2012/002 Design Guidelines for Bonded Anchors.
 Where bonded anchors are proposed, the Contractor shall demonstrate that the selected bonded anchor system satisfies the requirements of the design to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 680.02 STANDARDS
 Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 2193).
 (a) Australian Standards AS 2193 Calibration and classification of force-measuring systems AS 1391 Metallic materials - Tensile testing at ambient temperature
 (b) Additional Test Methods ASTM E 488 Standard Test Methods for Strength of Anchors in Concrete and Masonry Elements ASTM E 1512 Standard Test Methods for Testing Bond Performance of Adhesive-Bonded Anchors
 (c) Additional Documents and Referenced Specifications SA TS 101 Technical Specification  Design of post-installed and cast-in fastenings for use in concrete (published by Standards Australia) ATIC-SPEC 38  Metal anchors for use in concrete (published by the Australian Technical Infrastructure Committee (ATIC)) BTN2012/002 VicRoads Bridge Technical Note, Design Guidelines for Bonded Anchors ETAG (European Technical Assessment Guideline) 001 Part 5 ICC-ES (USA)  International Code Council Approvals, Evaluation service for post installed anchors and other building products
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 1 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 680.03 DEFINITIONS
 Anchor: a steel stud, threaded rod, steel bolt or reinforcing steel drilled and secured into the existing hardened concrete.
 Bonded anchor: a system comprising an anchor and a chemical adhesive that transmits loads from the embedded anchor into the hardened concrete.
 Chemical adhesive: a material or bonding agent used to bond together steel and concrete components to hardened concrete and provide the pathway for the required load transfer of the bonded anchor system.
 Discrete population: A population of bonded anchors that has bonded anchors of the same type (manufacturer and model), installed in the same substrate (e.g. same type and strength, same installation conditions such as wet or dry and temperature) and have all been installed by the same work crew. Proof load test: A test performed on a bonded anchor whose installation is complete and is intended to validate correct installation, by allowing bond failure but precluding concrete failure via a confined test. The proof load shall not exceed the lesser of the yield strength of the anchor rod or the design bond strength of the chemical adhesive.
 Ultimate load test: A test performed on a bonded anchor whose installation is complete and is intended to aid in establishing the suitability of the bonded anchor in a particular hardened concrete where all the properties required for design are not known, by allowing concrete failure and/or bond failure via an unconfined test.
 680.04 DESIGN AND LIMITATIONS ON USE
 The design and limitations on use of bonded anchors shall be in accordance with the requirements of BTN2012/002.
 Where SA TS 101 is referenced in the design of bonded anchors, BTN2012/002 shall take precedence where they differ.
 The design of the bonded anchor system shall make allowance for the following performance influencing factors: (a) the substrate conditions at the time of installation (b) the in-service substrate conditions (i.e. dry or wet, temperature, concrete strength, drilling
 method) (c) the geometry of the host concrete member (i.e. edge distance, spacing between bonded
 anchors, member thickness) (d) the nature of the applied loads (i.e. static, dynamic, cyclic, sustained) (e) the effect of the composition of the chemical adhesive on the load carrying capacity and
 performance.
 The bonded anchor system design shall be certified by a Design Engineer who is a member of Engineers Australia and with a minimum of 5 years experience in the design and construction of bonded anchor systems of similar complexity. The bonded anchor system design shall be verified in accordance with the Contract to confirm that the design satisfies the performance requirements of the bonded anchors.
 The bonded anchor system design shall be proof engineered by a Proof Engineer, who is independent of the design consultant's firm and is prequalified at Level PE under the VicRoads' prequalification scheme.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 2 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 HP Subject to the requirements of BTN2012/002, if it is proposed to use bonded anchors in tension as described in Clause 3.5 ofbtn2012/002, the Contractor shall submit full details of the proposal, including a Proof EngineeringCertificate of Compliance, for the approval of the Superintendent, not later than two weeks prior to the intended use.
 Any amendment to the design after the issue of the Proof Engineering Certificate of Compliance shall be referred to the Proof Engineer for review and written confirmation that the Certificate of Compliance remains valid.
 680.05 MATERIALS
 (a) General Bonded anchor systems shall be certified in accordance with a third party materials accreditation scheme or a technical approval scheme approved by the Superintendant. For this purpose, certification in accordance with one of the following is acceptable: (i) SA TS101 Appendix B (ii) ATIC SP 38 (iii) ETAG (European Technical Approval) 001 Part 5 (iv) ICC (USA).
 Bonded anchor systems with current ETA (European Technical Assessment/Approval) automatically conform to the requirements of SA TS101 Appendix B. Components from different types of bonded anchor or from different bonded anchor suppliers shall not be mixed, exchanged or substituted for the specified system.As a minimum the technical information to be specified on design drawings shall include the following: (i) bonded anchor: manufacturer's name, product name (ii) details of steel element: strength grade, depth of embedment (iii) drilled hole: diameter, depth, method of drilling (iv) sequence of installation, including cleaning steps (v) working time for the chemical adhesive (vi) curing time of the chemical adhesive to gain strength sufficient to allow the bonded anchor
 to be loaded (vii) tightening torque. HP If the Contractor proposes to use an alternative to the specified bonded anchor system, including any deviation from the product, substrate or installation specified, the Contractor shall submit full details of the proposed alternative system and its design for approval by the Superintendent no later than two weeks prior to the proposed installation of the bonded anchors.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Chemical Adhesives
 In addition to satisfying all requirements stipulated by the bonded anchor supplier, the following restrictions apply: (i) chemical adhesives containing styrenes are not permitted (ii) polyester type chemical adhesives susceptible to alkaline hydrolysis shall not be used if the
 bonded anchor will be exposed to moisture during the life of the structure (iii) the chemical adhesive shall be used in holes which have been drilled using the technique
 (e.g. carbide-tipped rotary hammer or diamond-tipped core drill) prescribed by the manufacturer (refer to manufacturer's installation instructions) (iv) the selected chemical adhesive shall perform in accordance with the design for expected ranges of temperature and moisture content over the design life of the structure (iv) the Contractor shall comply with all requirements for the correct use of the chemical adhesive specified by the supplier in the manufacturer's installation instructions, including but not limited to, temperature range, curing time, shelf life, mixing requirements and moisture content (v) bonded anchors used under sustained tensile loading shall be prequalified for this loading type in accordance with Clause 680.05(a).
 (c) Metallic Components and Coatings
 Steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of Section 611 and shall be prequalified for use with the chemical adhesive in accordance with Clause 680.05(a).
 Coatings for metal components shall have sufficient durability to achieve the required design life of the structure.
 Galvanised steel components may only be used in permanently dry conditions where the design life is 25 years or less.
 Stainless steel grades 1.4401, 1.4404, 1.4362 and 1.4571 (marking A4) may not be used in conditions where the component is either permanently inundated in seawater or in the splash zone. Stainless steel grades 1.4529 (marking C) may be used in conditions where the component is either permanently inundated in seawater or in the splash zone.
 Proprietary threaded anchor rods and metallic bolts shall be subject to certification by the third party materials accreditation scheme ortechnical approval scheme As required in Clause 680.05(a).
 680.06 COMPETENCY AND TRAINING OF PERSONNEL
 The bonded anchor installer shall be certified by the Australian Engineered Fasteners and Anchors Council (AEFAC), or shall be able to provide evidence of competency acceptable to the Superintendent.
 All personnel who are required to install bonded anchors shall be AEFAC certified installers or be trained by the supplier of the bonded anchor system in the specific installation requirements of the project before bonded anchor installation commences.
 Individuals who have successfully completed training shall be issued with either a card, which includes their name and photograph, or a certificate of training. The Contractor shall hold evidence of this training on site and present it to the Superintendent on request.
 The bonded anchor system installation supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of the applied techniques and shall be present at each stage of the bonded anchors installation works, including any trial installations and all testing.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 4 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 680.07 EQUIPMENT
 Bonded anchors shall be installed using the equipment specified or provided by the bonded anchor supplier in the manufacturer's installation instructions.
 680.08 WORKMANSHIP AND INSTALLATION
 (a) General
 Bonded anchors shall be installed in the manner specified by the bondedanchor supplier by a competent person who has received appropriate training in accordance with Clause 680.06.
 Holes for bonded anchors shall be drilled with carbide or diamond drill bits in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and shall be of the length and diameter specified by the supplier for the selected bonded anchor and as required by the design.
 Holes for bonded anchors must be positioned to avoid damage to reinforcement and pre-stressing tendons or to services. Prior to drilling of holes, reinforcing bars and pre-stressing cables that lie within the depth of the drill hole must be accurately located by reference to as-constructed drawings. The actual position of bars and tendons shall then be located by use of a recently calibrated concrete cover meter, operated by a competent person. If reinforcement is encountered during drilling, drilling shall cease immediately and the Contractor (following consultation with the design engineer) shall provide the Superintendent with an acceptable course of action consistent with the design requirements
 Holes for bonded anchors shall be drilled and cleaned in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. However, as a minimum, the procedure for drilling and cleaning of holes shall be as follows:
 (i) drill to required depth
 (ii) air flush twice
 (iii) brush clean twice
 (iv) air flush twice
 (v) fingertip test the hole surface for dust, and if dust is still present, brush clean and airflush until all dust is removedincluding a potential dust plug at the end of the hole which reduces embedment depth. At the end of the cleaning process, the hole shall be clean and free of debris, dust particles, oil and other contaminants over its full depth.
 If a mechanical compressor is used to provide the air flush, the compressed air shall be free of oil.
 If the hole is not immediately filled with chemical adhesive and is allowed to stand open for any period of time, the cleaning process shall be repeated prior to installation of bonded anchors.
 A discrete population of bonded anchors shall be installed by the same work crew
 (b) Additional specific requirements
 The following requirements shall also be met:
 (i) Immediately prior to installation of the bonded anchor system, holes for bonded anchors shall be completely free of water dry) or be free of standing water (damp), in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions
 (ii) Bonded anchors shallnot be used if the temperature of the concrete is less than -5C, above 40C, or outside the requirements specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions.
 (iii) Check temperature of hole prior to injecting chemical adhesive, note the working time which is the time allowed to place the anchor rod into the chemical adhesive and the curing time which is the time for the chemical to gain strength from the time of first mixing until the time when the bonded anchor can be loaded.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 5 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (iv) (v)
 (vi) (vii)
 (viii) (ix) (x)
 (xi) (xii)
 
 The procedure for placing chemical adhesives and anchors shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation requirements
 Chemical adhesive shall not be injected into the drilled hole until it is thoroughly mixed using the proprietary equipment to a uniform consistency, colour and appearance in accordance with the manufacturer's installation requirements.
 The initial discharge of chemical adhesive from the mixing nozzle nozzle and for every new mixing nozzle used thereafter shall be discarded.
 Each hole shall be checked visually to ensure that the chemical adhesive is injected to the correct depth (typically 2/3 of the hole depth) prior to insertion of the metal anchor rod.
 Excessive chemical adhesive shall be removed from the concrete and anchor rod surfaces after inserting the anchor rod.
 The anchor rod shall not be disturbed or moved during curing.
 If a popping or cracking sound is heard while inserting the anchor rod, air voids are present in the chemical adhesive. Remove the anchor rod, allow the chemical adhesive to fully harden, redrill the hole and repeat the entire installation process.
 Following mixing, the chemical adhesive shall be used within the time limit working time or gel time) stated in the manufacturer's installation requirements.
 Capsule chemical adhesives shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
 
 Chemical adhesives shall be allowed to gain strength for the minimum time specified by the manufacturer's installation instructions before torque is applied to bolts and load is applied to the bonded anchor system.
 
 680.09 LOAD TESTING OF INSTALLED ANCHORS
 
 l(a) General
 The scope of the testing described in this clause is limited to demonstration of the suitability of the selected bonded anchor for use in a particular application and forvalidating the quality of installation. Certification and testing of the bonded anchor system and components required by Clause 680.05 shall be conducted in accordance with the nominated independent third-party materials testing body.
 The requirements for site-testing of bonded anchors are limited to testing of tensile capacity.
 Separate requirements are given below for suitability testing and for testing of working anchors.
 Test bonded anchors shall be installed by suitably competent and experienced personnel, as described in Clause 680.06, in positions that are representative of the positions of the bonded anchors required by the design.
 Testing shall be conducted by a competent person who has experience in testing of bonded anchors and test reporting.
 Bonded anchors shall be tested using testing equipment that has been calibrated as a minimum, on an annual basis at the required intervals in accordance with AS 2193.
 HP One week prior to testing the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent calibration certificates conforming to the requirements of AS 2193 Grade B for the jack and pressure gauges or other force measuring devices to be used.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 6 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The measuring equipment shall allow the applied force to be determined to the accuracy+2%. If measurement of displacement is required, the measuring equipment shall comply with AS 1391 and shall allow elongation to be determined with an accuracy of  0.02 mm, with measurements made directly on the head of the anchor.
 The test load shall be applied at pre-determined increments and loading rates.
 HP Details of the test method including load increments and duration of sustained loading shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review not later than one week prior to the testing.
 Test bonded anchors shall be identified with a unique reference number.
 (b) Ultimate Load Testing for the suitability of bonded anchors
 Unless approved otherwise by the Superintendent, where the proposed bonded anchor system or where the characteristics of the substrate and/or installation are outside the scope of the bonded anchor prequalification as specified in Clause 680.05(a), the Contractor shall carry out ultimate load tests to validate the suitability of the bonded anchor system design and to demonstrate that the bonded anchor components, chemical adhesives, the substrate preparation and the proposed procedure will achieve the specified bonded anchor durability and load capacity.
 Ultimate load tests shall be conducted in advance of the installation of working bonded anchors after the manufacturer's curing time has elapsed.
 Bonded anchors to be tested for ultimate load shall be installed in an identical manner and shall be situated in a substrate identical to that of the working anchors, and shall be positioned such that the installation and performance of the working bonded anchors is not compromised in any way.A sample consisting of at least five of the proposed total number of bonded anchors required by the design shall be subject to an ultimate load test. Ultimate load testing shall be conducted for each of the combinations of anchors and chemical adhesives in each type of concrete or other substrate material, in each orientation and in uncracked and, if present, cracked concrete.
 The testing personnel shall ensure that the bonded anchors are installed in accordance with the specification and the manufacturer's installation instructions. Testing personnel shall be suitably competent and possess the relevant experience at conducting testing of bonded anchors on site and reporting the findings including the different possible modes of failure.
 The mode of failure and corresponding ultimate load for each test shall be recorded in the test report. In the event that multiple failure modes are observed, testing shall continue until the required minimum number of dominant mode of failure results are achieved. The capacity of the bonded anchor shall be calculated from test results of the dominant mode of failure.
 Bonded anchors shall be tested to the Ultimate load certified by the design engineer for the bonded anchor used, in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E 488 and ASTM E 1512 based on the unconfined test method.
 (c) Proof Load Testing of working bonded anchors
 All working bonded anchors that will be subject to tensile loads and whose failure could lead to failure or instability of a structure shall be subject to a proof-load test.
 For all other bonded anchors, a sample consisting of a minimum of 5 or 2.5% whichever is the greater, of the total number of working bonded anchors shall be subject to a proof load test. For sampling and testing purposes each discrete population of bonded anchors shall be considered as a separate group and tested separately.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 7 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Proof load testing shall not occur prior to the completion of curing time stated in the manufacturer's installation instructions. The application of load shall occur smoothly with the proof load being achieved between one to three minutes from the commencement of loading. A bonded anchor shall be deemed to have failed a test if either visible displacement is detected at a load less than or equal to the test load, or if the anchor fails to achieve the required test load. If failure is encountered in any sample all anchors within the discrete area shall be proof load tested. Working bonded anchors shall be proof load tested to 1.5 x the maximum design load certified by the design engineer for the bonded anchor used in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E 488 and ASTM E 1512 based on the confined test methodWorking bonded anchors in cracked concrete shall be proof load tested to 2 x the maximum design load certified by the design engineer for the bonded anchor used in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E 488 and ASTM E 1512 based on the confined test method. The proof load shall be maintained for a minimum period of 60 seconds.
 (d) Actions if a bonded anchor test fails
 HP In the event that a bonded anchor fails either the ultimate load testing for suitability or the working bonded anchor proof load test, the Contractor shall submit rectification proposals for review by the Superintendent prior to any further bonded anchor installation.
 680.10 REPORTING
 The Contractor shall provide a test report to the Superintendent for review. The test report shall identify the performance of each tested bonded anchor, including the following: (a) tester's name and employer (b) supplier and type of bonded anchor (c) date of installation of bonded anchor (d) date of testing (e) bonded anchor reference number (f) bonded anchor position (g) condition of bonded anchor (h) condition of concrete substrate  all defects such as cracks and delamination to be
 reported (i) strength of concrete substrate - including how this was determined (j) testing equipment (k) calibration certificate for testing equipment (l) test method including load increments and duration of sustained loading (m) test load and time of holding at the test load (n) failure load (if applicable) (o) mode of failure (if applicable) (p) amount of permanent displacement (q) any other relevant comments or observations.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 680 (Page 8 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 681 - CATHODIC PROTECTION OF REINFORCED CONCRETE STRUCTURES
 ##This section cross-references Sections 160, 168, 176 (or 177), 684, 686, 687 and 689. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 681.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the cathodic protection (CP) of steel in reinforced concrete structures which are atmospherically exposed, buried or submerged. The section applies to both new and existing structures, including relevant inspection and testing, acceptance criteria for both normal reinforcement and prestressed reinforcement embedded in concrete.
 Cathodic protection of prestressed reinforcement embedded in concrete shall be subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 Note: Due to the possible occurrence of hydrogen embrittlement, high strength steels should not be exposed to a potential more negative than -900 mV (Ag/AgCl/0.5M KCl). Prestressing steel may be sensitive to hydrogen embrittlement which can cause catastrophic failure due to high tensile loading of prestressing members. It is essential that caution be exercised in any application of CP to prestressed elements.
 CP of steel in reinforced concrete structures shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of AS 2832.5, unless otherwise stated.
 681.02 PROTECTION CRITERIA
 The CP system shall deliver sufficient current to satisfactorily polarise the reinforcement of the whole of the reinforced concrete structure in all cathodic protection zones.
 Satisfactory polarisation shall be demonstrated by achieving the protection criteria in accordance with the requirements of AS 2832.5.
 Satisfactory polarisation of the steel reinforcement in accordance with these protection criteria shall be achieved within 26 weeks of the date of first energising the CP system for all zones.
 681.03 ASSESSMENT OF EXISTING STRUCTURES
 The Contractor shall undertake an assessment of the structure, including its material condition, structural integrity and whether and how to repair it, in accordance with the requirements of Section 3.2 of AS 2832.5.
 The assessment of the structure shall include as a minimum:
 (a) the nature, extent, location, severity and causes of damage and/or deterioration, and the ability of the structure to perform its function;
 (b) the likely remaining service life of the structure;
 (c) what is required to make the structure safe before and throughout any repair work, and for the required service life.
 Any structural assessment that is required shall be undertaken by an Engineer who has qualifications admitting to Corporate Membership of the Institution of Engineers, Australia with a minimum of 5 years practical experience in the design and structural assessment of concrete structures.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 1 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 To confirm the suitability, determine the extent of the CP system and provide design input for the system, the diagnostic investigation shall be representative of the various structural components of the structure and the cathodic protection exposure zones stated in Clause 681.09 and shall include:
 (a) visual inspection of all defects such as cracks, honeycombing or poor construction joints including a comprehensive photographic record;
 (b) delamination survey of the cover concrete;
 (c) chloride determination at incremental depths and analysis;
 (d) carbonation depth measurement;
 (e) concrete cover;
 (f) alkali aggregate reaction (AAR) assessment, including any long term residual effects of AAR if any over the longer term;
 (g) steel reinforcement continuity (i) continuity between elements of the structure within each zone of the CP system, (ii) continuity of reinforcement within elements of the structure,
 (iii) continuity of metallic items, other than reinforcement, to the reinforcement itself;
 (h) potential mapping;
 (i) concrete electrical resistivity;
 (j) corrosion rate measurement;
 (k) compressive strength of concrete;
 (l) volume of permeable voids (VPV) of concrete.
 The location and frequency of sampling and testing shall be as specified on the drawings and in this section.
 
 681.04 STANDARDS
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS 2239
 
 Galvanic (sacrificial) anodes for cathodic protection
 
 AS 2832.1
 
 Cathodic protection of metals; Part 1: Pipes and cables
 
 AS 2832.2
 
 Cathodic protection of metals; Part 2: Compact buried structures
 
 AS 2832.3
 
 Cathodic protection of metals; Part 3: Fixed immersed structures
 
 AS 2832.4
 
 Cathodic protection of metals; Part 4: Internal surfaces
 
 AS 2832.5
 
 Cathodic protection of metals; Part 5: Steel in concrete structures
 
 AS/NZS 3000 Electrical installations (known as Australia/New Zealand Wiring Rules)
 
 AS/NZS 3012 Electrical installations  Construction and demolition sites
 
 AS 3799
 
 Liquid Membrane - Forming Curing Compounds for Concrete.
 
 (b) Other Standards
 
 ASTM B265
 
 Standard Specification for Titanium and Titanium Alloy Strip, Sheet, and Plate.
 
 The requirements of the above standards shall apply unless otherwise stated.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 2 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 681.05 DEFINITIONS
 
 Cathodic Protection (CP):
 
 Cathodic protection of reinforcing steel in concrete is an
 
 electrochemical method used to mitigate active corrosion of steel reinforcement, or prevent future
 
 reinforcement corrosion by passing a small direct current between an external or embedded anode
 
 material and the steel reinforcement. Sufficient cathodic current will ensure the reinforcing steel is
 
 entirely cathodic and suppress any existing or future anodes on the steel within the concrete
 
 electrolyte.
 
 Electrolyte: The liquid component in a composite material such as soil or concrete, in which electric current may flow by ionic charge transfer.
 
 Anode: A metal which is placed in or in contact with an electrolyte and connected to the steel reinforcement to apply CP to a reinforced concrete structure.
 
 Impressed current cathodic protection (ICCP): Cathodic protection effected by applying direct current supplied by an external power source to cathodically protect the steel reinforcement in a concrete structure. The ICCP system necessitates the presence of normal AC power and a transformer/rectifier to convert it to a DC power source. The external DC power unit is used to create an electric circuit between the steel reinforcement and supplemental anodes which are fixed onto the external concrete surface, embedded into the concrete or buried or submerged (the latter in the case of protection to the buried or submerged zones). The steel reinforcement is connected to the negative DC output and the anodes are connected to the positive DC output.
 
 Sacrificial anode cathodic protection: Cathodic protection effected by connecting a low driving voltage sacrificial anode (i.e. reactive metals such as zinc, aluminium or magnesium or alloys of these metals) onto the steel to develop a potential difference between the two metals which is sufficient to counteract any corrosion cells existing on the steel. The anode material discharges current to the steel through the concrete electrolyte and corrodes preferentially.
 
 Reference electrode: A monitoring sensor (i.e. Ag/AgCl, Mn/MnO2, Cu/CuSO4) which is permanently fixed (embedded) within an electrolyte, such as concrete, and close to the steel reinforcement, used to measure the electrical potential of that portion of the steel reinforcement.
 
 Transformer/rectifier (T/R): An electrical power unit which transforms and rectifies AC line voltages to the required lower DC output voltages, also referred to as a `DC power supply'.
 
 Zone: A discrete part of a reinforced concrete structure and/or CP system characterised by different environmental exposure conditions (i.e. submerged, tidal, splash, atmospheric zones) within its overall in-service environment.
 
 Energising: The process of the initial application of power to an impressed current cathodic protection system.
 
 681.06 CONTRACTOR COMPETENCY
 All Contractor, subcontractor, consultant and supplier personnel used in the design and installation of CP of reinforced concrete shall demonstrate competency through a minimum of 5 years experience in the cementitious patch repair, rehabilitation, coating and CP of concrete structures and demonstrate competency for surface preparation and associated CP system disciplines, and application of the associated cementitious repair materials. Other staff shall work under direct supervision of the competent personnel.
 The CP system installation supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of the applied techniques and shall be present during work at all times. Application personnel shall be adequately trained in installation of the CP system and application of the cementitious repair materials.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 3 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience, qualifications, skills and training of personnel, subcontractors and suppliers. The Superintendent shall have the sole authority to approve or reject the nominated persons or organisation.
 Personnel operating powered boats shall hold a current limited Coxswain's Certificate.
 No changes to personnel involved in the project shall be made without the Superintendent's approval.
 681.07 MATERIALS FOR CATHODIC PROTECTION SYSTEMS
 (a) General
 The types of CP systems which are considered to be suitable for incorporation into the protection of reinforced concrete are:  ICCP system with slotted anode ribbons  ICCP system with internal anodes  ICCP system with mesh anode and cementitious overlay  ICCP grid system  ICCP system with conductive ceramic anodes  ICCP with remote anodes (i.e. buried or submerged) located in the water or mud/soil  Sacrificial or galvanic anodes for use in soils, sea and other waters, complying with the
 requirements of AS 2239.
 Due to the differing exposure environments of the various structural elements described in Clause 681.09, more than one system type may be required to be incorporated in the cathodic protection system.
 All buried or submerged anodes shall comply with the requirements of AS 2239 and AS 2832, Parts 1 to 4.
 Conductive anode systems incorporating either organic or metallic coatings or systems not identified in this clause require approval by the Superintendent.
 (b) Activated Mixed Metal Oxide Titanium Anodes
 All anode material embedded within cementitious material shall be activated mixed metal oxide coated titanium (MMO/Ti) in mesh or solid ribbon or similar mesh, grid or tube form that can be installed on the concrete surface, recessed in cover concrete, or embedded within a new or existing structure. Sufficient anode material shall be installed to provide the necessary current to achieve full cathodic protection in accordance with AS 2832.5 while maintaining a current density on the anode surface of no more than 110 mA/m2.
 All titanium used for connecting the anode material shall be Grade 1 titanium conforming to ASTM B265.
 The anode material and the titanium feeder strips shall be electrically isolated from any reinforcing steel, any embedded metal work or any conductor in contact with any embedded metals, when installed, after cementitious material placement and after curing. Methods of electrical isolation where anodes are likely to accidentally come into contact with any embedded metals may include wrapping the anode material and the titanium feeder strips with insulating tape or application of a layer of epoxy resin. All such taping, application of epoxy or other methods of isolation shall be subject to review by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 4 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The depth of cover concrete over the reinforcing steel beneath each cable slot, adjacent to core holes or beneath the final location of the anode material and the titanium feeder strips shall be measured and results provided for review by the Superintendent. The minimum separation between the MMO/Ti anode material (including the titanium feeder or connecting strip) and reinforcement shall be 10 mm.
 
 Where anode ribbon mesh is to be installed in slots within the cover concrete, the anode ribbon mesh shall be installed within horizontal slots cut 8 mm wide x 40 mm deep along the full width of the concrete component and at 200 mm centres, unless otherwise shown on the drawings or this section.
 
 The anode material shall be fully embedded in well compacted, cementitious grout or concrete and continuously covered with a minimum 15 mm of grout or cementitious material.
 
 (c) Connection of the Anodes
 
 Each individual anode material shall be spot welded to a 12 mm wide x 1 mm thick grade 1 titanium strip with a minimum of three spots.
 
 For connections of mesh anodes 12 mm wide x 1 mm thick grade 1 titanium strip shall be spot welded to the full perimeter of anode mesh panels. Connections that are required by the design between anode mesh panels within the same zone shall be made by at least two titanium strips spot welded to the perimeter strip. Each anode mesh zone shall be spot welded to a 12 mm wide x 1 mm thick grade 1 titanium strip at each end.
 
 Each of the titanium strips at each end shall be connected to a 1.5 mm2 flexible copper cored cable, PVC double insulated, which extends to a junction box mounted as shown on the drawings and/or as stated in this specification. All surface mounted conduits shall be supported using grade 316 stainless steel full saddles and 316 stainless steel screws into insulating plugs. The length of the insulated plugs shall exceed the depth of the screws by at least 5 mm.
 
 Connection between the titanium strip and copper cored cable shall utilise a 6 mm diameter hole drilled centrally through the strip, suitably sized copper crimp lug and 6 mm stainless steel set screw, nut and washers. The completed bolted connection shall be fitted with a PVC former and encapsulated with electrical grade epoxy casting compound.
 
 The electrical grade epoxy casting compound material used for encapsulating connections shall have the following minimum properties as demonstrated through the product data sheet:
 
 (i) Thermal Conductivity
 
 0.66 W/(m.K)
 
 (ii) Thermal Expansion (Linear)
 
 1 x 10-5 K-1
 
 (iii) Barcol Hardness
 
 25
 
 (iv) Heat Deflection Temperature 50C
 
 (v) Volume Resistivity
 
 1014 ohm.cm at 25C
 
 (vi) Dielectric Constant
 
 3.28
 
 (vii) Power Factor
 
 0.015.
 
 Cables shall run vertically up columns and other vertical concrete components within a cable slot and cables shall be backfilled to ensure a minimum cover over the cables of 25 mm.
 
 All items including cables and titanium strips shall be embedded up to locations where components are out of reach of potential damage or vandalism.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 5 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Backfilling of Core Holes and Slots
 Internal anode core holes, anode slots, connections and cable slots shall be backfilled with a single component proprietary cementitious mortar with a minimum compressive strength of 23 MPa at 28 days and an electrical resistivity of less than 15,000 cm in accordance with the requirements of Section 689. The backfill mortar shall be compatible for use with cathodic protection and of proven suitability and durability, as demonstrated by the product datasheet. The contractor shall provide a work method statement detailing the intended method of ensuring the cementitious backfill grout fully encapsulates the anode material, connections and cable within the core holes and slots, including quality control testing in accordance with the requirements of Clause 689.12. The general backfilling procedure shall be as follows:
 (i) Ensure the core holes and slots are clean and free from all debris that may obstruct the anode insertion. The slot surface shall be roughened prior to installing the anode material.
 (ii) Pre-soak the anode material in grout slurry and work the slurry into all parts of the anode geometry.
 (iii) Prime the slot using the slurry of the proprietary cementitious mortar in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
 (iv) Mix the grout to a putty consistency as per the manufacturers instructions.
 (v) For core holes pack grout in the base of the hole and insert the anode to ensure a minimum 100 mm cover between the end of the anode and the concrete surface. The anode to cable connection shall be in this area. For slots pack grout in the base of the slot and insert the anode material to ensure a minimum 15 mm cover between the anode material and the concrete surface.
 (vi) Place further grout around the anode, working in with a suitable tool to ensure penetration of grout down the sides of the hole or the sides of the slot. Use an 8 mm wide packing tool to ensure the anode material does not lift in the slot.
 (vii) Fill and pack the hole with grout.
 The MMO/Ti anode material must not be allowed to exit the hole or slot for any connections. Only the titanium strip shall exit the concrete or grout where necessary.
 The grout shall be trowel finished to match the existing concrete surface and cured with two coats of an approved curing compound in accordance with the requirements of AS 3799.
 The contractor shall provide test method statements for review by the Superintendent, detailing the intended testing to ensure that total isolation is achieved between the anode materials and the reinforcing steel in accordance with the requirements of AS 2832.5.
 (e) Cementitious Overlay to Titanium Anode Mesh
 The titanium anode mesh and prepared concrete substrate shall be overlayed with a single component proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar using the wet or dry sprayed concrete process in accordance with the requirements of Sections 684 and 689 and shall be compatible and suitable for use with cathodic protection.
 The electrical resistivity of the spray applied cementitious mortar shall be less than 15,000 cm and shall be compatible with the requirements of the CP system. Specifications for the spray applied cementitious mortar and systems shall be detailed by the Contractor and shall include quality control testing in accordance with the requirements of Clause 689.12. The Contractor shall comply with all appropriate reference standards for specification and testing.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 6 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall provide a work method statement detailing the intended method of ensuring the spray applied cementitious material fully encapsulates the anode mesh attached to the concrete substrate. The concrete substrate shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 689.
 The outer edge of the titanium anode mesh shall be continuously covered with a minimum 15 mm of spray applied cementitious overlay. The titanium anode mesh must not be allowed to exit the spray applied cementitious overlay for any connections. Only the titanium strip shall exit the concrete or spray applied cementitious material where necessary.
 The spray applied cementitious mortar overlay shall be trowel finished to match the existing concrete surface and cured with two coats of an approved curing compound in accordance with the requirements of AS 3799. Curing compounds shall be removed prior to the application of any protective or decorative coatings in accordance with the requirements of Section 686, unless documented evidence is provided to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the applied curing compound is compatible with any proposed coatings.
 Immediately after placing and for 7 days, the concrete repair material shall be protected from drying out and against the harmful effects of tidal actions and weather including rain and rapid temperature changes.
 The contractor shall provide test method statements detailing the intended testing to ensure that isolation is achieved between the anode materials and the reinforcing steel.
 All materials proposed for use as part of the works shall be submitted for approval by the Superintendent. No material shall be used on site without prior written approval of the Superintendent.
 (f) Transformer/Rectifier (T/R)
 The transformer/rectifier unit and control panels shall comply with the requirements of AS 2832.5.
 681.08 CATHODIC PROTECTION REGULATIONS
 The Contractor shall identify and confirm the existence of any assets attached to the reinforced concrete structure, and/or their presence within the surrounding ground. The Contractor shall further ensure that the CP system, once it has been activated, will not create any adverse effect upon those assets or any other part of the reinforced concrete structure, by creating stray current or interference, and shall design the system appropriately.
 The Contractor shall obtain approval to operate the system from the Superintendent and any authority whose assets could be affected, prior to switching on the system. Any required interference testing shall be the responsibility of the Contractor.
 681.09 CATHODIC PROTECTION EXPOSURE ZONES
 The following exposure zones have been identified as having different environments which the Contractor shall take into consideration when designing the CP system:  Atmospheric zone  Splash zone  Tidal zone  Submerged zone.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 7 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 681.10 DESIGN OF CATHODIC PROTECTION SYSTEMS
 The Contractor shall perform the detailed design of the CP system which shall be capable of delivering sufficient current to satisfactorily polarise and provide 100% protection to the whole of the reinforced concrete structure as stated in this specification for a design life of not less than 30 years.
 The design shall include:
 (a) preparation of detailed working drawings and technical specification, including details of the location of monitoring devices (reference electrodes), plus performance requirements of the system;
 (b) drawings describing the extent and type of concrete repairs prior to and after installation of the CP system;
 (c) design calculations related to current densities and any anticipated losses in the system;
 (d) design basis of the actual condition and the actual resistivity of the concrete zones identified in Clause 681.09.
 The Contractor shall design the CP system to ensure protection for all components incorporated into the CP system against power surges caused by lightning strikes and/or voltage variation resulting from any other cause.
 The design shall conform to the design parameters detailed in Clause 681.12 and the protection criteria detailed in Clause 681.02.
 The CP system shall be designed, specified, installed and commissioned to be in accordance with standards stated in Clause 681.04. The Contractor shall nominate, with the design documentation, publications supporting the proposed system.
 681.11 DESIGN CHECK AND CERTIFICATION
 Design drawings and documentation shall be submitted by the Contractor for review by the Superintendent. The Contractor shall obtain at its own cost certification of the design, including all quality documentation by an independent reviewer.
 The independent review shall include confirmation that:
 (a) the current densities and current requirements are appropriate for all cathodic protection zones;
 (b) anode materials and anode operating levels are suitable for the intended purpose;
 (c) reference electrodes, connections, cables, conduits, DC power supplies, and all other equipment are suitable and adequately rated;
 (d) all drawings adequately reflect the proposed system and contain sufficient detail to enable correct installation of the system;
 (e) all installation procedures are adequate;
 (f) the inspection and testing methods are appropriate to ensure the system will be installed and perform as designed;
 (g) the commissioning procedures are suitable to ensure the system can be energised and operated as designed;
 (h) all aspects of the design, specification, drawings, installation, commissioning, records, documentation and operation conform to the requirements of AS 2832.5.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 8 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The independent reviewer shall be a person who holds a tertiary qualification in the relevant discipline, eligible to satisfy the requirements of the Australasian Corrosion Association certification as a Corrosion Technologist, competent as defined in Clause 681.06, with at least 10 years experience in CP system design, installation and monitoring of steel in concrete.
 
 The review of the drawings and documentation by the Superintendent will not absolve the Contractor from any responsibility for the work carried out.
 
 HP The Contractor shall not commence installation of the CP System until the:
 
 
 
 design and quality documentation has been reviewed by the Superintendent
 
 
 
 Superintendent has been given full and unqualified certification of the
 
 whole design, from the independent reviewer, stating that the design fully
 
 complies with the Contract requirements.
 
 681.12 DESIGN PARAMETERS
 The design life of the whole cathodic protection system and each and every component shall be not less than 30 years. The Contractor shall supply a listing of all major components incorporated within the system including their anticipated service life shall be not less than 30 years supported by documented evidence, and the relevant Australian or International Standard to which they comply.
 The whole of the CP system shall be capable of operating for the full design life of 30 years without the replacement of components such as anodes, anode cementitious backfill, fillers or cables, etc. Systems which incorporate components with a design life of less than 30 years shall not be accepted. Systems which require replacement of any components at any stage within the 30 year design life shall not be accepted.
 The CP system shall:
 (a) be capable of supplying a minimum 20 mA/m2 at the surface of all the steel;
 (b) be capable of synchronous interruption of all DC power supplies.
 All internal and external wiring shall be properly protected against vandalism and tidal and splash zone conditions with conduits and protective covers resistant to corrosion and ultraviolet degradation.
 
 681.13 MONITORING AND REFERENCE ELECTRODES
 It is essential for the protection of the structure to be easily and readily checked during the intended life of the CP system. Incorporated into the design of the CP system shall be a simple and reliable system to monitor the various parameters which require regular assessment. As a minimum this shall include permanent reference electrodes embedded within the concrete structure and external to the concrete for the submerged or buried sections. The reference electrodes and structure connections shall be cabled to a common location such that access to the cathodically protected concrete components is not required to take the measurements.
 Reference electrodes installed to monitor the performance of the CP system shall comply with the requirements of AS 2832.5, unless otherwise shown on the drawings or stated in this section. Reference electrodes installed in the works shall have a design life of not less than 30 years.
 Reference electrodes shall be specifically designed for permanent embedment in reinforced concrete structures and other electrolytes such as soil and water which form part of the CP system for the purpose of accurate monitoring of steel reinforcement potentials.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 9 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Reference electrodes shall be installed at multiple representative locations within each individual zone and control area to enable sufficient measurement points to be available to properly assess the performance of the CP system. The quantity, type and location of reference electrodes shall be as shown on the drawings and as specified in the specification.
 HP Installation of the reference electrodes shall not commence until their location has been approved by the Superintendent.
 Final reference electrode locations shall be accurately located and recorded.
 Permanent reference electrodes shall be supplied with a calibration certificate prior to installation, and shall be stored, maintained, handled and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. They shall be calibrated on-site against a master calibrated reference electrode immediately prior to embedment, immediately following embedment, and within 24 hours of installation.
 Care shall be taken not to place any strain on cable to anode or reinforcement connections or reference electrode cables.
 681.14 REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF CONCRETE AND TREATMENT OF DEFICIENT STEEL
 The Contractor shall complete concrete repairs to all areas of damaged or delaminated concrete as shown on the drawings and as exposed during the removal operation, in accordance with the requirements of Section 689 and this section. New reinforcing steel shall be incorporated into the structure to compensate for any existing reinforcing steel which is exhibiting loss in excess of 25% of its original cross-sectional area.
 All defective and delaminated concrete and existing repair materials shall be broken out to leave a sound and dense concrete surface at least 20 mm beyond the steel reinforcement. Hammer sounding shall be repeated on completion of breakout to ensure that all delaminations have been removed. The complete concrete surface to be repaired shall have an exposed aggregate finish and be non-friable and dust free.
 The Contractor shall carry out epoxy injection of cracks of width equal to or greater than 0.10 mm to all concrete components of the specified works. The epoxy resin shall be applied in accordance with Section 687.
 The exposed reinforcing steel shall be prepared by removal from the full circumference of all surface rust scale, dirt, grease and any other material that might reduce the adhesion of the new concrete to the steel, in accordance with Clause 689.08(c).
 Where existing concrete cover is minimal the new repair shall be re-profiled (as required) to ensure a minimum 50 mm cementitious repair material cover to the steel reinforcement is achieved in accordance with Clause 689.08(b) for exposure Classification C.
 In addition to the general testing for electrical continuity of the steel reinforcement, all reinforcement exposed in the concrete removal for repair work, shall also be tested for electrical continuity.
 The Contractor shall provide multiple electrical connection points to the steel reinforcement in each zone of the CP system in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.4 of AS 2832, and as shown on the drawings and this section to ensure the effective functioning of the CP system in that zone.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 10 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 689, cementitious materials used for concrete repairs shall be compatible for use with cathodic protection and of proven suitability, as demonstrated by the product datasheet. Only cementitious materials shall be used for concrete repairs. The electrical resistivity characteristics of the repair materials shall be compatible with those of the parent concrete and the requirements of the CP system. Specifications for repair materials and systems shall be detailed by the Contractor and shall include quality control testing in accordance with the requirements of Clause 689.12. The Contractor shall comply with all appropriate reference standards for specification and testing.
 The cementitious material shall be applied and cured in accordance with the requirements of Section 689.
 HP All materials proposed for use on the project shall be submitted for approval by the Superintendent.
 Immediately after placing and for 7 days, the concrete repair material shall be protected from drying out and the harmful effects of tidal actions and weather including rain and rapid temperature changes.
 HP The Contractor shall not commence concrete repair until it has provided the Superintendent with a work method statement for review covering both identification and breakout of concrete repair areas, and remediation in accordance with the specification.
 HP All prepared areas shall not be reinstated with repair material until:
 (a) a joint measurement of the repair area by the Superintendent and the Contractor has taken place;
 (b) evidence that the preparation conforms with the requirements of this specification has been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 681.15 INSTALLATION
 The installation of any proposed CP system shall take into account the manufacturer's recommendations for the use of any particular equipment or material and its suitability for long term performance for a design life of not less than 30 years in the manner or environment in which it is installed.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the provision of all AC power requirements at the required locations for the operation and monitoring of the CP system including the required application to the relevant power authority.
 HP Any electrical equipment, such as transformer/rectifiers and control panels shall be housed in powder coated mild steel, lockable and weatherproof cubicles with a rating of IP 65 at suitable secure locations as shown on the drawings and as stated in the specification to be approved by the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall identify by means of method statements, the activities involved in the installation of the CP system and the requirements for access to each particular section of the structure for the application of the various materials and components.
 The Contractor shall identify any special equipment used during installation and shall ensure that the use of the equipment is covered by the relevant Work Health and Safety regulations 2012.
 681.16 COMMISSIONING THE SYSTEM
 Commissioning shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of AS 2832.5. Prior to energising the system, tests shall be undertaken to ensure that all measurements, power and bonding circuits are correctly wired, connected and labelled, to provide the expected resistances.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 11 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall then carry out the necessary commissioning procedures including necessary adjustments, to demonstrate stability of the system and that the various protection criteria as described in Clause 681.02 have been achieved.
 Full cathodic protection against the aggressive action of chloride ions, in accordance with the various protection criteria as described in Clause 681.02, shall be achieved within 26 weeks of the date of first energising the CP system.
 Written records shall be maintained for all tests conducted during commissioning. Upon completion of commissioning the Contractor shall furnish the Superintendent with four copies of the Commissioning report into which shall be incorporated results of all tests obtained during the commissioning phase.
 Submission of the commissioning report which demonstrates full protection of the steel reinforcement within 26 weeks of the date of first energising the CP system, in accordance with the protection criteria as specified in Clause 681.02, shall be required prior to the Superintendent's issue of the Certificate of Practical Completion of the whole of the works.
 681.17 PREPARATION OF A MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE MANUAL
 The Contractor shall prepare and provide the Superintendent within 26 weeks of the date of first energising the CP system, four copies of a comprehensive monitoring and maintenance manual which shall contain all information necessary for the Department of State Growth to operate the system.
 The report shall include: (a) as-constructed drawings of the installed CP System showing the exact location of all cables,
 reinforcing connections, reference electrodes and conduits. The drawings shall also define all concrete repair locations; (b) all system wiring diagrams, names and addresses of all manufacturers and suppliers of all electrical equipment, including system components all cables, conduit, junction boxes and enclosures as supplied and installed; (c) copies of all quality documentation for the project; (d) fault finding information for minor repair or replacement of the most likely to fail components; (e) transformer-rectifier control panel details; (f) wiring schematics and operating manuals for the new electrical equipment details; (g) results of all testing completed during and after the installation; (h) copy of commissioning report as per Clause 681.16.
 681.18 MONITORING AND REPORTING FOLLOWING COMMISSIONING
 The Contractor shall monitor the performance of the CP system for 2 years from the commissioning acceptance date in accordance with Clause 681.16 and shall make any necessary CP system adjustments.
 The minimum frequency of monitoring shall be as follows: (a) once per 3 weeks for the initial 3 months following commissioning; (b) once per month for the period 3 to 6 months following commissioning; (c) once per 3 months for the period 6 to 24 months following commissioning.
 The Contractor shall provide the Superintendent with written reports at 3, 6 and 12 months after system commissioning and thereafter annually and such other times as may be necessary.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 12 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 681.19 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE The period of responsibility by the Contractor for defective materials and workmanship shall commence upon Practical Completion for a period of 24 months. During the defects liability period, remedial work including the supply of necessary parts, materials and labour shall be conducted by the Contractor when the Contractor's periodic inspections or monitoring, by either the Contractor or the Department of State Growth, indicate that the system is not performing to specification. All costs for any inspections or modifications or rectifications by the Contractor shall be borne by the Contractor during this period. The Contractor shall inform the Department of State Growth 7 days prior to any on-site modifications carried out to the installed system. The Contractor shall maintain full records of all maintenance work carried out on the system and provide these to the Superintendent upon request.
 681.20 QUALITY REQUIREMENTS (a) General
 The quality, occupational health and safety, and environmental requirements to which the Contractor shall adhere are itemised within Sections 168 and ##176 (or 177):. (b) Quality Plan In accordance with Clause 160.A4 the Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent a quality plan which includes:  concrete repair, inspection and testing procedures for each of the exposure zones described
 in Clause 681.09 including material type and resistivity, and curing  procedure for the mixing and application of the cementitious backfill grout to the MMO/Ti
 anodes described in Clause 681.07 including material type and resistivity, and curing  CP system repair and installation procedures  CP system commissioning procedures  CP system monitoring procedures  inspection and test plan; procedure for the determination of electrical continuity  assessment of concrete surface condition and surface preparation procedures  all inspection and testing methods to be undertaken.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 681 (Page 13 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 682 - REINFORCED SOIL STRUCTURES
 ##This section cross-references Sections 160, 175, 204, 610 and 620. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent.:
 682.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies requirements for the supply of materials, the manufacture and construction of Reinforced Soil Structures (RSS) and certain general requirements for the design.
 RSS shall comply with the requirements of the tender drawings and this section and shall comprise a composite system of compacted select fill and reinforcement with a precast concrete wall facing.
 The Contractor shall design and supply all materials and components and construct the RSS in accordance with this section and other relevant sections of the Specification.
 If an RSS is used in conjunction with a bridge abutment, all vertical and horizontal loads arising from the bridge must be supported independently of the RSS on a piled foundation that complies with the design, material and construction requirements of VicRoads Standard Specification, the Australian Standard for Bridge design, the Australian Standard for Piling and the relevant VicRoads Bridge Technical Notes.
 682.02 STANDARDS
 Design and construction of RSS shall comply with the requirements of the Australian Standard for Bridge design - Foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in Section 175. Where a RSS is to function as an earth retaining structure and designed in accordance with the Australian Standard for earth retaining structures as listed in Section 175, in circumstances where the design requirements differ between the two Australian Standards, the requirements of Bridge design  Foundations and soil supporting structures shall take precedence over those of the requirements of earth retaining structures.
 682.03 DEFINITIONS
 Reinforced Soil Structure (RSS): An earth retaining structure comprising selected fill and soil reinforcement that is embedded at regular intervals in both vertical and horizontal directions within the fill to form a composite structure. The visible face of the RSS may incorporate decorative or structural reinforced concrete or masonry facing panels that include a strip foundation. Soil Reinforcement: Metallic or synthetic components that are embedded in the select fill and which act through interface friction, bearing or other means to provide the required strength and stability of the RSS. Soil reinforcement may be anchored at its trailing end. Metallic Soil Reinforcement: Soil reinforcement made of steel or other metals in the form of straps or bars. Synthetic or Flexible Soil Reinforcement: Soil reinforcement in the form of sheets, strips or grids made from synthetic materials.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 1 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Anchor: Steel plates, transverse bars or vertical pins that are installed permanently in the fill and that connect to the trailing end of the soil reinforcement. The anchors may be used to transfer load to the rear of the RSS or as a means of providing tension in the soil reinforcement during construction.
 Wall Facing Panel: Decorative and/or structural reinforced concrete or masonry facing elements retaining the compacted select fill material with provision for connection to the soil reinforcement. Wall facing may be full- height, sectional or segmental panels. Facing panels and walls include a strip foundation.
 Connection: Mechanical or other components which connect the wall facing panels to the soil reinforcement and which are designed to transfer loads between the soil reinforcement and the wall facing panels.
 682.04 SUBMISSION OF DETAILS ## (should the Project require information regarding the proposed RSS design prior to award of the Contract, suitable notes should be included in the Conditions of Tender SPECIFICATION AUTHOR TO DELETE THIS NOTE):
 (a) Prior to Manufacture
 The Contractor shall submit the following information for review by the Superintendent not less than two weeks prior to the manufacture of facing panels:
 (i) supplier and type of proposed proprietary RSS system;
 (ii) preliminary drawings describing the geometry of the proposed reinforced soil block, drainage provisions, soil reinforcement type and arrangement, wall facing arrangement and surface finish and connections; and
 (iii) type and source of select fill including particle size distribution, shear strength and coefficient of friction value. The characteristic value for angle of friction at constant volume of reinforced fill material under effective stress conditions must be carried out using in accordance with Australian Standard - Methods of testing soils for engineering purposes - Soil strength and consolidation tests - Determination of shear strength of a soil - Direct shear test using a shear box as listed in Section 175. The effective cohesion of the reinforced fill adopted for design shall be taken as zero.
 (b) The Contractor shall submit the following information for review by the Superintendent not less than two weeks prior to the commencement of construction of the RSS or its foundations:
 (i) for-construction drawings;
 (ii) copy of the Certificate of Compliance  Design, certified by the Proof Engineer; (iii) sampling and test plan for materials that demonstrates compliance with the specified
 standards, including the shear strength and co-efficient of friction for the select fill;
 (iv) contract-specific quality plan in accordance with Section 160.
 (c) Where synthetic soil reinforcement is to be used, the type of materials shall be submitted for review, including but not limited to the following:
 (i) dimensions including cross-sectional dimensions of strip and grid materials;
 (ii) characteristic ultimate tensile strength - longitudinal and transverse (where geogrid is used);
 (iii) strain at both ultimate and nominated tensile strength, in both longitudinal and transverse directions where grid materials are to used;
 (iv) creep-limited strength in the longitudinal axis at the specified design life;
 (v) long term tensile strength at 5% elongation (i.e. initial and creep strain);
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 2 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (vi) minimum breaking load;
 (vii) Considerations of and allowance for strength reduction over the life of the structure due to creep deformation and rupture;
 (viii) allowance for strength reduction due to variations in manufacturing process;
 (ix) allowances for extrapolation of uncertainties where test duration is less than the design life;
 (x) material strength and durability testing for the effects of exposure to 1. water, 2. aggressive fluids, 3. aggressive soils, 4. UV radiation, 5. temperature effects, 6. resistance to mechanical damage, 7. contact with the fill material(s) intended for use with the RSS;
 (xi) list of partial factors for both construction damage and environmental effects;
 (xii) predicted maximum lateral displacement in facing panel;
 (xiii) wall geometry;
 (xiv) facing panel details including 1. intended applications  structure name and dimensions, 2. geometry, 3. durability considerations in accordance with the requirements of the Australian Standard for Bridge design as listed in Section 175 (exposure classification, mix design, cover), 4. sealing of joints, 5. joint details  load-transfer mechanism, 6. foundations;
 (xv) foundations  geotechnical considerations; (xvi) the performance and durability of synthetic soil reinforcement used as part of the
 proprietary reinforced soil systems shall comply with the Specification and the manufacturer's specification; (xvii) installation 1. training, 2. supervision, 3. general sequence of working, 4. method of placing and compacting fill and tensioning ties, 5. details of ties around obstructions such as piles and void formers.
 682.05 GEOTECHNICAL INFORMATION
 The Contractor shall assess all available site conditions information and consider conducting a site-specific geotechnical investigation to establish the properties of the existing natural or constructed ground. The assessment and investigation shall include the soil and ground water properties necessary for the design of the RSS and the accuracy of its construction and performance in accordance with the requirements of the Specification. The Superintendent will not be responsible for the RSS failing to meet the Specification or any costs associated with mitigation of the RSS to meet the requirements the Specification as a result of latent geotechnical conditions.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 3 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall allow sufficient time in its program for the geotechnical investigation and laboratory testing.
 682.06 DESIGN
 RSS shall have a minimum design life of 100 years.
 The Contractor shall design the RSS and prepare a specification and drawings for the manufacture of its components and for its construction.
 The Contractor shall have in place a Quality Management System in accordance with Section 160 which ensures compliance with the performance requirements described on the drawings and in the Specification. The design shall be proof-engineered by a Proof Engineer who shall be prequalified at Level PE in accordance with the VicRoads prequalification scheme or approved by the Superintendent.
 RSS used in conjunction with a bridge abutment shall be independent of the bridge structure. Vertical and horizontal loads arising from the bridge shall be supported on piles. Piles shall be surrounded with a compressible material to ensure that horizontal loads arising from the RSS are not be transmitted to the piles.
 The RSS shall be designed to support dead and live loads arising from bridge approach roads including vertical and lateral loads soil pressures, impact loads from barriers and guard fences and loads arising from signs and sign support structures.
 Void formers shall be provided within the RSS to accommodate foundations where specified or detailed on the drawings. Void formers shall be designed to withstand soil-pressure and the loads arising from piling activities with appropriate provisions for pile creep.
 If a protective barrier is required at the face of the RSS, the position of the RSS shall be adjusted in order to maintain the specified minimum clearance between the edge of the adjacent lane and the barrier.
 The RSS shall satisfy the stability requirements of the Australian Standards for Bridge design and Earth retaining structures.
 The Contractor shall determine the allowable bearing pressures and the maximum settlement of the founding material under the RSS using information obtained from the site-specific geotechnical investigation conducted in accordance with Clause 682.05.
 Subsurface drainage which complies with this Specification shall be provided within the RSS where necessary to intercept groundwater and to prevent the development of hydrostatic pressure behind the facing panels.
 A separate drainage system which complies with this Specification shall be provided to collect and discharge surface water into the storm water drainage system.
 The verticality of the RSS wall facing shall lean backward at a minimum slope of 1(H) in 40 (V).
 682.07 MATERIALS
 The Contractor shall supply all materials required for the manufacture and construction of the RSS.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 4 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The initial strength, stiffness and durability of materials for use in RSS shall be such that, on the expiry of the design life, the materials possess sufficient strength and stiffness to satisfy the requirements of the design.
 Not less than four weeks prior to the proposed use of materials and components the Contractor shall submit a signed statement including test reports demonstrating compliance of the materials and components with the RSS supplier's specification and the Specification.
 The requirements for RSS soil reinforcement that is located in aggressive environments shall be as specified on the drawings and in the Specification.
 Reinforcing strips which are attached to the wall facing panels and embedded in the fill together with their connections shall be fabricated from materials which shall be sufficiently strong, stiff, stable and durable to satisfy the performance and design requirements of the Specification.
 The Contractor shall submit data from laboratory and site applications in representative conditions that demonstrates the suitability of the proposed system to satisfy the specified design life.
 682.08 SOIL REINFORCING
 (a) Steel (Non-Extensible) Reinforcement for RSS (i) All steel components for use in RSS shall comply with the requirements of Section 611. Steel straps shall have a thickness of 5 mm. All steel components including couplers shall be galvanized in accordance with the Australian Standard for Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles as listed in Section 175. The Contractor shall submit certificates of compliance to the Superintendent demonstrating that the thickness of steel components and the minimum zinc coating mass for galvanized steel components complies with Section 160. (ii) Steel soil reinforcement shall incorporate additional sacrificial steel to allow for loss of thickness due to corrosion. The rate of corrosion shall be determined by nature of installation and climatic conditions relevant to the site. The minimum rate of corrosion shall be 0.02 mm per year. The total derived thickness shall be sufficient to achieve the specified design life. At the end of the design life, the residual thickness of steel shall be sufficient to safely support the design dead and live loads. Assessment of the rate of corrosion for this purpose shall include an allowance for the effect of stray currents from adjacent power sources.
 (b) Synthetic (Extensible) Soil Reinforcement for RSS (i) Synthetic soil reinforcement shall not be incorporated in RSS for bridges, retaining walls or other structures without the prior approval of the Superintendent subject to the requirements of Clause 682.04. (ii) Where approval to use geosynthetic soil reinforcement in the works is granted, the batches of material delivered to site shall be not more than 12 months old at the time of their incorporation into the works.
 (iii) Joints for synthetic soil reinforcement shall have a strength that is not less than the adjacent synthetic soil reinforcement and shall enable the adjacent reinforcement to achieve its full tensile strength over the design life of the structure allowing for the effects of creep together with any other changes in material properties that may occur over the life of the structure.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 5 of 10) )
 
 Department of State Growth
 682.09 TESTING OF SYNTHETIC SOIL REINFORCEMENTS
 (a) The Contractor shall provide a certificate of compliance stating that each batch of synthetic soil reinforcement complies with the type, strength and durability requirements of the Specification. The certificate shall provide full details of the required material properties and shall be accompanied by test results.
 (b) Certificates dated more than one calendar year before the date of delivery of the materials to site shall not be accepted.
 (c) The Contractor shall submit two representative samples of each layer of soil reinforcing material for testing in a NATA-accredited laboratory*. The Contractor shall provide a statement which shall be supported with the test results certifying that the durability of the effectiveness of the material with time (e.g. chemical and biological degradation, creep and elongation when the material is subject to the design loads) are in accordance with the manufacturer's specification and the associated national or international standards and the requirements of the Specification. The statement of compliance shall be provided for the Superintendent's review two weeks prior to commencement of construction of the RSS.
 * If NATA has not accredited a laboratory for testing, the following must be satisfied: (i) materials testing shall be conducted in accordance with recognised standards and test procedures by a NATA-accredited laboratory; (ii) testing overseas must be conducted by a laboratory which is accredited in accordance with a Mutual Recognition Agreement and is listed on the NATA web-site. Test reports shall be endorsed with the identifying mark of the accredited laboratory. In this case the test must be conducted and the results certified in accordance with the accreditation conditions; or
 (iii) approval by the Superintendent including results in an acceptable format.
 (d) Testing shall reflect conditions specific to the intended application including the relevant design loads and the intended fill materials.
 (e) Test results are to include interpretation where appropriate.
 HP Evidence that the proposed synthetic soil reinforcement meets the design requirements of the Specification shall be provided to the Superintendent for review. Construction of the RSS shall not proceed until the signed statement and certificates of compliance have been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 682.10 FACING PANELS
 Facing panels shall be designed in accordance with BTN1999-008 Detailing of reinforced soil facing panels and manufactured in accordance with Section 610 and Section 620.
 Minimum area of reinforcement, concrete mix designation, cover to reinforcement and standard of surface finish shall be as described in BTN1999-008 Detailing of reinforced soil facing panels.
 Facing panels shall be interconnected to prevent relative displacement normal to the wall face. The maximum differential movement shall be within the limit of the manufacturer of the RSS and the Specification.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 6 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 682.11 JOINT FILLERS Joint fillers shall be provided between facing panels to allow limited rotation at the joints without spalling of panel edges, to maintain joint thickness within design tolerances and to prevent loss of fines from the backfill material and staining of the panel faces. The joint filler shall consist of a flexible, durable and inert material.
 682.12 CONNECTIONS Connections shall have a design life of 100 years. Connections between facing panels and reinforcing elements shall be made wholly from steel or from similar metals in order to prevent corrosion. Steel components shall be galvanized in accordance with the Australian Standard for Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles as listed in Section 175 with a minimum average coating thickness equivalent to an application rate of 600 grams per square metre of Zinc. The Contractor shall provide a certificate of compliance certifying that the mass of zinc coating on galvanized steel components meets the specified requirements and that steel components have sufficient sacrificial steel thickness in combination with the galvanizing to achieve the specified design life. Connections made of synthetic materials shall comply with the requirements of Clause 682.08(b). Where connections are made of synthetic soil reinforcement such as geogrids, there shall be no splicing or joining of geogrid layers in the primary strength direction.
 682.13 HANDLING TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE Prefabricated RSS components shall be handled, transported and stored in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations in a manner that prevents damage and deterioration. Precast concrete facing panels shall be handled, transported and stored in accordance with Section 620.
 682.14 SELECT FILL Select fill shall comply with the requirements of the RSS designer, the minimum requirements of Section 204 of this Specification for Type A filling and shall: (a) consist of naturally occurring or processed natural material which at the time of placing is
 capable of being compacted in accordance with the specified requirements to form a stable mass of fill; (b) be free from organic or other deleterious material;
 (c) have a particle size distribution, shear strength and coefficient of friction value to ensure the RSS design parameters are achieved;
 (d) have the chemical and electrical properties stated in Table 682.131.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 7 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 682.131
 
 Soil Reinforceme
 nt
 
 Site
 
 Steel
 
 Dry Land
 
 Steel
 Polyester HDPE
 
 Submerged (not sea wa ter)
 N/A
 N/A
 
 Resistivity (ohm.cm)
 > 5000 > 1000 -
 5000
 > 3000
 -
 
 pH
 5 - 10 5  10
 5  10 4-9 3 - 12
 
 Cl
 
 SO4
 
 (mg/k (mg/kg
 
 g)
 
 )
 
 < 200
 
 < 200
 
 < 100 < 500
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 If the site is at-risk of submergence by sea water, a specific investigation shall be conducted and selection of fill materials shall be subject to approval by the Superintendent.
 Testing of the select fill material shall be in accordance with the test methods and frequency prescribed for the proprietary RSS system and the minimum standards prescribed in Section 204.
 Pulverised fuel ash (PFA) shall not be used as select fill.
 682.15 CONSTRUCTION
 The RSS shall be constructed at the location and to the shape and dimensions shown on the drawings in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations subject to the tolerances specified in Clause 682.20.
 Where future extensions of the RSS are indicated on the drawing or detailed as a requirement in the Contract, the design of the RSS wall shall allow for both initial and future configurations. For walls which are to be extended in height, the first stage reinforcement and facing panels shall have sufficient capacity to support subsequent increases in wall-height together with any surcharge without the need for enhancement. Removal and replacement of facing panel components to allow future extension is permitted.
 The reduced levels and position of the soil reinforcement shall not deviate from the specified level and position by more than  20 mm.
 682.16 EARTHWORKS
 HP The Contractor shall submit compaction test results for each layer of fill placement to the Superintendent for review and acceptance. No further fill placement shall be allowed if the total thickness of fill placement is greater than 1 m measured from the last layer that has been accepted. If any layer is found to be not in compliance with the compaction requirement, that layer and the layers above it shall be removed.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 8 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Earthworks for RSS shall comply with the requirements of Section 204.
 Testing and Acceptance of Compaction shall comply with Section 204, regardless of the manufacturer's requirements.
 Fill materials shall be placed and compacted in a direction parallel to the face of the structure and shall be completed in conjunction with the erection of the facing panels.
 Compacted layers of fill material shall be horizontal and of uniform thickness.
 The upper surface of the fill material shall slope down to the back of the RSS block to promote drainage of surface water away from the wall facing.
 Filling and compaction shall be conducted with care in order to avoid damage to or displacement of reinforcing elements and facing panels. Tracked machines or vehicles shall not be allowed to traffic over or work on reinforcing elements until the reinforcement is protected by a minimum 150 mm layer of fill material. Sheepsfoot rollers shall not be used for compaction of fill material.
 The condition of the soil reinforcement and connections to facing panels shall be inspected by the Contractor for compliance and a written record of each inspection shall be filed in the Contractor's quality system prior to placing the next layer of select fill material.
 682.17 ERECTION OF WALL PANELS AND PLACEMENT OF SOIL REINFORCING ELEMENTS
 Wall facing panels shall be placed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 Each facing panel shall be temporarily and securely supported during and after its erection until the adjacent fill material has been placed and compacted.
 Reinforcing elements shall be placed at the required level and position directly on top of the compacted fill material and connected to the wall panels in accordance with the design. Any twists, kinks, sags or deviations in the reinforcing elements shall be removed prior to the placement of fill material on the reinforcing. Wall construction shall include provision of inserts where specified.
 The level and alignment of each course of facing panels shall be checked progressively after placement of each course and prior to placement of the next course to ensure compliance with the dimensional and positional tolerances stated in the design. The Contractor shall record the results of this checking together with details of any non-conformances and the associated corrective actions.
 682.18 SPOON DRAINS
 Spoon drains shall be provided at the top of RSS walls to collect surface water drainage from adjacent batters. The spoon drains shall discharge to collection pits with outlets to a surface water drainage system.
 682.19 SAFETY FENCES
 Where a fall-hazard exists at the top of the RSS, a safety fence shall be provided. Unless otherwise specified, the fence shall be 1.2 metres high with a galvanized steel tube top and bottom rail faced with galvanized steel chain mesh.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 9 of 10)
 
 Department of State Growth
 682.20 TOLERANCES ON FINISHED DIMENSIONS AND POSITION OF REINFORCED SOIL STRUCTURE
 The following tolerances shall apply on completion of the RSS: (a) plan position shown on the drawings, at base of wall shall not exceed 15 mm; (b) relative displacement of adjoining smooth panel faces shall not exceed 15 mm measured
 normal to face of wall; (c) local deviation of the wall face measured at any location with a 3 m straight edge shall not
 exceed 15 mm; (d) the tolerance on position measured at the top of the wall face shall not exceed 5 mm per
 1 metre of wall height; (e) the wall level shall not deviate from the specified level by more than 20 mm; (f) variation in gap width between facing panels shall not exceed 5 mm per metre length and
 10 mm over the full length of the gap.
 682.21 SHAPE OF REINFORCED SOIL STRUCTURE
 To ensure compliance with the tolerances specified in Clause 682.20, the Contractor shall install stable and permanent survey reference points on a not more than 5 m (horizontal) by 2 m (vertical) grid covering the whole face of the RSS. The Contractor shall take measurements of the position of the RSS at the points defined in Clause 682.20(a) to (f) at intervals not exceeding one month for the first six months immediately following completion of the RSS and at intervals not exceeding six months thereafter until the end of the Defects Liability Period. The measurements shall be recorded in writing and reported to the Superintendent within two weeks of the survey.
 The Contractor shall extrapolate these measurements in order to predict the position of the RSS at the end of its design life. The predicted position of the RSS shall be plotted on a log time scale plot. If the position of the RSS and its rate of movement at the end of the Defects Liability Period indicates that the specified positional tolerances will be exceeded before the end of the design life: (a) the Contractor shall take remedial action at its own expense to ensure that the RSS will
 comply with the specified positional requirements throughout its design life; (b) the Contractor shall continue to take measurements at its own expense until it is
 demonstrated that the RSS will comply with the positional requirements; and (c) the Defects Liability Period shall be extended by an equivalent period or as agreed by the
 Superintendent.
 In respect of Clause 682.21(a), not less than two weeks before the commencement of the remedial work, the Contractor shall submit its proposals for remedial work to the Superintendent for review.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 682 (Page 10 of 10)
 
 SECTION 683 - SOIL NAIL WALLS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175 and 611. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 683.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials, testing and construction of soil nail walls.
 
 683.02 DEFINITIONS
 For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply:
 Soil Nail A component of a soil strengthening system consisting of steel or fibre reinforced polymer (FRP) reinforcement bar(s) inserted centrally into a pre-drilled hole and grouted in place. A soil nail does not require post-tensioning.
 Soil Nail Wall A soil strengthening system consisting of soil nails installed at appropriate intervals in both horizontal and vertical directions to provide a permanent support to the material retained by the wall.
 Bonded Length The length of a soil nail along which passive resistance is developed.
 
 683.03 STANDARDS
 
 Table 683.031 Standards
 
 Design Standards
 
 Required for
 
 AS 5100 Part 3 & Amdt 1
 
 Bridge Design Foundations and soil supporting structures
 
 Design and construction of soil nail walls
 
 AS/NZS 4678 & Amdts 1 & 2 Earth retaining structures
 
 Design and construction of a soil nail wall designed to function as an earth retaining structure
 
 Where the design requirements differ between the two Australian Standards, the requirements of AS 5100 shall take precedence over those of AS/NZS 4678.
 
 Material and Testing Standards
 
 American Concrete Institute Specification for Carbon and Glass Fibre-Reinforced Polymer Bar Materials for Concrete
 
 ACI 440.6M-08
 
 Reinforcement
 
 ASTM D7205/D7205M-06
 
 Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Fiber Reinforced Polymer Matrix Composite Bars
 
 ASTM A105908
 
 Standard Specification for Zinc Alloy Thermo-Diffusion Coatings (TDC) on Steel Fasteners, Hardware, and Other Products
 
 ASTM C 940
 
 Standard Test Method for Expansion and Bleeding of Freshly Mixed Grouts for PreplacedAggregate Concrete in the Laboratory
 
 AS 1478.2
 
 Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout Part 2: Methods of sampling and testing admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout
 
 AS 2193
 
 Calibration and classification of force-measuring systems
 
 AS/NZS 2312
 
 Guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings
 
 AS 3972
 
 General purpose and blended cements
 
 AS/NZS 4130 & Amdt 1
 
 Polyethylene (PE) pipes for pressure applications
 
 AS/NZS 4671
 
 Steel reinforcing materials
 
 AS/NZS 4680
 
 Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles
 
 Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS/NZS 4678)
 
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 683.04 SOIL NAIL DESIGN
 Soil nail design shall be in accordance with AS 5100.3 and AS/NZS 4678 and the appropriate Material and Testing Standards listed in Table 683.031. Notwithstanding the requirements of these standards, a soil nail shall have a minimum of 3 m bonded length. The length of a soil nail within 1 m (minimum) behind the shotcrete facing shall not be included in development of soil nail capacity.
 HP The Contractor shall submit construction drawings for review by the Superintendent a minimum of four weeks prior to commencement of soil nail installation.
 At each layer of soil nailing the construction drawings shall include the following information: (a) The name, qualifications and relevant experience of the Contractor's Nominated Geotechnical
 Representatives. (b) The procedure for inspection of the excavated soil face and verification of consistency with
 design assumptions including the sampling method and frequency, the methodology and parameters for classification of soils and field estimation of rock strength; and the records that will be retained for quality assurance. (c) The proposed construction procedure for drilling, installing and grouting the soil nails including details of the drilling equipment and grouting equipment. A permanent Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) grout collar shall be installed in each drilled hole before installation of the soil nail to prevent collapse of soil in the drilled hole. (d) A drawing(s) showing -
 (i) full description of expected material types and groundwater levels (ii) soil nail diameter, hole diameter, grout mix (iii) minimum adhesion between each material type and grout (iv) bond length of the soil nail along which capacity of the nail is developed (v) design capacity of individual soil nails (vi) horizontal inclination of soil nails (vii) nail assembly including the soil nail, type and spacing of centralisers, the grout tubes,
 grout collar and grouting bung (viii) the encapsulation, anchor head and any materials required for electrical isolation or
 corrosion protection.
 If the Contractor proposes to install the soil nails before applying sprayed concrete to the face of the soil the details to be submitted in accordance with Clause 683.04 shall include measures that will be taken to preserve the integrity of the excavated face until sprayed concrete is applied.
 Design and construction of soil nail walls shall comply with the requirements of the Australian Standard for Bridge design - Foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in Section 175. A soil nail wall designed to function as an earth retaining structure shall meet the requirements of the Australian Standard for Earth retaining structures as listed in Section 175. Where the design requirements differ between the two Australian Standards, the requirements of the Australian Standard for Bridge design  Foundations and soil supporting structures shall take precedence over those of the requirements of earth retaining structures.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 2 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 683.05 CONSTRUCTION SEQUENCE
 The construction of the soil nail walls shall be carried out in the following sequential order unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent:
 (a) Soil shall be excavated in layers as specified on the drawings.
 (b) The excavated soil face shall be inspected by a suitably qualified geotechnical engineer to confirm consistency with the design assumptions. The Contractor shall ensure that the geotechnical engineer's inspection records and findings are retained as quality assurance records.
 (c) The exposed soil surface shall be prepared, reinforcement placed and one layer of sprayed concrete applied to the face of the soil. Minimum clearance between the reinforcement and the soil surface shall comply with the requirements of the Australian Standard for Bridge design - Foundations and soil supporting structures as listed in Section 175. Sprayed concrete shall comply with the requirements of Section 684.
 (d) When the sprayed concrete has attained the specified strength, holes for the soil nails shall be drilled, and soil nails installed and grouted.
 (e) Load tests will be carried out to confirm soil nail capacity before excavation of the next layer.
 (f) Drains shall be constructed at the time the layers of wall incorporating the drains are constructed.
 HP If the geotechnical engineer's inspection reveals that the soil profile differs from that assumed in the design, the matter shall be referred back to the designers and soil nails shall not be installed until the design has been verified or amended to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 683.06 SOIL NAILS
 (a) Steel Reinforcement (i) Soil nails shall consist of Grade 500Y deformed high strength steel reinforcing bars complying with the requirements of AS/NZS 4671 and the requirements of Section 611, including the supply to the Superintendent of a current certificate of approval, issued by the Australian Certification Authority for Reinforcing Steel (ACRS). The bars shall be detailed as shown on the drawings or as specified. (ii) Where a soil nail consists of two or more steel reinforcing bars joined by a coupler between bars, the couplers shall be of the same strength grade or higher grade than the bars.
 (b) Carbon and Glass Fiber-Reinforced Polymer (FRP) Reinforcement
 Where the Contractor proposes to use Carbon or Glass Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Bar Materials for soil nails, approval may be granted by the Superintendent provided that the Contractor demonstrates the adequacy of the proposed FRP system to meet the design requirements of this specification to the Superintendent's satisfaction.
 In addition, the following conditions shall be satisfied: (i) FRP (bar, nut, washer and bearing plate) shall satisfy all aspects of ACI 440.6. (ii) Tensile properties of the FRP bar shall comply with the property requirements of ASTM D7205/D7205M-06.
 (iii) The FRP bar used in a soil nail shall be of continuous length with no coupler(s) and contain no joints.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iv) Size of FRP bar batches, batch sizes and sampling shall comply with ACI 440.6. (v) For certification and quality control, batch testing shall be undertaken in Australia to
 ASTM D7205/D7205M-06 to provide the NATA-endorsed report directly related and traceable to each batch. A test method statement shall be provided on the NATAendorsed reports. Test certificates for each batch of bar shall be provided to the Superintendent prior to FRP bar being used. (vi) Where nuts and bearing plate are required, the FRP shall be a continuously threaded solid bar with continuously reinforced thread cross section. Bars that have cut or moulded threads applied as a secondary production process shall not be used. (vii) The design ultimate tensile strength shall be limited to 40% of the minimum tensile strength of that published in the technical data sheet of the manufacturer of the FRP. (viii) FRP soil nails shall be tested in accordance with Clauses 683.10 and 683.11 for verification of construction quality.
 HP FRP bar shall not be installed until NATA-endorsed test certificates for each batch of bar have been submitted for review by the Superintendent and written approval to use FRP bar has been given by the Superintendent.
 683.07 CORROSION PROTECTION
 (a) Where FRP bars and materials are approved for use as soil nails by the Superintendent, further corrosion protection is not required.
 (b) All steel soil nails, including bars, nuts, washers, bearing plates and couplers, shall be either (i) galvanized in accordance with AS/NZS 4680; or (ii) thermo-diffusion coated to ASTM A1059, to achieve at least Coating Class 80, or a minimum thickness of zinc of 80 microns; or
 (iii) coated with a zinc-rich (>80% zinc by weight in the dry film) coating product that achieves a minimum thickness of zinc of 100 microns.
 Nuts shall be suitably treated, after application of corrosion protection, to run freely on the bar thread.
 (c) Centralisers shall be provided at 1 m intervals minimum along a soil nail to ensure that a minimum grout cover of 40 mm is maintained over the entire length of the soil nail. Centralisers shall be manufactured from a corrosion resistant material and shall be shaped to ensure achievement of the specified minimum cover during insertion of the nails, minimise disturbance of the hole during insertion, and minimise obstruction to the grouting.
 (d) Prior to grouting, all soil nails shall be insulated from contact with grout/shotcrete at the interface between the ground and the underside of the shotcrete facing. The Contractor shall apply corrosion protection over the entire length of the soil nail to be embedded in the shotcrete facing. The protection shall be extended to a minimum of 300 mm behind the underside of the shotcrete facing. Very heavy duty and robust wrapping tapes complying with the requirements of AS/NZS 2312 shall be used for the protection work and these tapes shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
 (e) All steel soil nails shall be encapsulated in a corrugated sheath sealed at the buried end. The Superintendent will not consider the use of nails without encapsulation unless the Contractor can: (i) verify by exhumation of sacrificial nails that the soil nail installation procedure will achieve a minimum cover of 40 mm of dense cement grout for the full length of the nail; and (ii) verify during installation of production nails, that the alignment of each hole is at least as straight as the holes drilled for the sacrificial test nails.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) Each encapsulation sheath shall: (i) be manufactured from high density polyethylene complying with AS 4130 with a minimum wall thickness of 2 mm (ii) have corrugations with a pitch between 12 mm and 24 mm and depth not less than 6 mm
 (iii) be securely sealed at the buried end of the nail and at any joints (iv) extend to the top of the grout collar (v) withstand a water head of 5 m without leaking or deformation (vi) be fitted with internal centralisers at each end of the nail and between the ends at a
 spacing that will achieve a minimum gap of 20 mm between the nail and the sheath (vii) be fitted with external centralisers at a maximum spacing of 2 m to achieve a gap
 between the encapsulation sheath and the drilled hole of at least 25 mm.
 683.08 CASINGS
 A permanent PTFE or PVC grout collar shall be installed in each drilled hole before installation of the soil nail to prevent collapse of soil inside the drilled hole.
 Unless the Contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that all of the drilled holes for the soil nails will not collapse in any form or shape at any stage during the entire soil nail installation process, temporary casings shall be placed for the full depth of the bored holes to support and prevent collapse of the drilled holes until supported by the soil nail system itself. The casing shall be withdrawn progressively during grouting of the hole.
 The thickness of the casings shall be determined by the Contractor who shall be responsible for its structural adequacy and the effects of any distortion which is likely to occur to the casings.
 683.09 GROUT TUBING
 Grout and bleed tubing of a minimum internal diameter of 12 mm shall be provided. Tubing shall be made from high density polyethylene Type PN 10 (nominal working pressure of 1 MPa) complying with the requirements of AS/NZS 4130. Tubing shall have a wall thickness of at least 2.0 mm. Tubing shall be of adequate strength to resist damage both during installation and grouting.
 The grout collar shall be inserted at least 600 mm into the drilled hole and may project up to 50 mm into the sprayed concrete face.
 683.10 SOIL NAIL DESIGN VERIFICATION TEST
 The Contractor shall carry out testing on sacrificial nails in accordance with Clause 683.11 to validate the soil nail design and to demonstrate that the proposed procedure will achieve the specified soil nail durability and load capacity.
 HP Prior to commencement of sacrificial soil nail installation the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent for review a procedure for soil nail installation and grouting.
 The Contractor shall provide the following information: (a) installation procedure for sacrificial nails including details of the plant and equipment to be
 used; (b) the method of drilling and the proposed hole diameter; (c) the method, equipment and materials to be used for grouting; (d) all details to be recorded on the soil nail lot register; (e) proposed detailed construction procedure.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 683.11 TESTS ON SACRIFICIAL NAILS
 Unless approved otherwise by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall carry out the following tests to validate the soil nail design and to demonstrate that the proposed procedure will achieve the specified soil nail durability and load capacity.
 (a) Pull-Out Tests on Sacrificial Nails
 A batch of at least three pull-out tests shall be performed on sacrificial nails for each type of soil profile encountered. The soil nail configuration and length and the drilling, installation and grouting procedure shall be the same as proposed for the production nails, except that each test nail shall be constructed initially with a free length (ungrouted section) at the top of the nail and a bonded length (grouted section). The free length shall be a minimum of 1.5 m or as specified by the designers to allow for transfer of load to the bonded section of the test nail. The bonded length shall be sufficiently long to allow for testing of skin friction (bond strength) between the bar and the grout and between the grout and the soil nail hole.
 The nominated test load shall be a minimum of 1.5 times the ultimate soil to grout adhesion value adopted in the soil nail design for each defined soil profile.
 The test load shall be applied directly to the head along the axis of the test nail. The test load shall be applied gradually in increments of 25% of the nominated test load, and each increment shall be held for 10 minutes. Immediately after the nominated test load has been fully applied, the nail head deflection relative to a fixed datum shall be recorded at time intervals of 0, 0.5, 1, 3, 5, and at 10 minute intervals thereafter. The load shall be held constant at the nominated test load for four (4) hours.
 The test nail shall then be unloaded in increments of 25 percent of the nominated test load, recording the nail head deflection immediately after each stage of unloading.
 Results of the soil nail pull-out tests shall be documented by the Contractor and a copy of the results forwarded to the Superintendent within 24 hours of completing the test.
 The pull-out test shall be deemed to have failed if the test nail does not meet all of the following criteria:  the plot of nail head displacement with log time shall be linear or display a decreasing rate
 of creep, and the creep rate shall be less than 2 mm per log cycle of time at the test load  the movement of the steel bar head under the test load shall be less than 0.2 percent of the
 bonded soil nail length  the maximum total nail head displacement at the design load shall not exceed 12 mm
 beyond the theoretical elastic deformation of the free length plus one half of the bonded length.
 Should any one of the Acceptance Criteria not be met, the Contractor shall revise the design and shall undertake further sacrificial testing until the soil nail design has been validated.
 (b) Exhumation Test on Sacrificial Nails
 The batch of soil nails used for the sacrificial pull-out tests shall be exhumed to verify the adequacy of the grout cover. Precautions shall be taken to avoid damage during exhumation to the grout column. The exhumed nails shall be cut into 500 mm lengths and the minimum grout cover at each section shall be photographed, measured and recorded.
 If any section on any nail in the batch has a grout cover less than the specified minimum cover the Contractor shall amend the installation procedure and conduct further exhumation tests until the specified minimum cover is achieved at each section of each batch of 3 sacrificial test nails.
 The Superintendent shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of each load test and each exhumation test.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Exhumation Tests on Sacrificial Nails Without Encapsulation If the Contractor proposes to install production nails without encapsulation the soil nail installation procedure shall be validated by installing and exhuming each batch of three full length grouted nails in each type of soil profile encountered. If any section on any nail in the batch has less than 40 mm of dense grout the production nails shall be encapsulated.
 HP Installation of production nails shall not commence until the soil nail design and the installation procedure have been validated by testing to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 683.12 SOIL NAIL INSTALLATION (a) General
 Soil nails shall be installed as soon as practicable after completion of excavating each layer. The soil nail shall be inserted and grouted on the same day as the completion of drilling the hole. (b) Drilling Drilling of holes for soil nails shall be in accordance with the drawings or as specified. Deviation in alignment shall not exceed 1 in 20. Deviation from straight shall not exceed 20 mm in any 3 metres. The holes shall be located within 100 mm radius of the design nail position. Where no protective sheathing is provided for permanent soil nails, the drill hole diameter shall be such that the steel bar shall have a minimum grout cover of 40 mm. Water or any other liquid shall not be used as drilling fluid or for flushing the holes. (c) Insertion of Soil Nails HP All soil nail holes shall be inspected prior to inserting the soil nail. All drilling
 records shall be available for inspection by the Superintendent prior to inserting the soil nail. The soil nail shall be installed in one continuous operation to avoid damage to the nail and the drill hole and shall be positioned and secured to prevent movement.
 (d) Bearing Plates and Anchor Heads Soil nail bearing plates shall have the minimum dimensions in accordance with the drawings, and shall have corrosion protection as specified in Clause 683.07. The plates shall be fixed to the nail head through use of a cupped washer and nut to accommodate variation in plate angle. The plates shall be bedded firmly onto the shotcrete face with non-shrink mortar/grout. If soil nails are anchored within the spayed concrete face the anchor head shall be designed to ensure full penetration of the sprayed concrete. Bearing plates shall not be used as anchor heads in this situation.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 683.13 GROUTING
 (a) Grout
 (i) Grout Mix Design
 The Contractor shall include full details of the grout proportions and additives, the equipment and methods which he proposes to use in the soil nail installation procedure specified in Clause 683.11.
 Grout for filling soil nail holes shall be composed of cement, water and an admixture to reduce shrinkage and bleeding. Cement shall conform to the requirements for Type GP general purpose cement in accordance with AS 3972 and shall be free from calcium chloride. Admixtures shall not contain chlorides, nitrates or similar electrolytic conducting materials and shall only be used where they will increase workability or reduce shrinkage and bleeding. The water/cement (W/C) ratio shall be as low as possible, consistent with adequate workability and shall be between 0.38 and 0.45.
 All batching shall be by mass with an approved measuring device and to an accuracy of  1%.
 The Contractor shall state the maximum water/cement (W/C) ratio for the proposed mix design and provide test results including the 7 day compressive strength, bleeding properties and flow cone value.
 The grout mix design shall be strictly adhered to by the Contractor. In the event of changes to the agreed grout mix design, the Contractor shall submit a new grout mix design to the Superintendent for review or approval as appropriate.
 (ii) Soluble Salts
 Chloride-ion Content The maximum acid-soluble chloride-ion content of the grout as placed, expressed as the percentage of the total mass of cement in the grout mix shall not be greater than 0.07%.
 Sulphate Content The sulphate content of grout as placed, expressed as the percentage by mass of acid-soluble SO3 to the total cement in the grout mix shall not be greater than 5%.
 Sulphate and chloride-ion content shall be determined by testing of hardened concrete in accordance with AS 1012.20.
 (iii) Testing of Grout
 The following tests shall be carried out both on trial batches of grout for mix design purposes and on production batches at the frequency specified:
  Compressive strength - Test cubes shall be made, cured and tested in accordance with the requirements of AS 1478.2.
 The minimum compressive strength for the grout shall be 32 MPa at 7 days.
 The cube side dimension shall be in the range 40 to 75 mm.
 At least one pair of cubes shall be taken from each five cubic metres or part thereof of grout.
  Bleeding - At least one bleed test shall be carried out for each five cubic metres or part thereof of grout in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C 940.
 The bleeding of the grout shall not exceed 2% of the volume three hours after mixing and shall not exceed 4% of the volume at any time.
 All separated water shall be absorbed within 24 hours.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
  Workability - Flow cone value  Testing using a flow cone to determine grout flow time (time to first break in continuous flow of grout) shall be in accordance with AS 1478.2. The flow time of the grout shall be in the range of 10 to 30 seconds.
 At least one determination of flow time shall be made from each five cubic metres or part thereof of grout.
 (b) Grout Mixing and Pumping Equipment
 Details of the mixing and pumping equipment shall be included in the soil nail installation procedure specified in Clause 683.11.
 Grout shall be mixed in a high speed mechanical mixer, for at least two minutes, until a uniform colloidal consistency is produced. Mixing by hand, or by a tumbling action, will not be permitted.
 Water shall be added to the mixer first, then the cement shall be added gradually, and the grout stirred continuously until pumped into the soil nail hole. Grout shall be stirred for a minimum period of two minutes prior to being pumped into the soil nail hole. Admixtures shall be added to the mix in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The hoppers to the pumps shall be fitted with 2.36 mm sieve strainers. Grout shall not be used later than 1.5 hours after the addition of cement to the mix.
 Pumps shall be capable of continuous operation with little pressure variation, and shall have a system for recirculating the grout whilst actual grouting is not in progress. Pumps shall be fitted with a pressure gauge and shall be capable of delivery at pressures up to 1 MPa. The use of compressed air will not be permitted.
 All piping to the grout pump shall have a minimum of bends, valves and changes in diameter. All pipes and fittings shall have a minimum internal diameter of 25 mm.
 All equipment, especially piping, shall be thoroughly washed with clean water after each series of operations and more frequently if necessary.
 (c) Grouting Operations
 Grouting shall not be carried out while the air temperature is below 5C, or while the shade temperature exceeds 35C.
 Just prior to grouting, the Contractor shall ensure that all loose soil in a soil nail hole is removed. The soil nail bar shall then be placed centrally in the drill hole. Where a soil nail hole is supported by a temporary casing, the casing shall be withdrawn gradually. A minimum of 0.5 m of the bottom end of the casing shall be filled with grout before the casing is fully withdrawn.
 Grout shall then be injected into each sheathing at a speed of between 0.3 m and 0.6 m per second.
 The Contractor's grouting procedure shall ensure that there are no air or water inclusions left in the grouted zone.
 The volume of grout for each hole shall be recorded. The Contractor shall cease the grouting operation if the volume of grout injected is greater than ten times of the calculated volume to complete the grouting of the soil nail. The Contractor shall report this to the Superintendent immediately and no further grouting shall be continued until the condition is reviewed by the Superintendent. Where seepage of grout in a soil nail hole has occurred subsequent to grouting, the Contractor shall top up the soil nail hole with grout to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 683.14 SOIL NAIL PRODUCTION LOAD TESTS
 The Contractor shall submit a pull-out test procedure to the Superintendent for review at least 14 days prior to commencement of soil nail works. The test load to be applied shall be as shown on the drawings or as specified.
 HP The Contractor shall carry out pull-out tests per each layer of excavation.
 The minimum number of pull-out tests per each row of soil nails within each layer of excavation is the greatest number of soil nails calculated based on the following criteria:  5% of the total number of soil nails  2 number soil nails  2 number soil nail per each soil type  2 number soil nail per installation method.
 The locations of the soil nails to be tested shall be in accordance with the drawings or as nominated by the Superintendent. The soil nails for these pull-out tests shall be supplied, installed and tested by the Contractor in accordance with the requirements of this section.
 The tests are to establish the adequacy of the soil nail installation with respect to skin friction between the nail and soil for the various ground conditions which apply and shall be carried out in the presence of the Superintendent.
 (a) Test Nails A test nail shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings or as nominated by the Superintendent. The test nails shall consist of two components, a free length (un-grouted section) and a bonded length (grouted section). The free length shall be a minimum of 1.5 m or as specified to allow for transfer of load to the bonded section of the test nail. The bonded length shall be sufficiently long to allow for testing of skin friction (bond strength) between the bar and the grout and between the grout and the soil nail hole. A test nail shall not form part of the production nails unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. All test nails which do not form part of the production nails shall be trimmed to a minimum of 100 mm below the finished batter face, and shall be fully grouted on completion of the pull-out test.
 (b) Test Load The test load shall be calculated in order that the design allowable cohesion between groundgrout can be verified. The test load shall be a minimum of 1.5 times of the design minimum allowable ground-grout pull-out resistance based on the bonded length of the test nail.
 (c) Pull-Out Testing The test load shall be applied directly to the head and uniaxial to the line of action of a test nail. The test load shall be applied gradually in increments of 25% of the maximum test load, and each increment shall be held for 10 minutes. Immediately after the test load has been fully applied, the nail head deflection shall be monitored at time intervals of 0, 0.5, 1, 3, 5, and at 10 minute intervals thereafter. The test load shall then be held for 4 hours. The test load shall be maintained constant throughout the entire duration of the testing. At each time interval, the actual movements of the soil nail independent of the base plate shall be recorded.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The test nail shall be unloaded in increments of 25% of the test load at 5 minute intervals, recording the nail head deflection immediately after each stage of unloading. A test shall be deemed to have failed if the movement of the steel bar or FRP bar head under the test load is greater than 0.2% of the bonded soil nail length. HP Any test nails that fail the pull-out test shall be reported to the Superintendent
 immediately. The reasons for the failure shall be ascertained by the geotechnical consultant nominated by the Contractor and forwarded to the Superintendent for review. HP The Contractor shall cease installation of the remaining soil nails until such time where the revised design allowable ground-grout pull-out resistance has been addressed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 (d) Calibration of Measuring Equipment The measuring equipment shall permit elongation to be measured with a maximum uncertainty of 2%. The force measuring system shall comply with the Grade B requirements of AS/NZS 2193. The tensioning force determined by applying all relevant corrections to the gauge reading from the calibration certificate, and the tensioning force calculated from the elongation shall not differ by more than 4%. All testing shall be carried out by personnel experienced in this testing and with equipment calibrated by a NATA accredited laboratory. Calibration certificates shall be made available upon request by the Superintendent.
 (e) Acceptance Criteria The design allowable ground-grout pull-out resistance shall be deemed to have failed if the test nail does not meet all of the following criteria:  the plot of nail head displacement with log time shall be linear or decreasing rate of creep, and the creep rate shall be less than 2 mm per log cycle of time at the test load  the movement of the steel bar head under the test load is less than 0.2% of the bonded soil nail length  the maximum total nail head displacement at the design load shall not exceed 12 mm beyond the theoretical elastic deformation of the free length plus one half of the bonded length.
 HP Should any one of the Acceptance Criteria not be met, the Contractor shall revise the adequacy of the design allowable ground-grout pull-out resistance and shall not commence installation of the production soil nails until such time where the revised design allowable ground-grout pull-out resistance has be addressed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 (f) Records Results of the soil nail pull-out tests shall be documented by the Contractor and a copy of the results forwarded to the Superintendent within 24 hours of completing the test.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth 683.15 SUB SURFACE DRAINAGE Geocomposite strip drains shall be securely fixed to the excavated soil face prior to construction of the sprayed concrete wall and shall be masked to prevent concrete adhering to the filter face. The low point of each strip drain shall be connected to a collector pipe with outlets to a spoon drain in front of the wall or as specified on the drawings. The collector pipe shall be fitted with a flushout riser connected to an inspection opening at the top of the wall as shown on the drawing. Preformed PVC fittings shall be used for all connections between strip drains and the collector pipe and all connections shall be sealed and protected to prevent ingress of concrete during concrete spraying. The collector pipe shall be flushed within 4 hours of the completion of the sprayed concrete surrounding it.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 683 (Page 12 of 12)
 
 SECTION 684 - SPRAYED CONCRETE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 204, 610, 611 and 689. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 684.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the supply of materials, construction and testing of sprayed concrete, for both the wet and dry processes of application.
 Wet process sprayed concrete using pre-mixed concrete may be used for structural applications such as retaining walls, soil nail walls, tunnel linings, supporting in situ excavated material, surface improvement and short-term support. Wet process sprayed concrete construction using pre-mixed concrete shall comply with the requirements of Section 610.
 Both the wet and dry processes of application may be used for concrete repair works and for the construction of overlays for cathodic protection (CP) of concrete structures, using proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars. Concrete repair works using proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars shall comply with the requirements of Section 689.
 
 684.02 STANDARDS Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 1012).
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS 1012
 
 Methods of testing concrete
 
 AS 1478.1 Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout  Admixtures for grout
 
 AS/NZS 4680 Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles.
 
 (b) Other Standards ASTM A820 Standard specification for seel fibres for fibre reinforced concrete.
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 
 684.03 DEFINITIONS
 Sprayed concrete: mortar or concrete pneumatically projected from a nozzle (sprayed) at high velocity onto a receiving surface where the sprayed material undergoes simultaneous placement and compaction to produce a dense homogeneous mass. As with conventional concrete the properties of sprayed concrete can be modified and further enhanced through the addition of additives or admixtures, such as silica fume, air-entraining admixtures, fibers and accelerators.
 Wet process application (i.e. shotcrete): the technique where the pre-mixed concrete or cementitious mortar is pumped down a hose to the exit nozzle, where compressed air is introduced via a separate hose to continuously propel the mix onto the prepared substrate. Any conventional concrete mix which is designed as a pump mix can generally be placed with the wet process.
 Dry process application (i.e. gunite): the technique where a dry mixture of cement, additives and aggregates or bagged pre-mixed proprietary formulated mortar is conveyed to a nozzle, where mixing with pressurised water occurs to produce the suitable consistency for the concrete to stick to the sprayed surface without slumping or rebounding excessively.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Rebound: part of the sprayed concrete which having struck the receiving surface does not adhere and deposits onto the ground or adjacent surfaces as wastage. Overspray: material outside the intended receiving surface. Sloughing/sagging: subsidence of the freshly applied sprayed concrete from its initial point of projection on the receiving surface. Layer: the thickness of sprayed concrete built up from a number of passes of the nozzle over the working area. Nozzle: the equipment consisting of a pipe with a mixing unit into which the various constituents are introduced and fitted at the end of the delivery hose from which the sprayed concrete is projected onto the receiving surface. Nozzle operator: the person controlling the nozzle and the application of the sprayed concrete. Aspect ratio: the length of a fibre divided by its diameter. Concrete cover: distance between the outside of the reinforcing steel and the nearest permanent surface of the sprayed concrete, or between the outside of the reinforcement and the nearest point on the receiving surface.
 684.04 MATERIALS
 (a) Wet Process Spray Applied Pre-mixed Concrete (wet-mixed shotcrete) - for structural application Materials, concrete mix design and tests for spray applied pre-mixed concrete shall comply with the requirements of Section 610.
 (b) Wet and Dry Process Spray Applied Cementitious Mortars - for patch repair and CP overlay Proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars shall comply with the requirements of Section 689.
 (c) Reinforcement Steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of Section 611. Steel reinforcement placed in sprayed applied concrete retaining walls, soil nail walls, tunnel linings, supporting in situ excavated material and surface improvement shall be hot-dip galvanised in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 4680. Contact between galvanised steel reinforcement and black steel shall not be allowed.
 (d) Fibres Where steel or other fibres are nominated to be incorporated in the sprayed concrete, the Contractor shall submit details of the quality and source of fibre for review by the Superintendent at least four weeks prior to the commencement of work. Fibres shall be supplied from one manufacturer and be of the same brand and type.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 2 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Fibres shall be added to the concrete in such a manner to ensure that they are uniformly distributed, balling does not occur, and the concrete mix remains workable, pumpable and sprayable.
 (i) Steel Fibres Steel fibres shall comply with the requirements of ASTM A820 for Type I, cold drawn wire, or Type II, cut sheet. All fibres shall be deformed and have a minimum tensile strength of 800 MPa and an aspect ratio between 40 and 70. Fibres shall be stored in dry sealed containers until ready for use and shall be free from corrosion, oil, grease, chlorides and harmful materials which may reduce the efficiency of mixing or spray process, or which may reduce the bond between the fibres and the sprayed concrete. Loose steel fibres shall be added through a 100 mm sieve onto a conveyor belt during the aggregate addition or to the mixer prior to the addition of aggregate, and mixed in the usual manner. Glued steel fibres shall not be added through a sieve.
 (ii) Synthetic Fibres Synthetic fibres shall be in accordance with an acceptable national or international standard. Synthetic fibres in the form of fine micro polypropylene monofilament fibres shall be used in the sprayed concrete mix where mitigation of the effects of explosive spalling of sprayed concrete is required for fire protection.
 (e) Admixtures Chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of AS 1478.1. The Contractor shall submit a detailed procedure for the addition and mixing of admixtures into both wet-mixed and dry-mixed sprayed concrete. Accelerators and other admixtures that are added to concrete at the nozzle or at the delivery hose shall be dispensed by calibrated mechanical means at dosage rates not exceeding the maximum recommended by the manufacturer. All chemical admixtures added to wet process pre-mixed concrete at the nozzle or at the delivery hose shall be included as part of the concrete mix design reviewed in accordance with the requirements of Section 610. Hydration control admixtures that suspend the hydration of sprayed concrete until the addition of the activator shall not cause a decrease in concrete strength with age.
 (f) Water Water shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.09.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 684.05 ADDITIONAL CONCRETE MIX DESIGN AND OPERATIONAL DETAILS
 
 (a) Fibre Content
 
 Determination of fibre content shall be based on a sample of a known volume not less than 6 litres. The sample shall be washed and the fibre content separated and weighed with results reported to the nearest 2 grams. Where synthetic fibres are used the samples may be soaked with alcohol, stirred until the fibres float to the surface and the fibres recovered.
 
 (i) Steel Fibre Content
 Steel fibre content determined from any portion of fresh concrete taken from the mixer shall comply with the nominal values stated in Table 684.051 and the allowed variation as stated in Clause 684.08(c).
 Table 684.051 Nominal Steel Fibre Dosage
 
 Aspect Ratio Nominal Dosage (kg/m3)
 
 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 65 50 40 35 30 25 25
 
 (ii) Synthetic Fibre Content
 Synthetic fibre content determined from any portion of fresh concrete taken from the mixer shall be within the dosage range limits stated in the sprayed concrete mix design.
 
 (b) Drying Shrinkage
 
 Further to Clause 610.07(j), drying shrinkage of the concrete specimens made from the trial concrete mix after 8 weeks drying period, or in the interim after 3 weeks, shall comply with the requirements of Table 684.052. Where no exposure classification is stated, requirements for exposure classification A shall apply.
 
 Table 684.052 Maximum Shrinkage Strain of the Nominated Trial Concrete Mix Design
 
 Exposure Classification
 
 Maximum shrinkage strain, microstrain Drying period
 
 3 Weeks
 
 8 Weeks
 
 A
 
 680
 
 900
 
 B1, B2
 
 560
 
 800
 
 C
 
 550
 
 750
 
 (c) Maximum Time for the Application of Sprayed Concrete
 Further to the requirements of Clause 610.13(f) for completion of concrete discharge, where a hydration control admixture is added to the concrete mix to achieve the required time for the application of the sprayed concrete, the approved application time shall not be exceeded.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 684.06 COMPETENCY OF PERSONNEL INVOLVED IN SPRAYED CONCRETE
 Personnel undertaking the sprayed concrete works including the nozzle operator, supervisor and finisher, shall have a minimum of 5 years experience in sprayed concrete application and a demonstrated competency for substrate preparation, sprayed concrete placement techniques and inspection, sprayed concrete material quality, equipment operation, encapsulation of steel reinforcement, finishing and curing.
 The nozzle operator shall have a demonstrated competence and ability to produce sprayed concrete complying with the specification and have prequalification to the sprayed concrete procedure requirements as stated in Clause 684.07
 The sprayed concrete supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of sprayed concrete application techniques and shall be present at each stage of the works. Installation personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures to be used.
 Documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience, qualification, skills and training of personnel.
 684.07 PREQUALIFICATION OF SPRAYING PROCEDURE
 (a) General
 HP The Contractor shall submit details of the proposed sprayed concrete operations, including the proposed type of sprayed concrete, mix design, substrate preparations, method of application, equipment and nozzle operators for review by the Superintendent not less than 4 weeks prior to commencement of the sprayed concrete Works.
 The Contractor shall produce evidence of the nozzle operators previous experience in the application of sprayed concrete. The nozzle operators shall have demonstrated their competence and ability to produce sprayed concrete complying with the specification.
 (b) Preparation of Test Panels
 Two test panels 750 mm x 750 mm and the greater of the specified thickness or 150 mm shall be constructed by the Contractor for each nominated nozzle operator prior to commencing full scale Works, for the purpose of checking the suitability of the proposed mix design, materials, plant and equipment, the method of working and the competence of the operator intended for the Works.
 The test panels shall be representative of the spraying operation(s) to be adopted, the in situ material(s), the location and the actual orientation (i.e. vertical, overhead etc.) of the sprayed concrete member at the Works.
 Spraying of concrete into the test panels when placed horizontally on the ground shall not be allowed.
 Additional panels will be required if the Contractor should change the mix design, plant and equipment or operator. The test panels shall be stored and cured under similar conditions to the sprayed concrete placed in the Works and in accordance with the requirements of this specification.
 Where reinforcement in the form of steel fabric, steel reinforcement or titanium anode mesh for CP is to be used in the permanent Works, the same reinforcement detailing and number of layers or titanium anode mesh shall be provided in the test panel.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Sampling and Testing of Panels
 The Contractor shall cut a sample of 8 cores from each test panel, at right angles to the plane of the panel approximately 48 hours after the panel has been sprayed. Cores shall not be taken within 125 mm of the edges of the panel.
 The Contractor shall ensure that 2 of the cores per sample are cut from concrete adjacent to steel reinforcement for the purpose of visual assessment of the quality of the sprayed concrete adjacent to steel reinforcement.
 For compressive strength testing, one core per sample shall be tested at 3 days, one at 7 days and two at 28 days after application of the sprayed concrete. The required compressive strength for each set of two 28 day cores shall comply with the requirements of Clause 684.08(e)(ii). The 3 day and 7 day tests shall be used to confirm strength development over time. Two cores per sample shall be tested for VPV values at 28 days in accordance with the requirements of Section 610. VPV test results shall comply with the acceptance criteria as set out in Table 610.061 for test cores.
 (d) Prequalification
 Where it is shown that the same materials, mix designs, equipment, procedures and personnel have given satisfactory results in similar works, the Superintendent may accept the construction of test panels concurrently with the first sprayed concrete placed in the Works.
 HP Sprayed concrete shall not be placed in the permanent Works until the Superintendent has reviewed all prequalification procedures, the results of testing, and visual inspection of both the cores sampled and the test panels in accordance with the requirements of Clause 684.08. Concrete shall not be sprayed until the mix design has been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 HP The prequalified sprayed concrete procedure shall be adhered to throughout the permanent sprayed concrete Works. Permanent sprayed concrete works shall only be carried out by the same nozzle operator who performed the prequalified procedure and produced the conforming test panels.
 HP The prequalified nozzle operator and prequalified sprayed concrete procedure may only be changed after further prequalification and with the approval of the Superintendent.
 684.08 TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF SPRAYED CONCRETE
 (a) Sampling and Testing of Pre-Mixed Concrete
 The concrete supplied for the Works shall be sampled at the worksite and tested for compliance with Section 610. In addition, sampling and testing to determine fibre content shall be as stated in Clause 684.08(c).
 (b) Sampling - General
 Sprayed concrete from the test panels and the finished Works shall be sampled and tested by taking 75 mm diameter cores to confirm compliance with the required compressive strength, 28 day volume of permeable voids (VPV) values, thickness and visual verification of quality. Cores shall not contain reinforcing bars.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The cores shall be cored through the whole thickness of the sprayed concrete and visually inspected to verify that the sprayed concrete is dense and homogeneous without segregation of aggregate and/or fibre or other visible imperfections as described in Clause 684.15. Should any of the cores reveal defects such as lack of compaction, dry patches, voids or sand pockets, the Superintendent may require further tests or cores from the sprayed concrete. Core holes in finished Works shall be cleaned and repaired with a single component, shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious material in accordance with Section 689. The exposed surface of the repaired hole shall be identical in texture and colour to the surrounding finished work concrete. The cores shall be secured, stored, cured and tested in accordance with AS 1012. All cores shall be clearly labelled to identify them with the location they represent. The strength and VPV requirements shall be in accordance with Section 610 and as detailed on the drawings. Where the length of core from finished Works is less than 150 mm, core strengths shall be corrected in accordance with the correction factors given in AS 1012.14.
 Coring from the Works shall not be undertaken unless steel reinforcement has been located either by prior knowledge of its exact location or by use of a calibrated cover meter supplemented by reference to the drawings. The location of the steel shall be clearly marked upon the surface of the concrete to ensure the accuracy of the coring activity. For concrete repair and CP overlay Works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars, compliance with the required compressive strength and 28 day VPV values shall be confirmed by the sampling and testing of cores from production test panels as specified in Clause 684.07(c). Sampling and testing of cores for compressive strength and 28 day VPV values from the finished concrete repair and CP overlay works is not required.
 (c) Sampling and Testing for Fibre Content Further to the requirements of Clause 610.16(a) for sampling and testing of concrete, the fibre content shall be determined and assessed for compliance in accordance with Clause 684.05 by sampling at a frequency of one test per five batch loads of concrete. The concrete represented by the sample shall be deemed to comply if the fibre content as determined is within 5% of the fibre content in the approved mix design.
 (d) Sampling Frequency of Completed Structural Work The Contractor shall take sample each day's production, from production lots established to meet the requirements of Table 684.081. Each production lot shall consist of 6 cores, taken at locations which shall be representative of the work completed in a day's spraying operation. The actual core sites shall be selected in accordance with VicRoads Test Method RC 316.10, except that areas within 200 mm of the edges of construction and within one (1) metre of a lateral construction joint shall be excluded from the lot.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The minimum number of samples shall be in accordance with Table 684.081.
 
 Table 684.081
 
 Volume of Sprayed
 Concrete per Day (m3)
 
 Minimum Number of Production Test Lots of
 Six Cores
 
 0 to 25
 25 to 50
 For each additional 50 m3 of sprayed concrete constructed
 
 1 2
 One additional sample of six cores shall be taken
 
 Each sample of cores shall be tested as follows:
 (i) Visual Inspection
 For each core the following shall be reported  the height (layer thickness) of the core  the visual appearance and presence of defects such as lack of compaction, dry
 patches, voids or sand pockets.
 (ii) Compressive Strength - Test and Report  1 core at 3 days  1 core at 7 days  2 cores at 28 days.
 The 3 day and 7 day tests shall be used to confirm strength development over time.
 Where soil nails are to be inserted through the sprayed concrete, the allocated core for the 3 day test shall be tested for compressive strength and the results assessed for compliance with the requirements prior to drilling proceeding.
 (iii) 28 Day Volume of Permeable Voids (VPV) Values  2 cores at 28 days.
 (e) Acceptance of Testing
 The work shall be assessed for compliance with the requirements for testing as follows:
 (i) Visual Inspection The average layer thickness shall not be less than that specified, and no individual layer thickness measurement shall be less than 0.85 times the minimum requirement. Areas where the visual appearance and presence of defects on core surfaces is unacceptable shall be inspected and assessed in detail to define portions requiring repair.
 (ii) Compressive Strength
 The required compressive strength for each set of two 28 day cores shall be satisfied if: (1) each core has a compressive strength equal to or greater than 0.85 times that
 specified; or (2) the average compressive strength is equal to or greater than 0.85 times that
 specified and the difference between the strength of individual cores is less than 20% of the average.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iii) 28 Day Volume of Permeable Voids (VPV) Values Test acceptance shall be in accordance with Section 610.
 Where layer thickness, visual appearance and compressive strength test results do not comply with the acceptance criteria, or where VPV test results do not comply with Table 610.061, the Contractor shall carry out rectification works. These Works shall achieve the specified level of durability, otherwise the sprayed concrete represented by that sample shall be removed and replaced.
 (f) Concrete Repair and CP Overlay Works Completed with Proprietary Spray Applied Cementitious Mortars
 (i) Production Test Panels During each day's application of sprayed concrete, the Contractor shall construct samples comprising of one production test panel representative of the work completed in accordance with the requirements of Clause 684.07(b) and (c). The minimum number of samples of production test panels shall be in accordance with Table 684.081. The production test panels shall be rigidly fixed alongside the position of application of sprayed concrete to the Works. The production test panels shall be stored and cured under similar conditions to the sprayed concrete placed in the Works and in accordance with the specification. Each production test panel shall be sampled for testing to the requirements of Clause 684.07(c). Where test results for 28 day compressive strength or VPV test results for production test panels do not comply with the requirements of Clause 684.08(e), the Contractor shall carry out rectification works. These works shall achieve the specified level of durability, otherwise the sprayed concrete represented by that sample shall be removed and replaced.
 (ii) Quality Control Testing Concrete repair works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar shall comply with the quality control testing requirements of Clause 689.12(b), (c) and (d). CP overlay works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar shall comply with the visual inspection and soundness testing requirements of Clause 684.08 and Clause 684.15.
 684.09 SUBSTRATE PREPARATION
 (a) Surface of In Situ Material
 Excavation to the required line and grade shall be carried out in accordance with Section 204.
 The integrity of the surface of the in situ or excavated in situ material shall be maintained free of excessive wetting or drying prior to the application of the sprayed concrete.
 Action shall be taken to control groundwater by the installation of drains to prevent contact with the newly sprayed concrete surface or the development of hydrostatic pressures behind the sprayed concrete, effective for the design life.
 Loose and unsound material which may affect adhesion of the sprayed concrete to the in situ surface shall be removed and the surface shall be cleaned before applying sprayed concrete. The surface shall be damp but without free water and prepared so that no abrupt changes in the thickness of the sprayed concrete occur.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Concrete Surfaces
 Loose and unsound material shall be removed from the existing concrete surface. The concrete surface shall be thoroughly cleaned down to remove any traces of dirt, grease, oil, remnants of curing compounds and organic contaminants (i.e. moss, algae, etc.), or other substances that could interfere with the bond of the newly placed sprayed concrete. Where sprayed concrete is to be placed against a smooth concrete surface, the surface shall be roughened as a minimum to an exposed aggregate finish by suitable means in accordance with Section 610. The concrete substrate shall be adequately pre-wetted prior to the application of the sprayed concrete. The surface shall be prepared such that no abrupt changes in thickness of the sprayed concrete occur.
 For concrete repair and CP overlay works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars the concrete substrate shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 689.
 (c) Steelwork and Reinforcement
 Steelwork and reinforcement bars shall be free of loose or thick rust, oil, grease paint mud or any other harmful coating over the metal prior to the application of sprayed concrete.
 Reinforcement shall be firmly fixed to provide the cover, clearances and laps described in the drawings or as specified in Section 611.
 684.10 APPLICATION OF SPRAYED CONCRETE
 (a) Equipment
 The equipment used shall have adequate capacity and be capable of delivering the concrete constituents to the nozzle at a uniform rate such that the sprayed concrete leaves the nozzle in a continuous uninterrupted stream and at a velocity of discharge which will maximise compaction, minimise rebound and overspray and prevent sagging of the applied concrete.
 Equipment shall be capable of allowing the nozzle to be maintained perpendicular and at a distance of less than 1 m from the receiving surface, and except where necessary at the required angle which will produce a dense in situ concrete with maximum adherence of material onto the prepared substrate. Delivery hoses shall have an internal diameter for unimpeded flow of material without blockages, balling of fibre or segregation of aggregate and/or fibre.
 Chemical admixture dispensing equipment shall be subject to regular maintenance and calibrated at three monthly intervals.
 (b) Application
 HP The Contractor shall provide at least 2 days prior notice of each intention to place sprayed concrete.
 HP Sprayed concrete shall not be placed until the evidence that the substrate preparation, reinforcement, and embedments has been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 Sprayed concrete shall be applied as soon as is practical following the preparation of the substrate as specified in Clause 684.09.
 The finished sprayed concrete shall be dense and homogeneous for its full thickness, without segregation of aggregate or fibres, and without collapsing, excessive rebound or other visible imperfections.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Each layer of the sprayed concrete shall be built up by making several passes over the working area. During starting and stopping of the spraying operation or whenever flow becomes intermittent or irregular for any cause the nozzle operator shall direct the nozzle away from the work until it again becomes constant.
 Where a layer of sprayed concrete is to be covered by succeeding layers, it shall be allowed to set prior to application of the succeeding layer. The surface shall be checked for soundness, segregated, loose or otherwise uncompacted sprayed concrete removed, repaired as specified, cleaned, and wetted using a blast of air and water.
 For vertical and near vertical surfaces application shall commence at the bottom. For overhead surfaces sprayed concrete shall be applied from the shoulder to the crown.
 Layer thickness shall be limited to a maximum of 150 mm to ensure that the material does not sag or delaminate.
 The spray nozzle shall be held at such a distance and angle to ensure placement of concrete behind and around steel reinforcement before any concrete is allowed to accumulate on its front face. Sprayed concrete shall not be placed through more than one layer of steel fabric, reinforcing bars or titanium anode mesh in one application.
 Any areas where rebound cannot escape or be blown free shall be filled with sound concrete. All overspray or rebound shall be removed, prior to the placement of sprayed concrete onto adjacent surfaces.
 Where the spraying process is adversely affected by wind or other adverse effects during application, spraying shall be discontinued unless special precautions can be implemented to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section.
 Curing compounds shall not be used when a further layer of sprayed concrete or other bonded finish is to be applied.
 Sprayed concrete shall only be applied in accordance with the requirements of Section 610 with respect to Temperature, Evaporation Limits and Concreting Operations.
 684.11 FINISHING
 The surface finish of sprayed applied structural concrete retaining walls, soil nail walls, tunnel linings, CP Overlay and other structural components forming part of permanent Works shall be steel floated and satisfy the requirements of Section 610 for Class 2 surface finish. The surface finish of concrete repair works completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortar shall be in accordance with Section 689.
 Unless otherwise shown on the drawings other sprayed concrete surfaces shall be left as sprayed. All surface finishes shall be uniform in texture and free from any blowholes or surface imperfections as defined in Clause 689.04.
 All freshly sprayed concrete shall be protected in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.17 which relate to Temperature, Evaporative Limits and Concreting Operations against harmful effects of weather including sun, wind, freezing or rapid drying, rapid temperature changes, rain or water until curing is implemented.
 Any sprayed concrete, which is exposed to dripping water within the period from application to curing, shall be nonconforming.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 684 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 684.12 CURING
 Curing of sprayed concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 610.
 HP The Contractor shall submit details of the proposed method of curing the sprayed concrete to the Superintendent for review at least 4 weeks prior to commencement of the sprayed concrete Works. The Contractor shall not proceed with the spraying of concrete until the curing method(s) has been reviewed and approved by the Superintendent.
 684.13 TOLERANCES ON SURFACE OF SPRAYED CONCRETE
 The tolerances listed below will be a basis for acceptance of the sprayed concrete Works.
 Tolerances for sprayed applied structural concrete, which is used instead of conventionally placed structural concrete, shall satisfy the requirements of Clause 610.36 and Table 610.362.
 Tolerances for concrete repairs and CP overlay completed with proprietary spray applied cementitious mortars shall comply with the requirements of Section 689.
 Where sprayed concrete is to be placed to a specified shape it shall be within  25 mm of that shape and contain no depression greater than 15 mm below a 2 metre straight edge. For sprayed concrete on natural surfaces or surfaces with undefined shape the thickness shall be within - 0 mm + 15 mm of the nominal thickness.
 The Contractor shall utilise probes during application of sprayed concrete to enable the monitoring of the required thickness.
 The Contractor may propose alternative methods for the monitoring of sprayed concrete thickness during application, for the approval of the Superintendent.
 Cover to the steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of the drawings.
 684.14 JOINTS
 The positions and types of joints shall be as shown on the drawings.
 All joints shall be formed square to the face of the panel.
 684.15 INSPECTION AND SOUNDNESS OF FINISHED SPRAYED CONCRETE
 The Contractor shall undertake a visual inspection and a soundness inspection of the finished sprayed concrete Works at the age of at least 28 days. Visual inspection shall be for defects such as lack of compaction, dry patches, voids or sand pockets. Soundness inspection shall be by tapping with a small (0.8 kg) hand-held hammer to locate `drummy' or `hollow' response areas that might indicate a possible lack of bond, delamination or other defect. The Contractor shall remove and rectify such defects in accordance with the requirements of Section 689.
 684.16 REPAIR OF DEFECTIVE AREAS
 Areas of the finished work that exhibit a lack of compaction or bonding, dry patches, voids and sand pockets, or have slumped or sagged, shall be removed and repaired with a single component, shrinkage compensating proprietary cementitious material in accordance with the requirements of Section 689 to achieve the specified level of durability. The exposed surface of the repaired defective area shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding sprayed concrete.
 Department of StateVGicroRwotahds AMugarucsht 20163 Section 684 (Page 121 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 685 - ANTI-GRAFFITI PROTECTION AND GRAFFITI REMOVAL
 ##This section cross-references Sections 160, 175 and 686. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 685.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials, application of anti-graffiti coating systems, removal of graffiti markings, graffiti removal maintenance requirements and relevant testing associated with roadside furniture and structures including bridges, pedestrian underpasses, facings of reinforced soil structures, noise walls, barriers, retaining walls, and traffic control boxes.
 This section is applicable to various substrate surfaces including normal concrete, lightweight concrete, glass fibre reinforced concrete, timber, acrylic plastic, painted steel, normal bricks, concrete blocks, besser blocks, cement render, sandstone, limestone and painted surfaces. Substrate surfaces other than concrete may require some variation of the usual treatment applicable to concrete surfaces. Manufacturer's recommendations shall be strictly adhered to for all substrate surfaces unless otherwise stated.
 Anti-graffiti coating shall not be applied to the following surfaces or materials:
 (a) steel coated with thermoset coatings (for example, Colorbond steel);
 (b) hot dipped galvanized steel;
 (c) hot-dipped zinc/aluminium alloy coated steel (for example, Zincalume steel);
 (d) weather resistant steel complying with AS/NZS 3678 Grade WR350 or AS/NZS 1594 Grade HW350, or similar.
 
 685.02 STANDARDS Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 2700).
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS 1580.108.2 Dry Film Thickness-Paint Inspection Gauge
 
 AS 1580.408.5 Adhesion-Pull-Off Test
 
 AS 1627.1
 
 Metal finishing, Preparation and pre-treatment of surfaces  Removal of oil, grease and related contamination
 
 AS 1627.4
 
 Metal finishing, Preparation and pre-treatment of surfaces  Abrasive blast cleaning of steel
 
 AS/NZS 2311 Painting of Buildings
 
 AS/NZS 2312 Guide to the Protection of Iron and Steel Against Exterior Atmospheric Corrosion
 
 AS 2700
 
 Colours Standards for General Purposes
 
 AS/NZS 4548.5 Guide to long-life coatings for concrete and masonry Part 5: Guidelines to methods of test.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 1 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Additional Test Methods ASTM D4263-83 Moisture in Concrete by the Plastic Sheet Method ASTM D4414-95 Measurement of Wet Film Thickness by Notch Gauges.
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 685.03 DEFINITIONS Adhesion/bond strength: The sum total of the forces of attachment between a dry film and its concrete substrate. Dry film thickness (DFT): The thickness of the applied surface coating(s) after the curing or drying time has elapsed.
 Graffiti: The unauthorised defacement of a surface by words, figures or obliteration. Substrate: The material constituting the surface marked, e.g. concrete, timber. Graffiti marking: The defacement material, e.g. paint, felt-tip pen. Anti-graffiti coating: A pigmented or clear coating material which improves the graffiti resistance of many substrate surfaces allowing easy removal of graffiti by acting as an impermeable layer which prevents defacement, stops the deep penetration of graffiti markings into the substrate pores, and prevents a firm attachment to the surface. Non-sacrificial anti-graffiti coating: Longlife (permanent) coatings which can withstand several cycles of repeated defacement/cleaning processes. Sacrificial anti-graffiti coatings: Temporary coatings which are partially or totally removed from the substrate surface together with the graffiti during the cleaning process. Sacrificial coatings are then re-coated. Wet film thickness (WFT): The thickness of the wet coating immediately after application.
 685.04 MATERIALS Anti-graffiti coatings, graffiti removal agents and decorative/anti-carbonation coatings shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, material safety data sheets and as specified in this section. The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent not less than 14 days prior to the commencement of the anti-graffiti protection works, details of the anti-graffiti protection operations including information on the proposed anti-graffiti coatings, graffiti removers, decorative/anti-carbonation coatings, substrate preparation, method of application, equipment and operators, demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this specification. Material details shall include information on the properties of the proposed products, documented evidence of previous performance and relevant test results, which shall not be more than twenty-four (24) months old.
 HP Anti-graffiti protection works shall not take place until the Contractor's proposed materials and procedures have been reviewed and accepted by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 2 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 685.05 SURFACE PREPARATION
 The surface preparation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for the coating system to be applied and as specified in this section.
 All dust, dirt and other surface contaminants shall be removed by appropriate means as approved by the Superintendent. The surface shall then be washed with water such that grease and oil contaminants, including remnants of curing membranes, shall be removed from the surface by the use of appropriate solvents or detergents followed by the water washing in accordance with AS 1627.1.
 Where an anti-graffiti coating system is specified, the substrate shall be free of all graffiti, graffiti shadows, paints, or any other surface contaminants which would be visible through the coating.
 Where shadows of previously removed graffiti are likely to be clearly visible through a coating, a suitable anti-bleed stain sealer shall be applied prior to the application of any subsequent coatings.
 Where required to promote adhesion of the coating system, some concrete and other substrate surfaces may be cleaned by whip blasting with a fine grade garnet or surface etched with an approved acid wash followed by a water wash in accordance with AS 1627.1. Any abrasive blast cleaning shall be carried out in accordance with AS 1627.4, applicable work health and safety laws and appropriate regulations imposed by the local government authority and the EPA.
 685.06 ANTI-GRAFFITI COATING SYSTEMS
 (a) General
 The anti-graffiti coating system shall be non-sacrificial, clear or pigmented coating to a specified colour. The coating system shall be an acrylic-copolymer, acrylic-epoxy, polyurethane or polyurea type. All coats in the system shall be of the same brand and must be compatible with each other.
 The use of sacrificial anti-graffiti coatings is subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 Substrate surfaces other than concrete may require variations of the usual treatment applied to concrete surfaces. Highly porous substrates may require a pore-filling primer coat prior to applying a final anti-graffiti finish. For relatively soft surfaces the primer and/or finish coat shall also offer surface binding and toughening effect. Manufacturer's recommendations shall be sought in all such cases.
 (b) Performance Requirements
 The coating system shall be non-yellowing and UV resistant for its guaranteed exposure life and shall exhibit low dirt retention capability. The coating shall be impermeable to chlorides, water, carbon dioxide and acid rain but allow the transmission of water vapour.
 The coating system shall carry a guaranteed outdoor exposure life of not less than 10 years and a guaranteed `Graffiti Removal' life of at least 8 cycles of defacement and removal from the date of application.
 Sacrificial anti-graffiti coatings if approved by the Superintendent shall carry a guaranteed outdoor exposure life of not less than 5 years from the date of application.
 The Contractor shall provide evidence as to the compatibility of the proposed coating system to the nominated substrate. Such evidence shall include but not be limited to test certificates from a NATA accredited testing laboratory and history of previous performance.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 3 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where a primer or undercoat is required as part of the anti-graffiti coating system, it shall be a different colour to that of the final nominated colour and in accordance with AS 2700.
 The coating pigments shall be colourfast, and not subject to fading or discolouration.
 The finished coating system shall have a minimum wet film thickness (WFT) of 175 m and a minimum anti-graffiti coating dry film thickness (DFT) of 100 m.
 Where an anti-graffiti coating is also used as an anti-carbonation coating its minimum DFT shall be 150 m and shall comply with the requirements of Section 686 for anticarbonation coating.
 The applied coating system shall have an adhesion value of greater than 0.75 MPa to the substrate in accordance with AS 1580.408.5.
 For penetrating anti-graffiti coating systems applied to full saturation, the minimum amount of penetration into the substrate and minimum application rate shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 685.07 METHOD OF APPLICATION
 The application of coating systems and removal of graffiti shall be carried out in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, current materials safety data sheets and as specified in this section.
 The substrate shall not be coated until it is surface dry. Sufficient time shall elapse between coatings to allow the initial coat to dry and cure.
 The finished coating shall be smooth, of uniform thickness, colour and appearance and without runs, beads, surface crazing and shall be free of any defects that may impair the performance or appearance of the coating for the life of the coating.
 If the coating is too thin, or shows evidence of having been applied under unfavourable conditions, or the workmanship is poor, or the specified requirements are not fulfilled, the surface shall be re-treated to the extent required by the Superintendent.
 Where the methods of application or removal are unacceptable to the Superintendent because of undesirable effects such as over spray, spatter or significant disruption to the public, alternative methods shall be used.
 If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, conditions become unsatisfactory, work shall not be continued, and newly coated surfaces shall be protected with approved shelters from rain or other damage.
 685.08 APPROPRIATE TIMINGS FOR APPLICATION OF ANTI-GRAFFITI COATINGS
 (a) Newly Constructed Cast In-Situ Concrete/Non-Accelerated Cured Precast Concrete Anti-graffiti coating systems shall be applied no earlier than twenty eight days after concrete has been placed. Anti-graffiti coating application may be undertaken earlier if it can be established, using a commercially available calibrated moisture meter, that the concrete moisture content is less than 10%, but not prior to fourteen days after concrete has been placed, and provided the concrete surface is dry at the time of application.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 4 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Steam or Radiant Heat Cured Concrete Application of anti-graffiti coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen days after concrete has been placed.
 (c) Repaired Concrete Where concrete repairs have been completed with proprietary cementitious materials, the application of anti-graffiti coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen days after completion of repair. Where normal concrete is used for repair, anti-graffiti coatings shall be applied no earlier than twenty eight days after the completion of repair.
 685.09 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS (a) General
 Coating systems shall not be applied under any of the following conditions: (i) windy conditions where over spray and/or spatter may be generated; (ii) wind-borne debris is likely to contaminate the uncured surface of the freshly applied coating;
 (iii) ambient temperature exceeds 35C or is below 10C; (iv) relative humidity exceeds 85%; (v) rain spatter, or run-off, including leakage through deck joints, contaminating the
 surface and adversely affecting the adhesion to the substrate may occur; (vi) substrate surface is wet or damp; (vii) surface temperature of the substrate is less than 3C above the dew point calculated
 in accordance with AS/NZS 2312 (Fig. 8.1) or exceeds 40C. The environmental conditions shall be measured, recorded and assessed against the requirements above once every four hours of each shift. A calibrated commercially available hygrometer (psychrometer) or electronic climatic measuring gauge shall be used to determine the parameters which require readings (i.e. items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii)).
 (b) Environmental Requirements The Contractor shall adhere to EPA and other local, state and federal government requirements with respect to how waste generated during surface preparation, coating application, and clean up will be collected, segregated, handled, controlled and disposed of.
 (c) Disposal of Waste Materials Waste materials which may constitute a fire hazard shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at designated disposal sites. Liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of through creeks or the stormwater drainage system.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 5 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 685.10 COATING MATERIAL, HANDLING AND STORAGE Materials shall remain in their original, sealed containers until time of use and shall be stored in strict accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. All material shall be brought to site in the original unopened cans clearly labelled with the appropriate marker's name, product type, reference number and batch number. The Contractor shall provide, for each batch of coating material, a copy of the manufacturer's information as specified below: (a) manufacturer's name and address; (b) product reference; (c) batch number of identification; (d) quantity manufactured in the batch; (e) certificate of date of manufacture. The Contractor shall maintain records showing which elements were treated with each coating batch. These records shall be provided to the Superintendent. Materials stored beyond the manufacturer's recommended shelf life shall not be used. The material shall be used in the order of manufacture. All coating materials to be used on the works shall be free from contamination, gelling, drying out, heavy skin formation and severe segregation of ingredients. Coating materials which have exceeded the pot life recommended by the manufacturer shall not be used.
 685.11 TRIAL APPLICATION A trial application on a small test area of the actual substrate or a test panel made from the same substrate shall be conducted seven days prior to the commencement of coating work. HP The Contractor shall not proceed with the full scale coating works until the trial
 coating application has been carried out and the outcomes reviewed and approved by the Superintendent. The small test area or test panel shall be prepared and coated by the Contractor to satisfy the requirements of Clauses 685.05, 685.06, 685.07, 685.09, 685.12 and 685.13 and in accordance with the material manufacturer's recommendations. If the coating trial application is deemed to be inadequate by the Superintendent a further coating application shall be made until the performance criteria of this specification are met. In the event that the trial application is rejected, the Contractor shall remove and dispose of any work deemed as unacceptable by the Superintendent, submit a new proposal to rectify the deficiencies (including prequalification testing of any new materials/methods) and repeat the trial application as described above. Any delays caused through rejection shall not constitute justification for extension of time.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 6 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 685.12 TESTING BEFORE AND AFTER APPLICATION OF COATING
 The Contractor shall carry out testing in at least one 1 m area in accordance with this clause. Testing shall be undertaken by a NATA accredited testing laboratory.
 (a) Testing before Application At least one test shall be carried out before application of materials to ensure that: (i) surface moisture conditions of concrete and other substrates satisfy the manufacturer's recommendations; (ii) moisture content of concrete and other substrates is free of water back pressure to satisfy the manufacturer's recommendations in accordance with ASTM D4263-83 (2012); (iii) environmental conditions, as specified in this section, are satisfied.
 (b) Testing after Application At least three tests for each of bond strength, WFT and DFT and amount of penetration of anti-graffiti penetrant shall be carried out after the application of materials to demonstrate compliance with this section. (i) The bond strength to the substrate and between separate coats shall be tested using aluminium dollies with a minimum diameter of 50 mm in accordance with AS 1580.408.5. The bond strength shall be greater than 0.75 MPa, fourteen (14) days after the application and curing process. (ii) The WFT of the film forming coating measured in accordance with ASTM D4414 shall not be less than 175 m as stated in Clause 685.06(b). (iii) The DFT measured in accordance with AS 1580.108.2 using a paint inspection gauge, shall not be less than 100 m as stated in Clause 685.06(b). The DFT of coatings may be measured using the coating remnants attached to the aluminium dollies from the adhesion testing provided the coating material remains intact and the correct frequency of testing is satisfied in accordance with the requirements of Clause 685.12(c). (iv) Measurements of DFT shall satisfy the following conditions: (1) not more than 15% of measurements of DFT shall be more than 10% under the specified thickness; (2) not more than 15% of the DFT measurements taken in the 1 m test area shall be less than the specified minimum. (v) Where a penetrating anti-graffiti coating system is applied, the amount of penetration shall be determined on concrete cores 50 mm in diameter x 50 mm deep in accordance with an acceptable national or international standard and shall not be less than that specified in Clause 685.06(b). A fugitive dye shall be used to enable clear differentiation between the treated and untreated depths of concrete.
 (c) Location and Frequency of Testing The above testing shall be undertaken in at least one 1 m test area for every 50 m on completion of the application of the final coat of the anti-graffiti or decorative/anticarbonation coating system.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 7 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 685.13 INSPECTION AND TESTING
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall maintain all required quality documentation including inspection reports, records of environmental conditions and test results as specified in this section and Section 160 of the specification for all stages of the work.
 The works shall be inspected by the Contractor at each stage of the coating operation as a minimum, i.e. after surface preparations, prior to each coat and after final top coat application and any touch-up coats that may be required.
 For the purpose of surveillance and audits as specified in Clause 160.A10, the Contractor shall give the Superintendent five days written notice of its intention to coat the substrate. The Contractor shall make available to the Superintendent all assistance and means of gaining access to the work. The Superintendent shall determine the access requirements for surveillance of the work.
 (b) Surface Preparation
 The Contractor shall inspect the surface preparation and shall ensure and document that the following requirements have been satisfied:
 (i) degree of surface cleanliness is as specified; (ii) surface profile is specified; (iii) immediately before painting, the prepared surface has had all loose dust and other
 foreign material removed; (iv) surface is not contaminated by any means after preparation and before painting.
 (c) Materials
 The Contractor shall inspect the materials and their preparation for use and shall ensure that the following requirements are met:
 (i) materials are the correct materials for the system which is to be applied; (ii) material containers are sound and not damaged in any way which may have caused
 or will cause the contents to deteriorate; (iii) material in the containers has not dried, gelled, formed a heavy skin or unduly
 settled; (iv) material is stirred, mixed, or thinned in accordance with the manufacturer's
 recommendations, multi-part materials mixed in the correct proportion, a reaction time for multi-part materials if specified by the material manufacturer shall be allowed and materials shall not be used once their pot life has expired; (v) application method is appropriate for the material.
 The Contractor shall maintain a sample of not less than 1 litre from each batch as a reference sample for the shelf life of the product.
 (d) Coating Condition after Application
 The Contractor shall inspect each coat and the finished coating system and shall ensure that the following conditions are satisfied:
 (i) uniformity, colour, gloss, opacity and appearance are in accordance with the requirements of the specification;
 (ii) free of any defects that may impair the performance or appearance of the coating for the life of the coating.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 8 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 685.14 COATING REPAIRS Should any of the works not comply then the areas concerned shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Such repair work may include removal of the coating, followed by surface preparation and application of a new coating. The procedure for any repair work shall be approved by the Superintendent. For the purpose of this clause, unsatisfactory work shall include coating failure due to yellowing, loss of adhesion, colour change, penetration of graffiti into the coating, or loss of solvent resistance during the guarantee period.
 685.15 REINSTATEMENT OF DAMAGED COATING All areas of coatings damaged by the Contractor during its operation shall be made good to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 685.16 CONTRACTOR COMPETENCY Application personnel and sub-contractors undertaking this work shall have a minimum of five years experience and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of protective coatings. The coatings application supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during coating work. Application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the coating to be applied. Documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience, qualification, skills and training of personnel and sub-contractors.
 685.17 PROTECTION OF WORKS AND PROPERTY The Contractor shall ensure that the coated works are protected from adverse conditions, dust and debris during the curing period of the coating system in accordance with the requirements of Clause 685.09. If the anti-graffiti coating is air-sprayed onto a concrete surface, in close proximity of buildings, footpaths, roadways, pedestrians, or vehicles, no spray painting shall be carried out within ten metres of the above items without approved protective measures or methods being used. Proposals to overcome the above problem shall be submitted to the Superintendent, a minimum of two working days in advance of the proposed works. Protective measures may include the use of tarpaulins, hand brush, or roller applied painting.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 9 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 685.18 GRAFFITI REMOVAL AS PART OF A MAINTENANCE CONTRACT
 (a) Graffiti Removal
 (i) General
 Graffiti removal from existing coatings or untreated substrates shall be strictly in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation and as specified in this section. Typical graffiti removal methods shall include but not be limited to: 1. chemical cleaning 2. steam cleaning 3. hot or cold high pressure water cleaning with or without detergents 4. wet and dry abrasive blast cleaning 5. low-volatile solvent cleaning (non-toxic) 6. non-abrasive low-pressure water jet with granular sodium carbonate additives 7. painting out of graffiti (where nominated).
 The Contractor shall be responsible for ensuring the compatibility of the proposed cleaning method without injurious effect to any applied coatings, paint systems and uncoated substrates.
 Damage to the substrate, substrate coating or anti-graffiti coatings caused by the Contractor shall be rectified.
 (ii) Removal of Graffiti Markings
 For anti-graffiti coated substrates the standard of graffiti removal shall be based on no residual graffiti markings being visible.
 For uncoated substrates the complete removal may not be possible due to the absorbency of the substrate material. Under these circumstances, the Superintendent may allow some residual paint staining or shadowing to remain.
 The graffiti message or configuration shall not be intelligible or clearly visible from close proximity in the case of a substrate close to pedestrians or from a distance of 10 metres in the case of proximity to a roadway.
 All proposed cleaning methods shall be appropriate and safe for use in public areas and satisfy EPA requirements and the requirements of Section 160.
 (iii) Painting Out of Graffiti
 Where painting out of graffiti is specified or approved by the Superintendent, at least two coats of an approved decorative/anti-carbonation coating product (VicRoads grey or approved alternative colour to AS/NZS 2311) shall be applied in accordance with AS/NZS 2311 and the manufacturer's recommendations to achieve a uniform colour and texture.
 Prior to overcoating, a suitable anti-bleed stain sealer shall be applied to prevent any subsequent bleed through of residual graffiti stain in the finish coat. If a uniform colour and texture is not achieved the Contractor shall take remedial measures to produce the required surface finish. For painting out of graffiti the accepted standard of graffiti removal shall be no residual graffiti being visible.
 Approved coatings shall be applied at a minimum DFT of 150 m and shall comply with the requirements of Section 686 for anti-carbonation coating.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 10 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Reports The Contractor shall submit a report detailing its graffiti removal and application work undertaken on a monthly basis. The report shall contain a comprehensive time dated photographic display of all graffiti supported with written detail as to the correct location, description, area, treatment and removal of the graffiti. The photographs shall be accurately labelled and presented in a suitable mounting system.
 (c) Graffiti Removal Maintenance on a Site Specific Basis The nominated Department of State Growth structures, parts of structures or roadside furniture shall be inspected and cleaned at a frequency nominated by the Superintendent, or where time periods have not been nominated, at a frequency of not less than twice per week. The inspection days will be Monday and Thursdays. At the request of the Superintendent, the frequency of inspections may be increased to three times per week (Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays). Any additional inspection day shall be at the Department of State Growth expense.
 (d) Timings for Graffiti Removal Graffiti shall be removed within 48 hours of the Contractor being aware of its presence either by inspection or notification by the Superintendent. Graffiti that is of a sensitive nature (racist, sexist, obscene or offensive) shall be removed within 24 hours.
 685.19 GRAFFITI REMOVAL AS PART OF A CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT The Contractor shall systematically inspect road and bridge construction works for graffiti at least on a monthly basis during the contract period, including immediately after weekends or public holidays, until the Date of Practical Completion. Particular attention shall be given to obvious graffiti targets such as bridges and other major structures with large surface area, sign structures and other roadside areas highly visible to the public. Where an inspection discovers graffiti on completed works, or on those parts of the works that would normally be left for some time before completion, cleaning and removal shall be initiated and completed in accordance with the requirements of Clause 685.18.
 685.20 RECORDS OF GRAFFITI REMOVERS Further to the requirements of Clause 685.10 regarding anti-graffiti coating materials applied to the works, the Contractor shall also maintain records of all compatible chemical graffiti removers and other suitable cleaning methods as recommended by the materials manufacturer. These records shall be provided to the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 685 (Page 11 of 11)
 
 SECTION 686 - COATING OF CONCRETE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 160, 175, 610, 685, 687 and 689. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 686.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply and quality of materials, surface preparation, application, relevant testing and acceptance criteria for decorative and protective coatings and surface treatments of concrete.
 This section does not cover other types of concrete deterioration including alkali aggregate reaction, sulphate and chemical attack.
 Requirements for anti-graffiti protection of concrete are specified in Section 685.
 
 686.02 STANDARDS
 Concrete coating materials, surface preparation and application shall comply with the requirements of the following standards and test methods:
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS 1580.108.2 Paints and related materials  Methods of test - Dry film thickness Paint inspection gauge
 
 AS 1580.408.4 AS 1580.408.5 AS 1627.1
 
 Paints and related materials  Methods of test  Adhesion (crosscut)
 Paints and related materials  Methods of test  Adhesion - Pull-off test
 Metal finishing - Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces  Removal of oil, grease and related contamination
 
 AS 1627.4
 
 Metal finishing - Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces  Abrasive blast cleaning of steel
 
 AS/NZS 2311 Guide to the painting of buildings
 
 AS/NZS 2312
 
 Guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by use of protective coatings
 
 AS 2700
 
 Colour standards for general purposes
 
 AS/NZS 4548.5 Guide to long-life coatings for concrete and masonry Part 5: Guidelines to methods of test.
 
 (b) Additional Test Methods ASTM D4262-05 pH of Chemically Cleaned or Etched Concrete Surfaces ASTM D4263-83 Moisture in Concrete by the Plastic Sheet Method ASTM D4414-95 Measurement of Wet Film Thickness by Notch Gauges BS 1881-Part 5 Initial Surface Absorption Test (ISAT).
 
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 1 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 686.03 DEFINITIONS
 Adhesion/bond strength: The sum total of the forces of attachment between a dry film and its concrete substrate.
 Anti-carbonation coating: Coating applied to concrete and other cement-based substrates to retard their carbonation by atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2).
 Carbonation: The reaction of atmospheric CO2 with alkaline materials such as concrete, and cement which lowers the alkalinity (pH) and thus protection to steel reinforcement.
 Coat: A continuous layer of a coating material resulting from a single application.
 Coating(s): An interchangeable term, meaning either the actual process of covering the concrete surface with a layer(s) of paint, or representing a protective or decorative coating as defined in this Clause.
 Coating system(s): Can be either protective or decorative coating system(s) as defined in this clause.
 Decorative coating system(s): These can be either film-forming coatings, surface treatments or combinations of these which can improve the aesthetic appearance of a concrete surface.
 Dry film thickness (DFT): The thickness of the applied surface coating(s) after the curing or drying time has elapsed.
 Film-forming coating(s): Viscous materials which form a pinhole - free film on the concrete surface to improve its aesthetic appearance or provide protection by acting as a barrier to the ingress of aggressive agents. Coatings are generally applied in two or more layers. Thin coatings have a dry film thickness (DFT) of 100-300 micron, high build coatings generally exceed 1 mm, whereas cementitious coatings are generally thick applications ranging from 1 to 20 mm thick.
 Primer: The first coat of a coating system applied to an uncoated concrete substrate designed to enhance adhesion of the coating system onto the surface and/or impart a surface binding and toughening effect on the substrate.
 Pore-lining penetrant(s) (Hydrophobic Impregnation(s)): These are low viscosity fluids (i.e. silane, silane/siloxane, siloxane, solid silane or silane cream) which react with the available hydroxyl group of the silicate structure of the concrete substrate in the presence of moisture, thus depositing water-repellent silicone resins chemically bonded to the walls of the concrete pore structure. These hydrophobic products can penetrate the concrete by several millimetres and work by repelling water and waterborne chloride ions.
 Protective Coating System(s): Either film-forming coatings, surface treatments or combinations of these which can impart protective qualities to the concrete surface against the ingress of aggressive agents.
 Sealer(s): These are viscous fluids which are intermediate between pore-lining penetrants and film-forming coatings. They can penetrate and block the pores of the concrete substrate and also form a thin film on its surface.
 Surface Treatment(s): Viscous materials such as pore-lining penetrants (hydrophobic impregnations) and sealers which can penetrate the concrete or block the pores of the concrete to improve its aesthetic or protective qualities.
 Undercoat: Highly pigmented coating which can serve as a first coat or intermediate coat before the finish coating to provide hiding power and improved adhesion of a top coat to the substrate.
 Wet film thickness (WFT): The thickness of the wet coating immediately after application.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 2 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 686.04 MATERIALS
 Coatings, surface treatments and decorative/anti-carbonation coatings, including any primers, undercoats and sealers shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and materials safety data sheets.
 The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent not less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the commencement of the coating works, details of the concrete coating operations including information on the proposed coatings and primers, surface treatments, decorative/anti-carbonation coatings, substrate preparation, method of application, equipment and operators, demonstrating compliance with the requirements of this specification.
 Material details shall include information on the properties of the proposed products, documented evidence of previous performance and relevant test results traceable to the proposed coating system, which shall not be more than twenty-four (24) months old.
 HP Concrete coating works shall not take place until the Contractor's proposed materials and procedures and surface preparation in accordance with Clause 686.06 have been reviewed and accepted by the Superintendent.
 686.05 PROTECTIVE AND DECORATIVE COATING SYSTEMS
 (a) General Requirements
 The protective or decorative coating system shall be water or acrylic based and solvent free.
 The protective or decorative coating system shall be clear or pigmented coating to a VicRoads Grey colour, or a combination of these. All coats in the system or separate coatings/treatments making up the system shall be physically and chemically compatible with each other.
 The Contractor shall supply the Superintendent with a certificate from the manufacturer in the form of a guarantee confirming that the coating system and materials comply with the requirements of this section, including a guaranteed outdoor exposure life of not less than ten (10) years prior to the need for re-coating.
 The coating system shall be capable of withstanding cleaning with hot water, in the range of 40C to 50C, detergent and scrubbing action without loss of adhesion, softening or changing in colour or gloss.
 Coating systems applied to highly porous and/or relatively soft concrete substrates shall include a high quality pore-filling primer coat or sealer to be applied prior to the application of at least two coats of the protective or decorative part of the overall coating system. The primer and/or the coating system as a whole shall also offer surface binding and toughening effect.
 The Contractor shall provide evidence as to the compatibility of the proposed coating system to the nominated substrate. Such evidence shall include but not be limited to test certificates from a NATA accredited testing laboratory and history of previous performance.
 Where a primer, undercoat or sealer is required as an integral part of the coating system (i.e. primer coat plus at least two coats of the protective or decorative part of the system), the primer, undercoat or sealer shall be a different colour to that of the final nominated colour and shall be in accordance with AS 2700.
 The coating pigments shall be colourfast, not subject to fading or discolouration and exhibit high resistance to chalking and dirt pick up.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 3 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The applied coating system shall also satisfy the following requirements:
 (i) bond strength greater than 0.75 MPa when tested fourteen (14) days after application in accordance with AS 1580.408.5;
 (ii) ability to bridge cracks up to 0.3 mm wide; (iii) ability to be recoated within 24 hours; (iv) have minimum pot life of 1 hour; (v) not to sag or run when applied correctly to vertical surfaces; (vi) compatibility to an alkaline surface in accordance with ASTM D 4262-83:2005.
 
 (b) Performance Requirements for Decorative/Anti-Carbonation Coatings
 
 Where required, concrete surfaces shall be painted with at least two coats of an approved decorative/anti-carbonation coating system (VicRoads Grey or approved alternative colour) in accordance with AS/NZS 2311 and the manufacturer's specification to achieve a uniform colour and texture. The primer which forms an integral part of the coating system shall be applied onto the concrete substrate prior to the application of subsequent coats of the approved decorative/anti-carbonation coating. If a uniform colour and texture is not achieved the Contractor shall take remedial measures at his own expense to produce the required surface finish.
 
 In addition to the general requirements of Clause 686.05(a), approved coatings shall also satisfy the minimum performance criteria shown in Table 686.051, as determined by testing in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 4548.5 and AS 1580.108.2.
 
 Table 686.051
 
 Property
 Equivalent Air Layer Thickness Equivalent Thickness of Concrete CO2 Diffusion Co-efficient
 Water vapour equivalent air layer thickness Dry film thickness
 
 Symbol R Sc D Sd
 DFT
 
 Requirement
 
 Method Reference
 
 >150 m
 
 AS/NZS 4548.5 Appendix D
 
 >450 mm <2 x 10-7 cm2/s
 
 AS/NZS 4548.5 Appendix D
 AS/NZS 4548.5 Appendix D
 
 <4 m
 
 AS/NZS 4548.5 Appendix C
 
 at least 150 m (microns) AS 1580.108.2
 
 (c) Performance Requirements for Moisture and Chloride Resistance
 (i) General
 Protective coating systems shall be applied in at least two layers and in addition to the general requirements of Clause 686.05(a), they shall satisfy the following minimum performance criteria:
 (1) the water absorption value not to exceed 0.01 ml m-2 sec-1 at 10 minutes, following the application and curing process in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the Initial Surface Absorption Test (ISAT) as per BS 1881, Part 5;
 (2) chloride diffusion co-efficient less than 5 x 10-9 cm2/sec, and carbon dioxide (CO2) diffusion co-efficient less than 2 x 10-7 cm2/sec after 2000 hours of accelerated ultra-violet (UV) weathering; and
 (3) dry film thickness (DFT) of at least 200 microns (m) in accordance with AS 1580.108.2;
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 4 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (ii) Tidal Zone
 In addition to the general requirements of Clause 686.05(a) and Clause 686.05(c)(i) the coating system for the tidal zone shall satisfy the following requirements: (1) the coating system shall be formulated for application onto surface dry but
 saturated concrete such as in the tidal range in a marine environment; (2) the coating system shall cure rapidly between the tidal cycles, such that it may
 be immersed in seawater within 3 hours of application and shall be capable of withstanding hydrostatic penetration of water.
 (iii) Atmospheric and Splash Zones
 A dual protective coating system consisting of a pore-lining penetrant (i.e. silane, solid silane or silane cream) and at least two coats of a film-forming top coat shall be applied to atmospheric and splash zones.
 In addition to the general requirements of Clause 686.05(a) and Clause 686.05(c)(i) the dual protective coating system shall satisfy the following requirements:
 (1) Silane pore-lining penetrants shall consist of at least 95% active ingredients and shall be applied in two applications at a minimum application rate of 0.3 litres/m2 with a minimum interval between coats of at least 6 hours. Solid silane or silane cream pore-lining penetrants shall consist of at least 80% active ingredients and shall be applied in one thick application at a minimum application rate of 0.4 litres/m2. Silane/siloxane or siloxane pore-lining penetrants shall only be used if approved by the Superintendent.
 (2) The amount of penetration of silane, solid silane or silane cream pore-lining penetrants into the concrete, shall be a minimum of 5 mm. The amount of penetration of silane/siloxane or siloxane pore-lining penetrants, shall be a minimum of 3 mm.
 (3) The pore-lining penetrant shall contain a fugitive dye to enable clear differentiation between coated and uncoated areas.
 (4) The pore-lining penetrant and film forming coating shall be compatible.
 (5) The film-forming topcoat shall satisfy the requirements of Clause 686.05(b) for decorative/anti-carbonation coatings, except that its DFT shall be at least 200 m.
 A dual protective coating system incorporating a penetrating sealer may be used subject to submission of documentary evidence of previous performance, including relevant test results which shall not be more than twenty-four (24) months old, which demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section.
 (d) Protective Coatings for Special Applications Protective coatings requirements for special applications shall be specified on the drawings.
 (e) Concrete Subject to Graffiti Coatings which are subject to graffiti shall satisfy the requirements of Section 685.
 (f) Coatings Applied to Retaining Walls Where coating systems are applied to the exposed concrete surfaces of retaining walls or other soil retaining structures, adequate waterproofing membranes and/or drainage systems shall be installed behind the retaining wall to prevent the coating system from blistering or peeling off, where applied on exposed concrete surfaces.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 5 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (g) Coatings Applied to Parapet Walls
 Where coating systems are applied on walls or other vertical concrete components which have exposed top horizontal surfaces, the coating systems shall be taken over the top of the parapet and at least 150 mm down to the back of the wall to prevent the coating system from blistering or peeling off, unless the whole rear wall requires protection.
 (h) Use of Pore-Lining Penetrants to Resist Moisture Ingress for General Applications
 Pore-lining penetrants alone and in combination with decorative/anti-carbonation coatings may be applied to concrete surfaces which are characterized by the following nonconforming deficiencies subject to review and acceptance by the Superintendent:
 (i) inactive cracks of width equal to or less than 0.20 mm; (ii) deficiency in concrete cover to the steel reinforcement; (iii) VPV values exceeding the maximum allowable limits as stated in Table 610.061 of
 Section 610.
 The pore-lining penetrants shall comply with the requirements of Clause 686.05(c)(iii) and decorative/anti-carbonation coatings shall comply with the requirements of Clause 686.05(b).
 686.06 SURFACE PREPARATION
 (a) General
 The surface preparation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations for the coating system to be applied and as specified in this section.
 (b) Uncoated Concrete
 Concrete surfaces shall be dry unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent, and shall be free from oil (e.g. from release oils), grease, laitance and loose particles, remnants of curing compounds and organic contaminants (i.e. moss, algae etc). The concrete surface shall be prepared by high pressure jetting with potable water, either with or without added abrasive (i.e. up to 3000 psi or 20.7 MPa), steam cleaning, wire brushing, abrasion with angle grinder, or by other means to provide a strong, hard surface. Areas of persistent contamination shall be removed from the surface by the use of appropriate solvents or detergents followed by washing with potable water in accordance with AS 1627.1. Any abrasive blast cleaning shall be carried out in accordance with AS 1627.4 applicable work health and safety laws and appropriate regulations imposed by the local government authority and the EPA.
 Any blow holes, areas of honeycombing, loose surface layers and weak concrete, shrinkage cracks of width less than 0.2 mm or other defects, either revealed by a grinding process or exposed by other surface preparation methods, shall be filled with a suitable fairing coat cementitious repair material in accordance with the requirements of Section 689. If the surface of the concrete is weak, more material shall be removed and repaired in accordance with the requirements of Section 689. Such repairs shall be sufficient to result in a strong, sound substrate suitable for the intended protective or decorative coating system. Projecting fins, rough spots and sudden steps shall be removed by light abrasion with an angle grinder to provide a surface which can be easily coated.
 Inactive cracks of width equal to or greater than 0.20 mm shall be sealed by resin injection in accordance with Section 687. Active cracks equal to or greater than 0.20 mm shall be treated by methods approved by the Superintendent and in accordance with Section 687.
 A trial application to check the suitability of the surface, the surface preparation methods and other requirements shall be undertaken as set out in Clause 686.13.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 6 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Previously Painted Surfaces
 Previously painted surfaces shall be clean and sound. All traces of dust, dirt and other contaminants (i.e. oils, grease, etc.), peeling or loose coating shall be removed by suitable methods as stated in Clause 686.06(b) approved by the Superintendent. The compatibility and adhesion of the existing coating to the concrete surface shall be evaluated by the cross-cut adhesion test in accordance with AS 1580.408.4 and as stated in Clause 686.14.
 A trial application and adhesion testing shall be undertaken to establish the effectiveness of the bond between the existing and new coating in accordance with AS 1580.408.5 and Clauses 686.13 and 686.14.
 If the compatibility and adhesion tests prove unsatisfactory the existing coatings shall be removed and the concrete surface prepared appropriately to receive the new coating in accordance with Clause 686.06(b).
 686.07 METHOD OF APPLICATION
 (a) Dry Concrete Surfaces
 (i) General
 All concrete surfaces to receive a coating shall be dry at the time of application. Sufficient drying time shall be allowed after wet preparation methods to satisfy the requirements of Clause 686.14.
 The coating shall be applied following the manufacturer's recommended application methods, overcoating times and coverage rates, mixing requirements, current materials safety data sheets and as specified in this section. The coating may be applied by brush, spray, roller, hand/glove or other technique to achieve the desired surface finish. Coverage rates shall be checked for compliance with the manufacturer's requirements. The surface area of the concrete structure subject to application and the volume of coating used shall be recorded by the Contractor.
 The coating system shall be applied as soon as possible (i.e. within 24 hours unless otherwise expressed in writing by the manufacturer) after the preparation of the concrete surface. The prepared surface shall be protected against contamination if it is left uncoated for more than 24 hours.
 For multiple coat applications, the manufacturer's stated minimum and maximum overcoating times for the prevailing weather conditions shall be satisfied, and successive coats shall have slightly different colour shades to assist in achieving uniform coverage. The difference in colour shall be such that a coat when either wet or dry shall be clearly distinguishable by means of colour difference, from the preceding coat.
 No application of coatings shall be made if any of the conditions stated in Clause 686.11 exist.
 No coating shall be applied over any coat which contains application defects or any damage until such defects have been repaired.
 If the coating is too thin, or shows evidence of having been applied under unfavourable conditions, or the workmanship is poor, or the specified requirements are not fulfilled, the surface shall be re-treated to the extent required by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 7 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where the methods of application are unacceptable to the Superintendent because of undesirable effects such as over spray, spatter or significant disruption to the public, alternative methods shall be used.
 If, in the opinion of the Superintendent, conditions become unsatisfactory, work shall not be continued, and newly coated surfaces shall be protected with shelters from rain or other damage as approved by the Superintendent.
 Further to the other requirements of this clause pore-lining penetrants (i.e. silane, silane/siloxane, siloxane, solid silane or silane cream) shall be applied by an airless pump system with an operating pressure not exceeding 70 kPa in order to ensure that no atomization or misting of the material occurs. Application shall be carried out in a series of continuous operations. The material shall be applied by a continuous spray technique giving saturation flooding, working from the lowest level and proceeding upward toward higher elevations. The treated area shall have a `wet look' for a few seconds after application. Areas to be treated with a pore-lining penetrant shall, where necessary, be protected from adverse weather conditions and shall be surface dry for a minimum of 24 hours before application commences.
 Bearings, painted steel surfaces, plastic and joint sealants adjacent to members to be impregnated with a pore-lining penetrant shall be masked-off before impregnation.
 A trial application to check the suitability of the method of coating application shall be undertaken as set out in Clause 686.13.
 (ii) Specific Requirements
 All multi-part coating materials shall be mixed according to the coating material manufacturer's instructions. The components shall be mixed in the specified proportions. The specified reaction period shall be allowed from the time the components are mixed until the application begins. No coating material shall be excessively thinned and any thinners used shall be the correct type as specified by the material manufacturer. The coating material shall be strained as specified by the material manufacturer.
 No coating material shall be applied after its pot life has expired.
 Where quantities of coating material are being applied by spraying successive batches of premixed multi-part material, the equipment shall be flushed and purged with clean solvent after 2/3 of the pot life of the material has expired from either the mixing of the first batch or since the last purge and cleaning of the equipment. Coating material ingredients shall be kept properly mixed in the spray pots or container during the application of the material whether by continuous mechanical agitation or intermittent manual agitation as required.
 Where brush or roller techniques are used, the brushes or roller heads shall be used for the day only and then discarded. The equipment shall not be cleaned for re-use.
 All coating operations shall be performed in a neat and workmanlike manner by personnel with experience in the use of protective coatings and application methods.
 Each coat shall have the required colour, gloss and opacity.
 Each coat shall have the specified DFT. This film thickness shall be applied to all edges and corners. Coats which, in the opinion of the Superintendent, show excessive film builds shall be removed.
 Each coat shall be smooth, uniform and free from sags, runs, mud cracking, wrinkling, fat edges, blisters, pinholes, holidays, dry spray, entrapped foreign bodies and heavy brush marks.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 8 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Damp Concrete Surfaces Coatings for application on damp concrete substrates shall be specifically formulated for tolerance to moisture during application, curing and subsequent service. All concrete surfaces to receive coating shall be surface-dry at the time of application. Where this requirement is not satisfied, temporary protection shall be provided to encase the concrete and coating applicator and prevent moisture penetration, ensuring adequate ventilation is provided. Deposits of salt crystals which collect on coated surfaces shall be washed off with potable water and the surface allowed to dry, prior to further coating application. With the exception of the surface moisture condition of concrete the coating shall be applied in accordance with Clause 686.07(a).
 686.08 SPRAY EQUIPMENT
 The spray equipment shall be suitable for the work intended. It shall be capable of properly atomising the coating material to be applied and shall be equipped with accurate pressure regulators and gauges. The spray gun, nozzles and needles shall conform to the coating material manufacturer's recommendations for the coating to be applied. The spray equipment shall be kept in such condition to permit efficient and effective coating material application. An efficient air line filter shall be fitted as close as possible to the pressure pot to eliminate line condensate and oil in the air supply to the spray gun. The air of the spray gun impinging against the surface shall show no condensed water or oils.
 686.09 DRYING AND CURING
 The Contractor shall adhere to the manufacturer's instructions regarding drying and curing requirements, and overcoating time intervals, for the prevailing weather conditions.
 686.10 CLEAN UP AND PROTECTION OF WORKS AND PROPERTY
 The Contractor shall protect already painted or galvanized surfaces, services, bearings, joints, painted signs and nameplates during abrasive blasting operations or any other surface preparation process and during coating application processes.
 The Contractor shall remove all coating drips and droppings, smudges and over spray from all surfaces, including surfaces not being treated. The Contractor shall remove from the site all spent abrasive and all other rubbish accumulated during the work. The Contractor shall dispose of such wastes to the satisfaction of the Superintendent and by a means which conforms to Clauses 686.11(b) and 686.11(c).
 The Contractor shall ensure that the coated works are protected from adverse conditions, dust and debris during the curing period of the coating system in accordance with the requirements of Clause 686.11.
 HP No spray painting shall be carried out within ten (10) metres of buildings, footpaths, roadways, pedestrians or vehicles without protective measures or methods being used which shall be submitted to the Superintendent for approval, a minimum of two working days in advance of the proposed works.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 9 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 686.11 ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
 (a) General Coating systems shall not be applied under any of the following conditions: (i) windy conditions where over spray and/or spatter may be generated; (ii) when wind-borne debris is likely to contaminate the uncured surface of the freshly applied coating; (iii) when the ambient temperature exceeds 35C or is below 10C unless otherwise expressed in writing by the manufacturer; (iv) when the relative humidity exceed 85% or where it may be expected to exceed 85% during the subsequent 12 hour curing period; (v) when rain spatter or run-off, including leakage through deck joints, contaminating the surface and adversely affecting the adhesion to the substrate, may occur; (vi) when the substrate surface is wet or damp, unless the coating is specifically required to be applied on a damp concrete surface in accordance with the requirements of Clause 686.07(b); (vii) the surface temperature of the substrate is less than 3C above the dew point calculated in accordance with AS/NZS 2312 (Fig. 8.1) or exceeds 40C. The environmental conditions shall be measured, recorded and assessed against the requirements above once every four hours of each shift. A calibrated commercially available hygrometer (psychrometer) or electronic climatic measuring gauge shall be used to determine the parameters which require readings (i.e. items (i), (iii), (iv), (vi) and (vii)).
 (b) Environmental Requirements The Contractor shall adhere to Environment Protection Authority and other local, state and federal government requirements with respect to how waste generated during surface preparation, coating application, and clean up will be collected, segregated, handled, controlled and disposed of.
 (c) Disposal of Waste Materials Waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the Contractor that are acceptable to the Environment Protection Authority and other relevant authorities. Liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of in creeks, waterways or the stormwater drainage systems.
 686.12 COATING MATERIAL, HANDLING AND STORAGE
 Materials shall remain in their original, sealed containers until the time of use and shall be stored in strict accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Storage facilities shall provide protection from the elements and be safe and secure. Relevant warning signs shall be displayed.
 All material shall be brought to site in the original unopened cans clearly labelled with the manufacturer's name, product type, reference and batch numbers.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 10 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall provide a certificate from the manufacturer for each batch of coating and primer material confirming: (a) manufacturer's name and address; (b) product reference; (c) batch number of identification; (d) quantity manufactured in the batch; and (e) date of manufacture.
 The Contractor shall maintain records showing which elements were treated with each coating batch. These records shall be handed over to the Superintendent before the Date of Practical Completion.
 Materials stored beyond the manufacturers recommended shelf-life shall not be used.
 All coating materials to be used on the works shall be free from contamination, gelling, drying out, heavy skin formation and severe segregation of ingredients.
 686.13 TRIAL APPLICATION
 A trial application of the coating system, including any primers and undercoats shall be conducted on a test area of the actual substrate of not less than 10 m or a test panel made from the same substrate, fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of coating work. The test area or test panel shall be prepared and coated by the Contractor to satisfy the requirements of Clauses 686.06, 686.07, 686.11, 686.14, and 686.15, and in accordance with the material manufacturer's recommendations.
 HP The Contractor shall not proceed with the full scale coating works until the trial coating application has been carried out and the outcomes reviewed and approved by the Superintendent.
 Actual coverage rates of the coating system shall be recorded, in order that due allowance may be made in the full scale application for rough, irregular or highly absorbent concrete substrate. Additional requirements or observations shall be recorded and considered for the full scale application.
 If the coating trial application is deemed by the Superintendent not to comply with the requirements of this section a further coating application shall be made until the performance criteria of this specification are met.
 In the event that the trial application is rejected, the Contractor shall remove and dispose of any work deemed as unacceptable by the Superintendent, submit a new proposal to rectify the deficiencies (including prequalification testing of any new materials/methods) and repeat the trial application as described above. Any delays caused through rejection shall not constitute justification for extension of time.
 686.14 TESTING BEFORE AND AFTER APPLICATION OF COATING The Contractor shall carry out testing in at least one 1 m2 test area in accordance with this clause.
 (a) Testing before Application All concrete surfaces prepared for coating shall be sampled and tested in accordance with the requirements of this section. Each sample of prepared concrete surface shall be tested as required for surface moisture condition, moisture content of concrete, environmental conditions and cross-cut adhesion of previously painted surfaces as specified in this section.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 11 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 At least one test per sample shall be carried out immediately prior to the commencement of each day's coating application to ensure that:
 (i) surface moisture conditions of concrete or other substrates satisfy the manufacturer's recommendations;
 (ii) moisture content of concrete and other substrates is free of water back pressure to satisfy the manufacturer's recommendations, in accordance with ASTM D4263-83:2012;
 (iii) the environmental conditions, as specified in Clause 686.11, are satisfied.
 For previously painted surfaces, the cross-cut adhesion of the existing coating shall be tested in accordance with AS 1580.408.4 and shall be deemed to be satisfactory, if 75% of the cross-cut surface remains attached to the concrete and provided the surface is free from cracking, blistering or heavy chalking.
 At least three measurements per sample of cross-cut adhesion shall be carried out for every 25 m of previously painted surface for the first 100 m and then at least three measurements per sample for every 100 m thereafter.
 (b) Testing after Application
 All applied coating shall be sampled and tested with calibrated equipment in accordance with the requirements of this section. Each sample of applied coating shall be tested as required for bond strength, WFT and DFT, amount of penetration of pore-lining penetrant and water absorption, as specified in this section.
 At least three measurements per sample of each of the following tests shall be carried out after the application of materials to demonstrate compliance with this section.
 (i) The bond strength to the substrate and between separate coats shall be tested using aluminium dollies with a minimum diameter of 50 mm in accordance with AS 1580.408.5. The bond strength shall be greater than 0.75 MPa, fourteen (14) days after the application and curing process.
 (ii) The WFT of the film forming coating measured in accordance with ASTM D4414 shall be as specified by the material manufacturer.
 (iii) The DFT measured in accordance with AS 1580.108.2 using a paint inspection gauge, shall not be less than 150 m (microns) and 200 m (microns) as specified in Table 686.051 of Clause 686.05(b) and Clause 686.05(c)(iii) respectively.
 The DFT of coatings may be measured using the coating remnants attached to the aluminium dollies from the adhesion testing provided the coating material remains intact and the correct frequency of testing is satisfied in accordance with the requirements of Clause 686.14(c).
 Not more than 15% of all measurements from all test samples of DFT shall be less than 90% of the minimum specified thickness.
 (iv) Where a coating system is applied to resist the ingress of moisture and chloride ions, the water absorption value shall not exceed 0.01 ml m-2 sec-1 at 10 minutes, in accordance with the Initial Surface Absorption Test (ISAT), as set out in BS 1881, Part 5, when tested fourteen (14) days after the application and curing process.
 (v) Where a pore-lining penetrant is applied, the amount of penetration shall be determined on concrete cores 50 mm in diameter x 50 mm deep in accordance with an acceptable national or international standard and shall not be less than that specified in Clause 686.05(c)(iii). A fugitive dye shall be used to enable clear differentiation between the treated and untreated depths of concrete.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 12 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (vi) For previously painted surfaces, pull-off testing shall be made in accordance with this clause and AS 1580.408.5, fourteen (14) days after application and curing, and adhesion shall be deemed to be satisfactory if adhesion failure of three dollies attached to the new coating, occurs at the interface of the concrete substrate and the existing coating.
 (c) Location and Frequency of Sampling and Testing after Application of Coating Sampling and testing in accordance with Clause 686.14(b) shall be undertaken in at least one 1 m test area for every 50 m on completion of the application of the final coat of the protective or decorative coating system and the application of the pore-lining penetrant.
 686.15 INSPECTION AND TESTING
 The Contractor shall undertake all inspection and testing as specified in this clause and Clause 686.14. The Contractor shall maintain all required quality documentation including inspection reports, records of environmental conditions and test results as specified in this section and Section 160 for all stages of the work.
 The work shall be inspected for defects by the Contractor at each stage of the coating operation as a minimum, i.e. after surface preparations, prior to each coat and after final top coat application and any touch-up coats that may be required. The surface to be coated shall be clean and free of defects. When applied the coating shall be free of lumps, bubbles, inclusions, ripples, sags, runs, air holes and other film faults.
 For the purpose of surveillance and audits as specified in Clause 160.A10, the Contractor shall give the Superintendent five (5) days written notice of its intention to coat the concrete and shall provide adequate access to enable surveillance of the Works by the Superintendent.
 686.16 APPROPRIATE TIMINGS FOR APPLICATION OF COATINGS
 (a) Newly Constructed Cast In-Situ Concrete/Non-Accelerated Cured Precast Concrete Protective or decorative coating systems shall be applied no earlier than twenty-eight (28) days after concrete has been placed.
 (b) Steam or Radiant Heat Cured Concrete Application of coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen (14) days after concrete has been placed.
 (c) Repaired Concrete Where concrete repairs have been completed with proprietary cementitious materials, the application of coatings shall be carried out no earlier than fourteen (14) days after completion of repair. Where normal concrete is used for repair, coatings shall be applied no earlier than twenty-eight (28) days after the completion of repair.
 Coating application may be undertaken earlier if it can be established using a commercially available calibrated moisture meter, that the concrete moisture content is less than 10%, but no earlier than 50% of the time periods stated in (a), (b) and (c) above, and provided the concrete surface is dry at the time of application
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 13 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 686.17 COATING REPAIRS Should any of the coating application work not comply with the provisions of this specification then the areas concerned shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Such repair work may include removal of the coating, followed by surface preparation and application of a new coating. The procedure for any repair work shall be reviewed by the Superintendent. For the purpose of this clause, non-complying work shall include coating failure due to yellowing, loss of adhesion, and colour change during the contract liability period. All areas of coatings damaged by the Contractor during its operation shall be made good to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 686.18 REQUIREMENTS FOR FUTURE MAINTENANCE OF COATINGS The Contractor shall provide the manufacturer's recommendations as follows: (a) The methods of preparation to be used in the event that re-coating of the coated surface is
 required. (b) Which types of coating, other than the original product, are compatible with the finish coat
 for re-coating purposes. (c) The technique which can be used to repair local damage to the coating, with particular
 reference to colour and gloss matching of finish coats applied after a time lapse of 5 years. The most appropriate techniques for cleaning of the finish coat to remove surface soiling, with particular reference to ease of removal of graffiti or glued posters, where possible, without damage to the existing finish.
 686.19 CONTRACTOR COMPETENCY The coatings application supervisor and sub-contractors undertaking this work shall have a minimum of 5 years experience and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of protective coatings. All application personnel undertaking this work shall also have a minimum of 2 years experience. The coatings application supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during coating work. Application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the coating to be applied. Documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience, qualification, skills and training of all personnel and sub-contractors.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 686 (Page 14 of 14)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 687 - REPAIR OF CONCRETE CRACKS
 ##This section cross-references Sections 168, 176, 686 and 689. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 687.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply and quality of materials, surface preparation, application, relevant testing and acceptance criteria for the repair of cracks in concrete.
 Repair of cracks shall not be undertaken unless the cracked concrete structure has been assessed and the influence of cracks on load bearing capacity, serviceability and durability has been evaluated by the Contractor, and reviewed by the Superintendent.
 A crack repair method shall be selected based on the assessment of the cause(s) of the crack, crack width, the moisture condition of the crack and whether a crack is active or inactive prior to any repair works taking place. The crack repair method shall also include details of the crack filling material properties, location, local environment, likely crack behaviour, effect on load capacity, serviceability and durability, surface preparation and method of application.
 Crack repair methods and crack filling materials other than those specified in this section shall not be used unless their suitability has been demonstrated by the Contractor and reviewed by the Superintendent.
 687.02 STANDARDS
 All strength requirements of crack filling materials shall be tested in accordance with the following standard:
 BS 6319 Testing of resin and polymer/cement compositions for use in construction
 687.03 DEFINITIONS
 Active cracks: Live cracks, which are subject to further movement (i.e. opening up).
 Coating over cracks: Application of coatings with a crack bridging capability.
 Crack filling material: A resin (or resin adhesive or adhesive) or sealant applied into a crack for the purpose of filling and closing the crack.
 Entry port: A device or passageway in the surface seal through which the resin adhesive is introduced into a crack.
 Flexible sealing: Use of suitable flexible sealants to seal active cracks in the same manner as flexible joints.
 Gravity feed: Filling and sealing of horizontally positioned cracks using low viscosity resins by pouring and spreading onto surface or placing into purposely formed reservoirs.
 Inactive cracks: Dormant or dead cracks , which do not open, close or extend further.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 1 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Resin (or resin adhesive or adhesive): The crack filling material that is injected or introduced into a crack for the purpose of re-bonding the separated edges to allow the transfer of tensile stress across the crack.
 Resin injection: Crack filling under pressure using a selected polymer resin adhesive such as epoxy or polyurethane to restore structural soundness and penetrability of concrete where cracks are inactive or can be prevented from moving further.
 Routing and sealing: Enlarging the crack along its exposed face and filling with a suitable joint sealant to produce a repair method for cracks that are inactive and not structurally significant.
 Sealant: The crack filling material that has adhesive and cohesive properties that forms a seal to prevent the ingress of liquid or gases into the concrete.
 Stitching of cracks: Anchoring of U-shaped metal legs in predrilled holes on both sides of cracks to restore the tensile strength of the crack affected concrete.
 Surface Seal: Material used to confine the injection adhesive in the fissure during injection and cure.
 687.04 CONTRACTOR COMPETENCY
 Personnel, sub-contractors and suppliers used in repair of concrete cracks shall have a minimum of five years experience in the repair and rehabilitation of reinforced concrete structures and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of the crack filling material to be applied.
 The concrete crack repair supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during repair work. Application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the crack repair material to be applied.
 Documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience, qualification, skills and training of personnel, sub-contractors and suppliers.
 687.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CRACK FILLING MATERIALS
 The properties of the crack filling material and the characteristics of the equipment to be used shall be specifically allowed for by the Contractor when assessing crack repair methods.
 The crack filling material shall possess the following properties:
 (a) Resin Injection (i) Viscosity @ 20C  Maximum 300 centipoise (ii) Compressive strength (BS 6319) @ minimum at 7 days  60 MPa
 (iii) Tensile strength (BS 6319) @ minimum at 7 days  25 MPa (iv) Flexural strength (BS 6319) @ minimum at 7 days  50 MPa (v) Adhesive strength at the crack edges @ minimum at 7 days  2.5 MPa or failure in
 concrete whichever occurs first.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 2 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Routing or Sealing, Nipple Placement, Gravity Feed or Stitching (i) Compressive strength (BS 6319) @ minimum at 7 days  60 MPa (ii) Tensile strength (BS 6319) @ minimum at 7 days  25 MPa
 (iii) Flexural strength (BS 6319) @ minimum at 7 days  30 MPa.
 (c) Flexible Sealing for Live or Active Cracks
 The flexible sealant shall provide for a minimum expectant movement of  25%.
 Materials shall not be used when the ambient temperature is below 5C or is 5C on a falling thermometer or is above 35C. The crack filling material shall be compatible with all materials with which it is intended to come into contact.
 687.06 EQUIPMENT
 (a) General
 Equipment used for the filling of cracks shall ensure an adequate, uninterrupted flow of the crack filling material until capillary suction has ceased, and shall be capable of filling the cracks as detailed in the manufacturer's requirements .
 (b) Equipment for Injection
 Equipment for injection shall have the following characteristics:  easy to handle with simple function checking  pressure regulation or limitation in the operating range of the injection equipment  simple cleaning and maintenance. Equipment for multi-component injection such as special purpose twin-metering pumps shall also satisfy the following requirements:
 (i) Type The equipment used to meter and mix the two injection adhesive components and inject the mixed adhesive into the crack shall be portable, with positive displacement type pumps with interlock to provide positive ratio control of exact proportions of the two components at the nozzle. The pumps shall be electrically powered and shall provide inline metering and mixing. The equipment shall have high dosing accuracy throughout all temperature ranges.
 (ii) Discharge Pressure The injection equipment shall have automatic pressure control capable of discharging the mixed adhesive at any pre-set pressure up to 550 5 kPa and shall be equipped with a manual pressure control override.
 (iii) Ratio Tolerance The equipment shall have the capability of maintaining the volume ratio for the injection adhesive prescribed by the manufacturer of the adhesive within a tolerance of 5% by volume at any discharge pressure up to 550 kPa.
 (iv) Automatic Shut-Off Control The injection equipment shall be equipped with sensors on both component reservoirs that will automatically stop the machine when one component is being pumped to the mixing head.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 3 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Injection Fittings and Surface Seal Bonded-on injection fittings or injection fittings placed in drilled holes in conjunction with Vgrooving of the cracks may be used. Where hole drilling is undertaken care shall be taken to ensure that the reinforcement is not damaged. Parts of injection fittings remaining in the structure shall be made of rustproof materials. The surface seal material shall have adequate strength to hold injection fittings firmly in place and to resist injection pressure adequately to prevent leakage during injection. Suitable rapid-curing repair materials for after-sealing shall be kept ready for use where poor sealing is identified.
 687.07 MATERIAL MIXING AND APPLICATION
 All materials shall be mixed and applied in accordance with the directions for use issued by the manufacturer.
 687.08 SURFACE PREPARATION
 Cracks and surfaces located a minimum of 50 mm either side of cracks on all areas of application shall be cleaned of all loose particles, dirt, dust, grease, oil, paints, curing compounds or efflorescence using appropriate methods (i.e. oil-free compressed air, industrial vacuum cleaners or flushing with high pressure water). Impurities, which inhibit wetting and adhesion or penetration by the crack filling material, shall be removed.
 Cracks and crack zones shall be allowed to dry thoroughly for a minimum of 24 hours or dried out by accelerated means prior to the application of materials, unless such materials are water tolerant.
 687.09 RESIN INJECTION OF CRACKS
 (a) General The Contractor shall submit all details of crack filling procedure for review by the Superintendent 14 days prior to commencement of the Works.
 (b) Materials Cold curing, two component, solvent free, unfilled epoxy or polyurethane resin adhesives may be used to seal cracks.
 (c) Execution of the Works (i) General Each crack shall be treated in a single continuous operation and shall be filled completely. The Contractor shall comply with the temperature ranges for application and any other material specific constraints specified in the directions for use by the manufacturer. Where water-bearing cracks are to be sealed, rapid-foaming polyurethane shall, where necessary, be injected to provide temporary sealing prior to injection of the cold-curing resin. Where cement paste is used, dry or moist crack edges shall be wetted thoroughly.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 4 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where re-injection is required, this shall be carried out within the temperaturedependent period of the crack filling material given in the directions for use by the manufacturer. At high ambient temperatures, the use of cooling to influence the workability time of materials in containers is permissible.
 The injection pressure used shall be commensurate with the equipment and materials used, to ensure that cracks are completely filled without leaving voids.
 (ii) Preparation
 (1) Surface preparation shall be undertaken in accordance with Clause 687.08.
 (2) Injection entry ports shall be provided along the crack at intervals of not greater than 200 mm.
 Where a concrete component such as a wall or slab is cracked all the way through, the injection entry ports shall be located on both sides where access is possible. The injection entry ports at the reverse face shall be placed midway between those at the front.
 Where cracks can only be sealed on one side only, injection entry ports shall be placed at intervals which are 50% of the depth to which the resin is required to penetrate or not greater than 200 mm, whichever is the lesser.
 (3) Apply surface seal material to the face of the crack between the entry ports. Surface seal material shall also be applied to the reverse face of cracks where accessible.
 (4) Resin injection shall not proceed until the surface seal material has achieved adequate strength in accordance with the manufacturer's directions for use.
 (iii) Resin Injection
 (1) For vertical cracks injection of resin adhesive shall begin at the lowest entry port and continue until there is an appearance of resin adhesive at the next entry port adjacent to the entry port being pumped. Where resin adhesive drains out of vertical cracks in retaining walls or foundation walls due to the inability to seal the earth backfill side or the bottom of slabs, such cracks shall be re-injected until they are full and remain full.
 For horizontal cracks, the injection shall proceed from one end of the crack to the other. For horizontal cracks, which are on grade, the crack shall be re-injected until the crack is full to compensate for any resin adhesive which may drain away due to the grade.
 Where a concrete component such as a wall or slab is cracked all the way through, the resin shall be injected through alternate entry ports on both sides where access is possible. For slabs, injection from the underside shall precede injection from the top.
 (2) When resin adhesive travel is indicated by appearance at the next adjacent port, injection shall be discontinued and the entry port capped, and the resin injection shall be transferred to the next adjacent port where the resin adhesive has appeared.
 (3) Resin adhesive injection shall be performed continuously until cracks are completely filled.
 (4) If port to port travel of resin adhesive is not indicated, the work shall cease immediately and the Superintendent notified.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 5 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 687.10 ROUTING AND SEALING
 (a) Materials
 Cold curing, two component, solvent free, epoxy or polyurethane sealants or silicones, polysulphides or asphaltic materials may be used to seal cracks. Cement grouts shall not be used for this type of crack repair. Sealants shall be able to withstand cyclic deformations and shall not be brittle. Flexible sealants used for the repair of active cracks shall be capable of accommodating the anticipated movement.
 (b) Execution of the Works
 (i) Inactive or Dormant Cracks
 The crack shall be chased and a V-shaped groove with a minimum surface width of 10 mm and depth of 10 mm shall be formed to act as the sealant reservoir. The groove shall be prepared and cleaned in accordance with Clause 687.08. The sealant shall be placed into the dry groove and allowed to cure in accordance with the material manufacturer's specified directions. No routing of cracks shall be undertaken on prestressed concrete components unless the depth of concrete cover has been established.
 (ii) Flexible Sealing for Live or Active Cracks
 A rectangular reservoir with a minimum width to depth ratio of 2:1 or as required by the material manufacturer's directions shall be cut out on top of the active crack and prepared in accordance with Clause 687.08. A bond-breaking polyethylene tape or equivalent shall be placed over the crack at the bottom of the reservoir prior to the application of the flexible sealant.
 687.11 GRAVITY FEED
 (a) Materials
 Cold curing, two component, solvent free, unfilled epoxy resin adhesives may be used to close cracks by gravity feed.
 (b) Execution of the works
 Filling and sealing of horizontally positioned cracks shall be executed by pouring and spreading suitable crack filling material onto the surface or placing into purposely formed reservoirs.
 (i) Pouring and Spreading onto Surface
 The crack filling material shall be poured onto the surface and spread with brooms rollers or squeegees. The material shall be worked back and forth over the cracks to obtain maximum filling. Excess material shall be broomed off the surface to prevent slick, shining areas after curing. The feeding of material to the crack shall be uninterrupted, throughout the temperature-dependent workability of the crack filling material, until no more material can be absorbed.
 (ii) Purposely Formed Reservoir
 A reservoir shall be formed by running a bead of silicone or acrylic sealant along both sides of the crack. The ends of both beads shall be formed together at the termination of the crack to form a reservoir. The edge of the sealant shall be a minimum of 5 mm away from the crack and its height shall be a minimum of 10 mm above the substrate. The crack filling material shall be poured into the reservoir and be topped up as its level drops. When the crack filling material in the reservoir starts to gel, both the excess resin and the sealant reservoir shall be scraped off.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 6 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 687.12 COATING OVER OF SHALLOW CRACKS Inactive cracks with a width of less than 0.2 mm may be coated over with a protective coating system, provided such cracks are not associated with earth or water retaining concrete components. Protective coating systems including their mixing and application shall satisfy all requirements of Section 686. Active or live cracks of width equal to or greater than 0.2 mm shall be repaired in accordance with Clause 687.10 prior to coating over. Inactive or dormant cracks of width equal to or greater than 0.2 mm shall be repaired in accordance the requirements of this section prior to coating over. Protective coatings shall be compatible with any previously applied crack fillers or sealers.
 687.13 STITCHING OF CRACKS This crack repair method shall be used where restoration of the tensile strength is required across major cracks. Holes shall be drilled on both sides of the crack, cleaned in accordance with Clause 687.08 and U-shaped metal legs (stitching) anchored in the holes with an epoxy resin based bonding system. The stitching metal legs shall be variable in length and orientation, and they shall be located such that the tension across the crack is distributed over an area in the concrete and not concentrated on a single plane within a section. Such cracks shall also be sealed in accordance with this section.
 687.14 QUALITY CONTROL FOR RESIN INJECTION
 (a) Low Pressure Injection Resin injection, which utilises proprietary injection kits, modified grease guns or sealant guns shall continue until firm and sustained hand pressure on the gun trigger signifies that no further resin can be accepted in the crack.
 (b) Multi-component Injection (i) Pressure Test The mixing head of the injection equipment shall be disconnected and the two-adhesive component delivery lines shall be attached to the pressure check device. The pressure check device shall consist of two independent valved nozzles capable of controlling flow rate and pressure by opening or closing the valve. There shall be a pressure gauge capable of sensing the pressure build-up behind each valve. The valves on the pressure check device shall be closed and the equipment operated until the gauge pressure on each line reads 550 kPa. The pumps shall be stopped and the gauge pressure shall not drop below 515 kPa within three minutes. The pressure test shall be undertaken twice a day for each injection unit, at the beginning and half way mark when the unit is used in the crack repair work.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 7 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (ii) Ratio Test The mixing head of the injection equipment shall be disconnected and the two-adhesive components shall be pumped simultaneously through the ratio check device. The ratio check device shall consist of two independent valved nozzles capable of controlling backpressure by opening or closing the valve. There shall be a pressure gauge capable of sensing the backpressure behind each valve. The discharge pressure shall be adjusted to 550 kPa for both adhesive components. Both adhesive components shall be simultaneously discharged into separate calibrated containers. The amounts discharged into the calibrated containers during the same time period shall be compared to determine that the volume discharged conforms to the manufacturers specified directions.
 (iii) Proof of Ratio and Pressure Test The Contractor shall maintain complete and accurate records of the pressure and ratio tests for review by the Superintendent.
 687.15 CURING AND FINISHING
 (a) When cracks are completely filled, resin adhesive shall be cured for sufficient time in accordance with the material manufacturer specified directions, to allow removal of surface seal without any draining or runback of resin material from cracks.
 (b) Surface seal material and injection adhesive runs or spills shall be removed from concrete surfaces.
 (c) The face of the crack shall be finished flush to the adjacent concrete showing no indentations or protrusions caused by the placement of surface sealant or entry ports.
 (d) Where protective or decorative coating systems are required these shall satisfy all requirements of Section 686.
 687.16 VERIFICATION OF DEPTH OF PENETRATION OF CRACK FILLING MATERIAL
 The Contractor shall extract at a minimum of seven days after completion of crack repair works a sample of two 75 mm diameter cores from the first 25 m of crack repair works and thereafter for every 50 m or part thereof, to verify the depth of penetration of the crack filling material. The core samples shall be extracted at locations jointly determined by the Contractor and the Superintendent's Representative and shall be inspected by the Superintendent's representative, to verify that the crack filling material has penetrated to the full depth of the crack.
 Core samples shall be located with a calibrated cover meter capable of detecting the presence of steel reinforcement with an accuracy of 1 mm at a depth of 25 mm, to avoid cutting through the reinforcing steel. Drilling cores in areas of high stress, or creating core holes below the waterline shall be avoided.
 The Contractor shall obtain the approval of the Superintendent prior to undertaking any extraction of core samples.
 If the Contractor fails to adequately verify the depth of penetration of the crack filling material it shall extract additional 75 mm diameter cores at its own expense. Alternatively, the Contractor may at its own expense use non-destructive test (NDT) methods such as Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity (UPV), Impact Echo (IE) or Spectral Analysis of Surface Waves (SASW) to establish the extent of penetration of resin adhesive into the cracks.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 8 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall supply for review by the Superintendent a copy of all depth of penetration testing including photographic records within one week of undertaking such verification testing. The cored holes shall be cleaned and repaired with a suitable shrinkage compensating cementitious repair material in accordance with the requirements of Section 689. The exposed surface of the repaired hole shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete. Should the crack filling material not penetrate the full depth of the crack, the Contractor shall carry out rectification works. These works shall achieve the specified level of durability, otherwise the concrete works represented by that sample may be rejected.
 687.17 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT (a) Occupational Health and Safety Requirements
 Further to the requirements of Section 168, the Contractor shall include within its Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan, specific provisions for the material manufacturer's occupational health and safety directions and the Work Health and Safety Act, Regulations and Codes of Practice. All material safety data sheets (MSDS) shall be kept on site at all times and be readily available. (b) Environmental Management Requirements Further to the requirements of Section 176, the Contractor shall include within its Environmental Management Plan, specific provisions regarding the collection, segregation, handling, control and disposal of waste generated during repair of concrete cracks, and clean up. Waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the Contractor that are acceptable to the EPA and other relevant authorities. Liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of in creeks, waterways or the stormwater drainage systems.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 687 (Page 9 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 688 - FIBRE REINFORCED POLYMER COMPOSITE STRENGTHENING OF CONCRETE STRUCTURES
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 160, 175, 630, 631, 685, 686, 687 and 689. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 688.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply and quality of materials, surface preparation, trial and permanent installation, relevant inspection and testing and acceptance criteria for the strengthening of concrete structures using Fibre Reinforced Polymer Composite (FRPC) strengthening systems.
 The application of anti-graffiti and anti-carbonation coatings, crack repairs and cementitious patch repairs of concrete which may be required as part of the FRPC strengthening system installation work shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of Sections 685, 686, 687 and 689.
 
 688.02 STANDARDS
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS 1627
 
 Metal finishing - Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces  Method selection guide
 
 AS/NZS 2312 Guide to the protection of structural steel against atmospheric corrosion by the use of protective coatings.
 
 (b) VicRoads Codes of Practices
 
 RC 500.16
 
 Code of Practice for Selection of Test Methods for the Testing of Materials and Work.
 
 (c) VicRoads Test Methods
 
 RC 252.02
 
 Determination of the Tensile Bond Strength of Concrete Repairs and Strengthening Systems.
 
 (d) Additional Documents
 
 BS 6319
 
 Testing of resin and polymer/cement compositions for use in construction
 
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 
 688.03 DEFINITIONS
 Fibre Reinforced Polymer Composite (FRPC): FRPC repair and strengthening systems are a combination of fibre reinforcing material and resins such as epoxies and other adhesive materials, which can act as a composite to enhance the capacity and extend the life of concrete structures. The role of the resin is to provide the adhesive bond onto the concrete surface and facilitate the transfer of stresses to and from the fibres.
 Fibre Reinforcing Polymer Material (FRPM): Carbon, aramid or glass fibres which are used to formulate the various types of fibre reinforced polymer plates, strips, sheets and fabric materials by impregnating or saturating with a resin matrix such as epoxies and other adhesive materials as part of a complete manufacturing process.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 688.04 MATERIALS
 (a) General
 HP The Contractor shall submit details of the proposed FRPC strengthening system including information on the proposed resins, primers, patties, saturants, adhesives and reinforcing fibres, substrate preparation, method of application, equipment, and operators to the Superintendent for review not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of the FRPC strengthening works. FRPC strengthening and repair works shall not take place until the Contractor's proposed materials and procedures have been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 All constituent materials used for the FRPC strengthening systems shall be tested to national or international standard test methods.
 (b) Material Properties
 The constituent materials used for the FRPC strengthening system shall include all compatible resins, primers, patties, saturants, adhesives and reinforcing fibres as required. All property and strength requirements of resin and adhesive materials shall be determined from testing in accordance with BS 6319.
 All FRPC materials shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, material safety data sheets, and as specified in this section.
 Material details shall include documented evidence of previous performance, relevant test results and certificates of compliance traceable to the proposed FRPC strengthening system(s), which shall not be more than twenty-four (24) months old.
 The FRPC materials shall have the following properties:
 (i) Carbon Fibre Laminate (Carbon Fibre Reinforced with Epoxy Matrix)
 The carbon fibre laminate material shall be a pre-fabricated, pultruded section, specifically designed for adding tensile strength as part of a compatible, load transferring, bonded system.
 The carbon fibre laminate shall possess the following properties: (1) Available in a range of modulii and strength grades, widths and thicknesses (2) Elastic Modulus not less than 165,000 MPa (3) Tensile Strength not less than 2,400 MPa (4) Elongation at Break not less than 1.2% (5) Volumetric fibre fraction of not less than 68% (6) Temperature Resistance - between 150C and 500C (7) Glass Transition Point (Tg)  minimum temperature value of 62C.
 (ii) Carbon Fibre Fabric (High Strength Carbon Fibres)
 The fibre fabric materials shall be pre-woven into sheets, specifically designed for adding strength as part of a compatible, load transferring, bonded system.
 The fibre fabric material shall possess the following properties: (1) Elastic Modulus not less than 200,000 MPa (2) Tensile Strength not less than 2,400 MPa (3) Elongation at Break not less than 1.6% (4) thickness for static design not less than 0.055 mm (per 100 g/m) (5) Fibre density not less than 1.6 g/m.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 2 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iii) Adhesive for Carbon Fibre Laminate
 The adhesives shall be a thixotropic paste used to bond FRPC laminate systems to the concrete substrate and provide the required shear load path between the concrete substrate and the FRPC reinforcing laminate.
 Adhesives shall also be used to bond together multiple layers of FRPC laminates where required.
 The adhesive for the carbon fibre laminate shall possess the following properties: (1) Adhesive Strength not less than 3.5 MPa or concrete failure (2) Shear Strength not less than 14 MPa or concrete failure (3) Compressive Strength not less than 55 MPa at 7 days (4) Tensile Strength not less than 24 MPa at 7 days (5) Static E-Modulus not less than 9,500 MPa (6) Coefficient of Thermal Expansion not more than 9 x 10-5 per C (7) Ability to be built up to 20 mm thickness without additional filler (8) Glass Transition Point (Tg) - minimum temperature value of 62C.
 (iv) Saturating Resin (for Carbon Fibre Fabric)
 The saturating resin shall be used to impregnate the reinforcing fibre fabric to fix it in place and shall be capable of providing a shear load path to effectively transfer the load between fibres.
 The saturating resin shall also serve as the adhesive for wet lay-up systems, and shall be capable of providing a shear load path between the previously primed concrete substrate and the FRPC system.
 The saturating resin shall possess the following properties: (1) Adhesive Strength not less than 1.5 MPa or failure in concrete (2) Tensile Strength not less than 24 MPa at 7 days (3) Flexural E-Modulus not less than 3,500 MPa (cured at 7 days) (4) Flexural Strength not less than 35 MPa at 7 days (5) Compressive Strength not less 60 MPa at 7 days (6) Viscosity not greater than 2,500 cps @ 25C (unless part of a compatible carbon
 fibre fabric strengthening system) (7) Application Temperature between 5C and 35C for both ambient and the
 substrate.
 (v) General Resin Requirements
 Resins used as part of FRPC strengthening systems including primers, putty fillers, saturants and adhesives shall also have the following characteristics: (1) compatibility with and adhesion to the concrete substrate; (2) compatibility with and adhesion to the FRPC system; (3) resistance to in-service environmental effects, including but not be limited to
 moisture, salt water, temperature extremes and chemicals normally associated with exposed concrete; (4) filling ability; (5) workability; (6) pot life consistent with the application; (7) compatibility with and adhesion to the reinforcing fibre; (8) development of appropriate mechanical properties for the FRPC.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (vi) Primer
 The primer shall be a very low viscosity resin used to penetrate the concrete surface and provide an improved adhesive bond for the saturating resin or adhesive. The primer shall have properties similar to the saturating resin in Clause 688.04(b)(iv).
 (vii) Putty Filler
 The levelling putty filler shall be a thixotropic paste used to fill small voids, including bug holes, in the concrete substrate, to provide a smooth surface to which the FRPC system bonds and also prevent bubbles from forming during curing of the saturating resin. The levelling putty filler shall have properties similar to the adhesive for carbon fibre laminate in Clause 688.04(b)(iii).
 (c) Handling and Storage of Materials
 Adhesives and other resins shall be stored in dry conditions not exposed to direct sunlight, in strict accordance with the material manufacturer's data sheet requirements and within the manufacturer's specified maximum and minimum temperature range. Materials shall remain in their original, sealed containers until time of use.
 All material shall be brought to site in the original unopened cans clearly labelled with the appropriate manufacturer's name, product type, reference number and batch number. Materials stored beyond the manufacturer's recommended shelf life shall not be used. The Contractor shall not incorporate into the works any product that is within 30 days of its expiry date and/or shelf life.
 The Contractor shall provide, for each batch of FRPC system material, a copy of the manufacturer's information as specified below:
 (i) manufacturer's name and address; (ii) product reference;
 (iii) batch number of identification;
 (iv) quantity manufactured in the batch;
 (v) certificate of date of manufacture.
 FRPC system materials including adhesives and resins shall be used in order of manufacture.
 FRPC plates, laminates or strips shall be supplied and stored on site such that damage or contamination does not occur. Plates, laminates and strips shall be free from unintended curves, bows, wraps, undulations or twists. Plates, laminates and strips shall be handled with clean gloves under dry conditions, and touching of ready for bonding surfaces without peel ply shall be avoided. Where FRPC materials are fitted with protective peel ply to ensure a clean surface, the ply shall be removed immediately prior to application and touching of the surface shall be avoided.
 FRPC fabric sheets or rolls shall be kept free from any contamination. The FRPC fabric sheets shall be handled carefully and shall be free from wraps, twists or fibre misalignment. Any protective peel ply shall be removed immediately prior to application. They shall be stored either by being rolled to a radius greater than 400 mm or by being dry stacked after cutting and shall be protected from dust and moisture.
 All FRPC materials shall be checked for possible damage resulting from transportation, handling or incorrect cutting. Handling and preparation precautions shall be in accordance with the material manufacturer's recommendations and material data sheets.
 The Contractor shall maintain records showing which elements were treated with each batch of FRPC system material.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 688.05 SYSTEM INSTALLATION
 (a) Concrete Surface Preparation
 Concrete surfaces shall be dry unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent, and shall be free from all dust, oil (e.g. from release oils), grease, laitance and loose particles, remnants of curing compounds, waxes, coatings, impregnations, organic contaminants (i.e. moss, algae etc.) and other bond inhibiting materials. The concrete surface shall be prepared with wet or dry abrasive blasting, steam cleaning, wire brushing, abrasion with angle grinder, or by high pressure water jet blasting to provide a clean sound surface.
 Areas of persistent contamination shall be removed from the surface by the use of appropriate solvents or detergents followed by washing with potable water in accordance with AS 1627.1 and allowed to dry thoroughly.
 The surface preparation process shall be managed to ensure that all abrasive materials and debris emissions shall be contained, collected and removed from site and disposed of in compliance with Environment Protection Authority and Local Municipal Authority's requirements.
 Abrasive blasting shall be carried out in accordance with the applicable Work Health and Safety laws and appropriate regulations imposed by the local government authority and the EPA.
 Abrasive blast cleaning shall be carried out in accordance with AS 1627.4. Dust from the surface preparation shall be removed by blowing with dry compressed air or other suitable means. The surface shall be vacuumed before the application of the FRPC laminate.
 The surface layer of the concrete shall be removed to expose small particles of well-bound aggregate such that the roughness to be achieved lies between an amplitude of 0.5 mm to 1 mm, with a surface presenting similar to 60-grit sandpaper. The surface shall not be roughened excessively.
 HP Prior to the commencement of full-scale surface preparation procedures, the Contractor shall first prepare a representative sample area to be approved by the Superintendent. The sample area shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this section and shall be used as a reference standard exhibiting a satisfactory prepared surface for the duration of the works.
 Any blow holes, areas of honeycombing, loose surface layers and weak concrete, cracks of width less than 0.20 mm or other defects, either revealed by a grinding process or exposed by other surface preparation methods, shall be filled with a suitable epoxy putty adhesive, compatible with the FRPC strengthening system to be applied. If the surface of the concrete is weak, more material shall be removed, and the amount removed and refilled shall be sufficient to result in a strong, sound substrate suitable for the intended FRPC strengthening system. Where necessary, projecting fins, rough spots, sudden steps or other surface irregularities shall be ground to less than 1 mm by light abrasion with an angle grinder or filled with a suitable epoxy putty adhesive to provide a smooth concrete surface.
 Any breakouts or core holes shall be repaired with hand-applied polymer modified cementitious materials to the original surface profile and in accordance with the material manufacturer's recommendations. The polymer modified cementitious materials shall be compatible with the parent concrete, in terms of electrical resistivity and compressive strength.
 Where fibre fabric is to be wrapped around corners, the corners shall be rounded to a minimum radius of 25 mm to avoid local damage to the fabric.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The unevenness of the concrete substrate surface shall be such that the gap under a 2 m straightedge does not exceed 4 mm. The general unevenness with respect to a 0.3 m straightedge shall not exceed 1 mm. Any out of tolerance areas shall be rectified with a suitable rapid setting leveling putty filler.
 Inactive cracks of width equal to or greater than 0.20 mm in both the FRPC strengthened and non-strengthened surfaces of the specified works shall be sealed by resin injection in accordance with Section 687. Active cracks equal to or greater than 0.20 mm shall be treated by methods approved by the Superintendent and in accordance with Section 687.
 Cementitious repairs undertaken in accordance with the requirements of Section 689 shall be cured for at least 14 days prior to undertaking any FRPC strengthening application.
 FRPC strengthening system application may be undertaken earlier than 14 days, but no earlier than 7 days, if it can be established using a commercially available calibrated moisture meter that the moisture content of cementitious repairs is less than 10%, and provided the concrete surface is dry at the time of application. A trial application of the overall FRPC system to check the suitability of the surface, the surface preparation method, method of application and other requirements shall be undertaken as set out in Clause 688.06.
 (b) Primer and Epoxy Putty Requirements
 Where the FRPC strengthening system requires the use of a primer to seal the surface, it shall be uniformly applied to all areas of the prepared concrete surface using brush or roller, in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and specified rate of coverage. Airless spray equipment can be used provided thorough back rolling is undertaken to work the primer into the concrete surface.
 Compatible epoxy putty shall only be used to fill voids, smooth surface discontinuities and treat minor imperfections prior to the application of other materials. Rough edges or lines of cured putty shall be ground smooth prior to proceeding with the installation. The putty shall have rapid strength gain characteristics which enable over-bonding to be carried out after a short time and shall be capable of being applied in thin layers where required.
 Prior to applying the adhesive or the saturating resin the primer and putty filler shall be allowed to cure for the required period in accordance with the material manufacturer's specified requirements, to ensure satisfactory adhesion at the interface of the two materials. Where the primer and putty filler are completely cured, additional surface preparation may be required prior to the application of the saturating resin or adhesive consistent with the FRPC strengthening system compatibility requirements.
 (c) Mixing of Resins
 The mixing of resins shall be in accordance with the FRPC system manufacturer's recommended procedures including recommended batch sizes, mix ratios, mixing methods, mixing times, current material safety data sheets, and as specified in this section. The ambient temperature of all resin components shall be between 10C and 30C at the time of mixing. Resin and hardeners shall be mixed together in the correct proportions and required mixing times until there is a uniform, homogeneous mixing of components and colour streaks are eliminated. No excess material shall be left in the individual component containers.
 Resin components shall be mixed using slow speed electrically powered mixing paddles. All mixed resin shall be used within the resin's specified pot life. Any resin remaining at the end of the specified pot life shall be discarded. Scales or volumetric equipment used shall be calibrated at 3-monthly intervals.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Drying and Curing Requirements
 The Contractor shall adhere to the manufacturer's instructions regarding drying and curing requirements, re-application time intervals for adhesives and other resins, and prevailing weather conditions.
 (e) Environmental Conditions
 FRPC strengthening systems shall not be applied under any one or more of the following conditions:
 (i) windy conditions where over spray and/or spatter may be generated;
 (ii) when wind-borne debris is likely to contaminate the uncured surface of the freshly applied coating;
 (iii) when the ambient temperature exceeds 30C or is below 5C unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the manufacturer;
 (iv) when the concrete surface temperature exceeds 35C;
 (v) when the concrete surface temperature is below 8C unless an appropriate heating method is in place
 (vi) when the relative humidity exceeds 85% unless an appropriate drying method is in place;
 (vii) when rain spatter or run-off, including leakage through deck joints, contaminating the surface and adversely affecting the adhesion to the substrate, may occur;
 (viii) when the surface temperature of the substrate is less than 3C above the dew point calculated in accordance with AS 2312 (Fig. 8.1);
 (ix) when the moisture content of the concrete or cementitious repairs exceeds 10%;
 (x) when the surface moisture condition of the concrete is not dry and it does not satisfy the manufacturer's recommendations.
 The environmental conditions shall be measured, recorded and assessed against the requirements above once every four hours of each shift. A calibrated commercially available hygrometer (psychrometer) or electronic climatic measuring gauge shall be used to determine the parameters which require readings (i.e. items (i), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (viii)).
 (f) Application of Plates, Laminates or Strips
 The bonding surface of the FRPC plate, laminate or strip shall be thoroughly cleaned and where required abraded lightly as per the manufacturer's recommendations prior to application. Where cutting of the FRPC laminate is required, it shall be installed securely to prevent any longitudinal splitting.
 The adhesive shall be applied to the prepared bonding concrete surface as a thin layer by means of a notched steel trowel or equivalent immediately after mixing. The adhesive shall cover the whole of the bonding area and shall be maintained at a thickness in the range of 1 mm to 2 mm. A further adhesive layer shall be applied to the cleaned and fully dried FRPC plate, laminate or strip to form a dome profile across the plate with 3 mm of adhesive material in the centre and 1 mm on the edges.
 The FRPC plate, laminate or strip shall be brought into contact and lightly pressed with the fingers onto the prepared bonding area. The FRPC material shall be further pressed on with a hard rubber roller until the extra adhesive is squeezed out along the sides. The roller pressure shall be applied from the centre going to the outer edge such that no voids are formed between the laminate and the concrete substrate surface. The excess adhesive shall be removed. The layer thickness of the final adhesive along the bond line of the laminate shall be a minimum of 1.5 mm and a maximum of 3 mm.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Adhesive residues on the laminate surface shall be removed with a compatible chemical remover prior to hardening.
 Where required, additional parallel FRPC plates, laminates or strips shall be applied at a minimum distance of 5 mm from the adjacent FRPC material.
 Where FRPC plates, laminates or strips are lapped, the minimum overlap, in the longitudinal fibre direction, shall be 200 mm.
 If temporary support of the FRPC plate, laminate or strip is required to be retained in position then the FRPC system shall be fully cured before removing the support.
 (g) Application of Fabric Sheets
 The saturating resin or bonding adhesive shall be uniformly applied to saturate the concrete surface using hand-held foam roller, brush or scraper at the coverage rates specified in the material manufacturer's data sheet to ensure adhesion of the fabric material. The fabric sheets shall be cut to the prescribed sizes using suitable cutters. The FRPC sheets shall be applied to the resin-saturated concrete surface by pressing manually onto the adhesive such that it is stretched by avoiding any wrinkles or the introduction of voids. The surface of the fabric shall be rolled over the backing paper to force the impregnation of the resin into the fabric material. Rolling shall be in the longitudinal direction of the fibres along the centreline and working outwards to expel excess adhesive at the edges to ensure the removal of any entrapped air and produce an even adhesive line. The backing paper shall then be peeled away.
 Where subsequent layers of saturation resin are required as part of the FRPC strengthening system, the required time shall be allowed between the first and second coat of resin in accordance with the material manufacturer's data sheet. The time between mixing and application of the saturation resin shall be in accordance with the material manufacturer's data sheet.
 Where FRPC fabric sheets or strips are lapped the minimum overlap in the longitudinal fibre direction, shall be 200 mm. Additional resin shall be applied to the outer surface of the fabric layer to be overlapped. No lapping in the lateral fibre direction shall be allowed. Any lifting or delamination that may occur during the application period shall be corrected by pressing the fabric sheet using a foam roller or spatula.
 Where multiple layers of FRPC fabric sheet are required as part of the design of the FRPC strengthening system, these shall be applied in accordance with the material manufacturer's recommendations, data sheet, and as specified in this section.
 Where the resin is factory applied or it is applied onto the fabric on site using hand held foam rollers, brushes or impregnation machines prior to application, additional procedures on how the installation shall be supported shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 (h) Anchorage requirements
 Where required, anchorage shall be provided as detailed on the drawings. Fibre anchors shall not be fabricated on-site and shall be manufactured and delivered directly from the manufacturer. Fabrication and protective treatment of steel anchorage plates and bolts used as part of FRPC strengthening systems shall comply with the requirements of Section 630 and Section 631.
 688.06 TRIAL SYSTEM APPLICATION
 A trial application of the complete FRPC strengthening system shall be conducted on a test area of the actual substrate of not less than 1.5 m, fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of permanent FRPC strengthening installation works.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 HP The Contractor shall not proceed with the permanent FRPC strengthening installation works until the trial system application has been carried out and the outcomes reviewed and approved by the Superintendent.
 The test area shall be prepared and strengthened by the Contractor to satisfy all the requirements of the material manufacturer's recommendations. Selection of a suitable test area is to be approved by the Superintendent.
 As a minimum the concrete surface of the test area shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Clause 688.05(a). The surface layer of the concrete shall be removed to expose small particles of well-bound aggregate such that the roughness to be achieved lies between an amplitude of 0.5 mm to 1 mm, with a surface presenting similar to 60-grit sandpaper. The surface shall not be roughened excessively.
 The trial FRPC strengthening application including testing shall prove the adequacy of the Contractor's proposed materials and methods to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Actual coverage rates of adhesives and other resins shall be recorded, in order that due allowance may be made in the full-scale application for rough, irregular or highly absorbent concrete substrate. Additional requirements or observations shall be recorded and considered for the full-scale application.
 If the trial application is successful, the FRPC strengthening system shall be utilised in the works.
 If the trial application is deemed by the Superintendent not to comply with the requirements of the specification, a new trail application shall be made until the performance criteria of this section, including the requirements of Clauses 688.05, 688.08 and 688.09, are satisfied.
 In the event that the trial application is rejected, the Contractor shall remove and dispose of any work deemed as unacceptable by the Superintendent, submit a new proposal to rectify the deficiencies and repeat the trial application as described above. Any delays caused through rejection shall not constitute justification for additional claims and/or an extension of time.
 688.07 CONTRACTOR COMPETENCY
 The FRPC system installation Contractor or sub-contractor and installation personnel shall have a minimum of 5 years experience in the repair and rehabilitation of reinforced concrete structures and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of the FRPC system to be installed. Such experience shall be supported with documented evidence of previous experience including previous projects and relevant references.
 The Contractor shall also provide documented evidence from the FRPC system manufacturer demonstrating that the Contractor's application personnel are adequately trained and skilled in the installation procedures of the FRPC system to be installed.
 The FRPC system installation supervisor shall be trained and qualified in all aspects of the applied techniques and shall be present at each stage of both the trial and permanent FRPC strengthening installation works.
 688.08 INSPECTION AND TESTING
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall undertake all inspection and testing of the installed FRPC strengthening system with calibrated equipment as specified in this clause. The Contractor shall maintain all required documentation and results as specified in this section and Section 160 for all stages of the work.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The work shall be inspected by the Contractor at each stage of the FRPC strengthening operation as a minimum, i.e. after surface preparations, mixing of materials, prior to and after adhesive and resin application and any touch-up that may be required and both during and after installation of FRPC plates, laminates, strips or fabric sheets.
 For the purpose of surveillance and audits as specified in Section 160, the Contractor shall give the Superintendent five (5) days written notice of its intention to carry out repair or strengthening works and shall provide adequate access to enable surveillance of the works by the Superintendent.
 (b) Testing for Drummy Areas
 A visual inspection of the FRPC works shall be conducted immediately after installation is complete and any defects recorded. The cured FRPC strengthening system shall also be visually inspected and checked for delaminations, air voids, and bubbles between multiple layers or between the FRPC system and the concrete, 7 days after completion of installation.
 The drummyness test shall be conducted along the whole length of each applied FRPC plate, laminate, strip or fabric sheet using a small hammer (or similar). Areas where the FRPC material has not bonded correctly to the concrete or to subsequent layers will be characterised by a `drummy' or hollow sound.
 Delamination size, location, and quantity relative to the overall application area shall be recorded and evaluated with respect to structural integrity and durability of the FRPC system. Small delaminations less than 25 mm x 25 mm do not require corrective action provided the total delaminated area is less than 5% of the FRPC strengthened area and there are no more than 5 such delaminations per 1 m. Where these requirements are not complied with, the effective delaminated area shall be considered as a large delamination area and repaired in accordance with the requirements of Clause 688.09. Individual or isolated delaminations, air voids or bubbles larger than 25 mm x 25 mm shall be marked and repaired in accordance with the requirements of Clause 688.09.
 (c) Testing for Flatness
 The evenness of FRPC plates, laminate, strip or fabric sheets shall not deviate by more than 4 mm when checked with a 2 m straightedge. In addition, evenness shall not deviate by more than 1 mm when checked with a 300 mm straightedge.
 Where the requirements of this sub-clause are not complied with, additional FRPC plates, laminates, strips or fabric sheets shall be fixed in locations as approved by the Superintendent.
 (d) Adhesion (Pull-Off) Testing
 The Contractor shall conduct partially cored direct pull-off tests of the fully cured FRPC system to verify the tensile bond between the FRPC material and the existing concrete substrate, 7 days after the completion of installation.
 The pull-off testing shall be undertaken in accordance with VicRoads test method RC 252.02 as described in the VicRoads Code of Practice RC 500.16.
 Testing for FRPC plates, laminates or strips shall be carried out at a frequency of three (3) tests per 50 lineal metres of FRPC strengthened area. Testing for FRPC fabric sheets shall be carried out at a frequency of three (3) tests per 5 m of FRPC strengthened area. The mean bond strength at 7 days shall be greater than 1.5 MPa, provided no individual result is below 90% of 1.5 MPa.
 The mode of failure of the pull-off test shall be in the concrete substrate. Mean bond strengths less than 1.5 MPa or failure between the FRPC system and the concrete substrate or between layers of FRPC shall be raised as a nonconformance for approval by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 After the pull-off test is complete the cored holes shall be filled and smoothed with a polymer modified cementitious material in accordance with Section 689 or with the FRPC system putty filler in accordance with Clause 688.04(b).
 (e) Compressive Strength of Adhesives and Resins
 The Contractor shall take three (3), 75 mm test cubes from the first batch of material mixed, then three (3), 75 mm cubes for every 100 kg of material used thereafter to test for compressive strength. The cubes shall be cured for 7 days as per the material manufacturer's recommendations. Two (2) cubes shall be tested at 7 days and the third cube at 28 days, to confirm compliance with the minimum compressive cube strengths as specified in Clause 688.04(b). Test cubes shall be made, cured and tested in accordance with BS 6319.
 688.09 SYSTEM REPAIRS
 HP Should any of the FRPC strengthening system application work not comply with the provisions of this specification then the areas concerned shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Such repair work may include removal of the FRPC areas concerned, followed by surface preparation and application of new layers of FRPC. The procedure for any repair work shall be reviewed by the Superintendent.
 For the purpose of this clause, non-complying work shall include delaminations, air voids or bubbles larger than 25 mm x 25 mm.
 Large delaminations greater than 300 mm x 300 mm shall be repaired by selectively cutting away the affected FRPC material, followed by surface preparation and application of overlapping FRPC layers.
 Delaminations, air voids or bubbles greater than 25 mm x 25 mm in size but less than 300 mm x 300 mm shall be repaired by either resin injection or FRPC layer replacement in accordance with this clause.
 Wrinkling of the FRPC material or broken fabric shall be repaired by the application of additional layers in accordance with this clause.
 Any area of the FRPC system damaged by the Contractor during its operation shall be made good in accordance with this clause.
 688.10 PROTECTION OF WORKS AND PROPERTY AND CLEAN UP
 (a) Protection of Works/Property
 The Contractor shall protect already completed works during abrasive blasting operations or any other surface preparation process and during FRPC system application processes.
 The Contractor shall ensure that the FRPC works are protected from adverse conditions, dust and debris during the curing period of the FRPC system in accordance with the requirements of Clause 688.05(e).
 The Contractor shall undertake suitable protective measures and methods during the installation of the FRPC system to ensure that vehicles and pedestrians are adequately protected from these works. The proposed protective measures or methods being used shall be submitted to the Superintendent for approval, a minimum of two working days in advance of the proposed works.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth (b) Environmental and Occupational Health and Safety Requirements
 The Contractor shall remove all adhesive residues, droppings and smudges from all surfaces, including surfaces not being treated. The Contractor shall remove from the site all spent abrasive and all other rubbish accumulated during the work on a daily basis. The Contractor shall dispose of such wastes and shall adhere to EPA and other local, state and federal government requirements with respect to how waste generated during surface preparation, FRPC system application, and clean up will be collected, segregated, handled, controlled and disposed of. All relevant requirements of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012 and Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 shall be satisfied with respect to all formwork. (c) Disposal of Waste Materials Waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the Contractor that are acceptable to the EPA and other relevant authorities. Liquid or other waste material shall not contaminate creeks, waterways or stormwater drainage.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 688 (Page 12 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 689 - CEMENTITIOUS PATCH REPAIR OF CONCRETE
 ##This section cross-references Sections 168, 176, 611, 685, 686 and 687. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 689.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials, surface preparation, application, relevant inspection and testing and acceptance criteria for the patch repair of concrete structures using cementitious repair materials.
 689.02 TYPES AND SELECTION OF PATCH REPAIR METHODS
 This section includes the following types of patch repair of concrete structures using cementitious repair materials:  corrosion deteriorated concrete repair;  non-corrosion deteriorated concrete repair; and  filling of blowholes and surface imperfections.
 Repair of concrete shall include:  breaking back to sound and dense concrete to receive repair material;  preparation of steel reinforcement and concrete substrate;  application of an appropriate steel primer and substrate bonding coat; and  rebuilding to the original surface profile.
 HP Prior to commencement of any patch repair of concrete, the Contractor shall assess the affected concrete structure or component to determine the influence of spalled, deteriorated, damaged or honeycombed concrete on load bearing capacity, serviceability and durability, and submit the assessment to the Superintendent for review.
 A cementitious patch repair method shall be selected based on:  an assessment of the cause(s) and extent of the spalled, deteriorated, damaged or defective
 concrete;  the location of the patch repair on the concrete structure or component;  the proposed repair material properties, likely patch behaviour and the effect on load capacity
 and structural safety, serviceability and durability.
 A patch repair method shall be submitted which includes requirements for surface preparation, method of application, curing and surface finish, to ensure the longevity of the repair solution.
 Any proposal to use patch repair methods and repair materials other than those specified in this section shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 The application of anti-graffiti and decorative/anti-carbonation coatings and crack repairs which may be required as part of the concrete repair work shall be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of Sections 685, 686 and 687.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 1 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 689.03 STANDARDS
 (a) Australian Standards AS 1478 Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout AS 1627 Metal finishing  Preparation and pretreatment of surfaces AS 3799 Liquid membrane-forming curing compounds for concrete AS 5100 Bridge design.
 (b) VicRoads Test Methods VicRoads Test Method RC 252.02  Determination of the Tensile Bond Strength of Concrete Repairs and Strengthening Systems.
 (c) Other Standards BS 6319 Testing of resin and polymer/cement compositions for use in construction.
 
 689.04 DEFINITIONS
 
 Blowholes: Small regular or irregular cavities, usually not exceeding 15 mm in diameter or 5 mm in depth, resulting from entrapment of air bubbles in the surface of formed concrete during placement and consolidation.
 
 Bond: The adherence between the repair material and the existing concrete substrate.
 
 Bond strength (or pull-off strength): The resistance to separation of a repair material from the existing concrete substrate.
 
 Corrosion Deteriorated Concrete: Concrete with deterioration, delamination, cracking or spalling due to contamination by deleterious substances such as chlorides and carbon dioxide associated with the overall mechanism of corrosion of steel reinforcement.
 
 Delamination: The separation of a section of concrete from solid concrete usually along steel reinforcement which is identified by a drummy or hollow sound instead of a clear ringing sound when metal hits the concrete.
 
 Exposure Classifications: In accordance with Table 4.3 of AS 5100.5 Bridge Design - Concrete and summarised as follows:
 
 A - Mild
 
 C - Very Severe
 
 B1 - Moderately Severe
 
 U - Special Consideration
 
 B2 - Severe.
 
 Fairing coat: A thin layer of cementitious material used to render large surface areas and cover, fill or smooth blowholes and surface imperfections flush with the finished concrete surface.
 
 Featheredging: Cementitious repair material applied to the edge of the repair in a very thin layer instead of a thicker layer which is contained at the edge with a square cut.
 
 Non-corrosion Deteriorated or Defective Concrete: Concrete with deterioration, damage or defects due to accidental or physical loadings, temporary overloading, impact and other mechanical or uncontaminated damage, excessive early shrinkage or thermal stresses and low quality honeycombed or off form voided concrete.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 2 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Surface Imperfections: Surface voids or cavities not exceeding 5 mm in depth left on the concrete surface (in the form of surface honeycomb), due to failure of the mortar to effectively fill the spaces among coarse aggregate particles during placement and consolidation.
 Spall: A fragment of concrete broken off or detached from the edge of solid concrete due to the corrosion of steel reinforcement or due to accidental, physical or mechanical damage.
 
 689.05 CONTRACTOR COMPETENCY
 Personnel, sub-contractors and suppliers utilised in cementitious patch repair of concrete shall have a minimum of 5 years experience in the repair and rehabilitation of reinforced concrete structures and a demonstrated competency for surface preparation and application of the repair material to be applied.
 The concrete repair supervisor shall be trained and qualified on all aspects of application techniques and shall be present at all times during repair work. Application personnel shall be trained and skilled in the application procedures of the repair material to be applied.
 Documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate experience, qualification, skills and training of personnel, sub-contractors and suppliers.
 
 689.06 MATERIAL PROPERTIES
 
 (a) General
 
 Materials used for reinstatement of concrete shall be single component polymer modified cementitious non-shrink repair mortars, or be part of a complete polymer modified cementitious repair system. Only whole bags of material shall be used. Test certificates, material data sheets and health and safety data sheets shall be available for all materials.
 
 (b) Repair Material
 
 The proposed repair material shall:
 (i) be capable of being hand applied in vertical and overhead sections up to 30 mm thick in one application with no slumping;
 (ii) achieve strength conforming to the requirements in Table 689.061 -
 
 Table 689.061 : Repair Material Strength Requirements
 
 Concrete Structure Strength
 
 Repair Material Strength
 
 @ 1 day
 
 @ 7 days
 
 @ 28 days
 
 MINIMUM COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH (in accordance with BS 6319 Pt 2:1983  dry cure)
 
 15 MPa to 30 MPa
 
 5 MPa
 
 19 MPa
 
 23 MPa
 
 Greater than 30 MPa to 50 MPa
 
 10 MPa
 
 25 MPa
 
 35 MPa
 
 Greater than 50 MPa
 
 15 MPa
 
 40 MPa
 
 60 MPa
 
 MINIMUM FLEXURAL STRENGTH (in accordance with BS 6319 Pt 3:1990)
 
 15 MPa to 30 MPa
 
 4 MPa
 
 Greater than 30 MPa to 50 MPa Greater than 50 MPa
 
 6 MPa 10 MPa
 
 MINIMUM TENSILE STRENGTH (in accordance with BS 6319 Pt 7:1985)
 
 15 MPa to 30 MPa
 
 1.8 MPa
 
 Greater than 30 MPa to 50 MPa
 
 2.8 MPa
 
 Greater than 50 MPa
 
 3.8 MPa
 
 MINIMUM BOND OR PULL-OFF STRENGTH TO CONCRETE SUBSTRATE @7 days (in accordance with VicRoads Test Method RC 252.02)
 
 All Concrete Structure Strengths
 
 0.75 MPa
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 3 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iii) achieve a drying shrinkage of less than 600 microstrain at 28 days in accordance with ASTM prism at 23C and relative humidity of 50%;
 (iv) minimum wet density of 1700 kg/m3; (v) maximum water/powder ratio of 0.16; (vi) resistant to alkaline solutions. Steel reinforcement primer and substrate-bonding coat shall be compatible with the repair mortar and be part of the same range of proprietary repair system.
 (c) Fairing Coat Fairing coat cementitious repair material required to fill blowholes and imperfections on concrete structures shall be: (i) a single component polymer modified material; (ii) capable of application at 0  3 mm thick and fill blowholes and imperfections flush with the finished concrete surface; (iii) capable of application over a large area without being subject to shrinkage cracking.
 689.07 HANDLING AND STORAGE OF MATERIALS
 Repair materials shall be stored in accordance with the material manufacturer's requirements, including:  in dry conditions not exposed to direct sunlight;  within the specified maximum and minimum temperature range;  in their original, sealed moisture resistant bags or containers.
 All material shall be brought to site in the original sealed bags or unopened containers clearly labelled with the appropriate manufacturer's name, product type, reference number and batch number. Materials stored beyond the manufacturers recommended shelf life shall be discarded.
 The following information shall be provided for each batch of repair material: (a) manufacturer's name and address; (b) product reference; (c) batch number of identification; (d) quantity manufactured in the batch; and (e) certificate of date of manufacture.
 689.08 PREPARATION AND APPLICATION
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall perform concrete repair work in conformity with the manufacturer's specification.
 HP Any deviations from the manufacturer's specification and the requirements of this specification shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review accompanied by certification from the manufacturer, prior to commencement of repairs.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 4 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Steel Reinforcement
 Where the existing concrete cover to steel reinforcement is less than the design requirements, the concrete repair shall be profiled to ensure that the following minimum cover of polymer modified repair material is achieved:
 (i) Exposure Classification A and B1 20 mm minimum cover
 (ii) Exposure Classification B2 and C 50 mm minimum cover
 For a corrosion deteriorated concrete repair new reinforcing steel shall be incorporated into the structure to compensate for any existing reinforcing steel which is exhibiting loss in excess of 25% of its original cross-sectional area. Steel reinforcement incorporated into the structure shall comply with the requirements of Section 611.
 (c) Surface Preparation
 (i) General For all types of patch repair all defective and delaminated concrete and existing repair materials shall be broken back to a sound and dense concrete surface. Defective concrete shall be removed using light hand held percussive equipment or high pressure water jetting. Care shall be taken to ensure that any steel reinforcement exposed is not cut or damaged. The method of breaking back or scabbling shall ensure that excess dust does not form a hazard in the surrounding area. Hammer sounding shall be conducted on completion of breakout to ensure that all delamination has been removed. A perpendicular saw cut of at least 15 mm shall be provided around the perimeter of the area to be repaired to prevent featheredging of the repair material. The saw cut surface shall be roughened by removing the surface layer to expose small particles of well bound aggregate. All concrete surfaces and mortar substrates shall be sound, clean and free from dust, oils, and grease and surface contaminants. All loose and unsound materials and surface laitance shall be removed. The concrete substrate and any exposed steel reinforcement shall be cleaned by a final wash down or by blowing down with oil free compressed air to ensure removal of all residual contamination. The prepared concrete substrate shall be thoroughly pre-wetted with clean fresh water and shall be surface dry prior to application of repair material.
 (ii) Corrosion Deteriorated Concrete Repair In addition to other requirements, for repair of corrosion deteriorated concrete repair all defective and delaminated concrete and existing repair materials shall be broken back to a sound and dense concrete surface to a minimum of 20 mm behind and around the rusted steel reinforcement. Concrete shall be removed along the length of visibly corroding steel reinforcement until at least 50 mm of sound, rust free metal is exposed at each end of the rusted section. All corrosion products shall be removed from the exposed steel reinforcement. Steel reinforcement shall be cleaned to a bright metal to achieve a surface preparation equivalent to AS1627 Part 4 Class 2.5.
 (iii) Non-corrosion Deteriorated or Defective Concrete Repair HP The Superintendent shall review the depth of removal of concrete for non-
 corrosion deteriorated or defective concrete repair and the amount of exposure of steel reinforcement prior to commencement of application of repair material.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 5 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Application of Reinforcement Protection and Substrate-Bonding Coat
 All exposed steel reinforcement shall be coated immediately following preparation and cleaning with a primer which forms part of the proprietary repair system to provide immediate protection against corrosion. The steel primer shall be adequately applied to the back of the steel reinforcement where it is fully exposed and where steel bars are tied together. Over-coating of the concrete substrate with the steel primer shall be avoided unless it is a requirement of the overall repair system.
 A substrate-bonding coat which also forms part of the proprietary repair system shall be worked into the concrete substrate using a short bristle brush to enhance the bond at the repair interface.
 The steel primer and substrate bonding coat shall be thoroughly mixed to achieve a uniform colour and consistency. Materials shall not be thinned and the whole container contents shall be mixed without split mixing between mixes.
 (e) Application of Repair Mortar
 The Contractor shall include within its quality procedures the manufacturer's specifications for use of the repair materials, and test plans that meet the requirements of the standards and this section.
 HP Reinstatement of prepared areas shall not commence until:
 (i) a joint measurement of the repair area by the Superintendent and the Contractor has taken place;
 (ii) evidence that the preparation of the repair area conforms to the requirements of this Specification; and
 (iii) the Contractor's quality procedures has been sighted by the Superintendent.
 All materials shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications or instructions for use in a continuous process.
 The repair mortar shall be thoroughly mixed in whole bags with potable water prior to commencement of application. Mixing of repair materials shall be undertaken in a forced action mixer or in a suitably sized drum using a spiral paddle fitted to a low speed heavy-duty drill. Free-fall mixers shall not be used.
 Repair material shall be applied while the substrate bonding coat is still tacky.
 Concrete shall be rebuilt to the original surface profile using a cementitious repair material. Where the existing concrete cover to the steel reinforcement is less than the design requirements, the new repair shall be profiled as required to ensure that a minimum cover of polymer modified repair material to the steel reinforcement is achieved as specified in Clause 689.08(b).
 Where formwork is used to facilitate the patch repair, it shall be pre-treated such that it prevents moisture absorption from the repair mortar and positioned such that it does not inhibit effective compaction of the repair material.
 Repair material shall only be applied when the concrete substrate temperature and the air temperature measured at the point of application is above 5C or 5C and rising. No material shall be applied when the air temperature measured at the point of application is above 35C.
 Where the ambient temperature at the point of application of material is above 30C and the area to be treated is subject to direct sunlight, protective shading shall be used and equipment that comes into direct contact with the repair material shall be kept cool and not exposed to direct sunlight.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 6 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) Blowholes and Surface Imperfections Blowholes and surface imperfections shall be filled with a scrape coat application of a single component cementitious fairing coat repair mortar. A cementitious fairing coat repair mortar may also be used in a thin layer where a uniform concrete surface is required prior to the application of a protective or decorative coating. The quality control testing requirements of Clause 689.12 shall not apply to cementitious fairing coat repair mortars.
 689.09 CURING AND PROTECTION
 Immediately after placement and for seven days thereafter, the repair material shall be cured and protected from drying out and against the harmful effects of water movement and weather, including rain and rapid temperature changes.
 Cementitious material shall be cured with a curing compound in accordance with the material manufacturer's specification. In addition to a curing compound, heavy duty polyethylene sheeting fastened and sealed at the edges shall also be provided for concrete patch repairs greater than 500 mm x 500 mm in size and for all concrete repairs to chloride affected concrete structures or components.
 Curing compounds shall comply with AS 3799. Curing compounds shall be removed prior to the application of any protective or decorative coatings, unless documented evidence is provided to the satisfaction of the Superintendent that the applied curing compound is compatible with any proposed coatings.
 689.10 FINISHING AND SURFACE CONDITION
 All surfaces shall match surrounding surface finish by use of steel forms or steel trowel finish.
 The surface of the concrete repair shall not have cracks of width greater than 0.10 mm measured at the concrete surface nor craze cracking covering a significant area of the repair at the completion of the curing period.
 Cracks in repair material shall be repaired in accordance with Section 687.
 There shall be no cracking at the interface of the concrete repair with the existing concrete.
 A joint inspection of all concrete repaired areas with the Contractor and Superintendent shall be undertaken 12 months after completion of the repair works, or prior to the end of the defects liability period (whichever is earlier).
 The surface of the concrete repair shall not have cracks of width greater than 0.10 mm measured at the concrete surface nor craze cracking covering a significant area of the repair 12 months after completion of the repair works, or at the end of the defects liability period (whichever is earlier).
 Any necessary remedial works shall be undertaken within two weeks of the date of inspection.
 689.11 TOLERANCES
 The tolerance on edges and surfaces in plan and level shall be  3 mm.
 Maximum allowance for irregularities when measured with a 2.0 metre straightedge shall be 3 mm. In addition, evenness shall not deviate by more than 1 mm when checked with a 300 mm straightedge.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 7 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 689.12 QUALITY CONTROL TESTING
 (a) Compressive Strength of Cementitious Repair Material
 Three 75 mm test cubes shall be taken from the first batch of material mixed, then three 75 mm cubes for every 100 kg of material used thereafter to test for compressive strength. The cubes shall be cured for 7 days under laboratory-controlled conditions. Two cubes shall be tested at 7 days and the third cube at 28 days to confirm compliance with the minimum compressive strength requirements as specified in Table 689.061. Test cubes shall be made, cured and tested in accordance with AS 1478.2.
 (b) Bond Strength (Pull-Off) Testing
 The Contractor shall conduct partially cored direct pull-off tests of the fully cured in situ repair material to verify the tensile bond strength between the in situ repair material and the existing concrete substrate, 7 days after the completion of application. The pull-off testing shall be undertaken in accordance with VicRoads Test Method RC 252.02.
 The test locations shall be jointly determined by the Contractor and the Superintendent. Testing shall be carried out at a frequency of three tests per 10 m2 at representative test locations of a completed repair area.
 The mode of failure shall be determined by visual inspection of the test specimens and categorised as follows:  Mode 1: Tensile failure within the existing concrete substrate.  Mode 2: Tensile failure within the repair material.  Mode 3: Bond failure at the interface between the existing concrete substrate and the
 repair material.  Mode 4: Bond failure between the adhesive layer and the dolly.  Mode 5: Partial bond failure at the interface between the existing concrete substrate
 and the repair material and partial tensile failure within the repair material.  Mode 6: Partial bond failure at the interface between the existing concrete substrate
 and the repair material and partial tensile failure within the existing concrete substrate.
 Where a combination of modes of failure exist the percentage of each mode of failure shall be recorded to the nearest 10% based on the surface area of the failure face.
 The mean bond strength at 7 days shall not be less than 0.75 MPa, with no individual result less than 0.65 MPa.
 The mode of failure of the pull-off test shall be in accordance with Mode 1, with tensile failure within the existing concrete substrate.
 Mean bond strengths less than 0.75 MPa or failure modes 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 shall be raised as a non-conformance.
 (c) Testing for Drummy Areas
 A visual inspection of all concrete repair areas shall be conducted immediately prior to the application of any decorative/anticarbonation coating for delaminations and any defects recorded.
 The test for drummy areas shall be conducted using a small hammer along the whole surface area of the concrete patch repairs and delaminated areas shall be characterised by a `drummy' or hollow sound.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 8 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Delaminated patch repairs shall be removed and repaired in accordance with the requirements of this section. Testing for drummy areas shall be conducted in the presence of the Superintendent. (d) Test Results The Contractor shall supply for review by the Superintendent a copy of all quality control testing including photographic records within one week of undertaking such testing. (e) Non-conformances For any test batch that fails to meet the specified standards, all repairs to which the test batch relates shall be removed and the repairs repeated in accordance with the requirements of this section.
 689.13 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT (a) Occupational Health and Safety Requirements
 Further to the requirements of Section 168, the Contractor shall include within its Health and Safety Co-ordination Plan, specific provisions for the material manufacturer's occupational health and safety directions and the Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 and Codes of Practice. All material safety data sheets (MSDS) shall be kept on site at all times and be readily available. (b) Environmental Management Requirements Further to the requirements of Section 176, the Contractor shall include within its Environmental Management Plan, specific provisions regarding the collection, segregation, handling, control and disposal of waste generated during concrete patch repair works, and clean up. Waste materials including liquid wastes shall be deposited in suitable containers and disposed of at sites to be located by the Contractor that are acceptable to the EPA and other relevant authorities. Liquid or other waste material shall not be disposed of in creeks, waterways or the stormwater drainage systems.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 689 (Page 9 of 9)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 690 - MATERIALS TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE GROWTH
 690.01 GENERAL The materials listed in Schedule 690.05 and specified elsewhere herein, will be supplied by the Department of State Growth free of cost to the Contractor under the conditions of delivery specified.
 690.02 QUANTITIES The quantities supplied will be the net quantities as determined from the drawings, or as specified elsewhere herein. Any loss or damage to the materials after the Contractor has taken delivery of them shall be made good at the Contractor's expense. The Contractor shall notify the Superintendent of any loss or damage to materials as soon as is practicable after the removal of materials from the road trucks, and he shall confirm such loss or damage to the Superintendent within seven days of delivery of the materials.
 690.03 DELIVERY Delivery by road transport shall be to the road pavement or firm ground in the vicinity of the bridge site. Should the Contractor require delivery to a location such that the transport is required to leave the road pavement, he shall provide a suitable access track, and shall assume full responsibility for the safety of the contents of the vehicle and the movement of the vehicle while on the access track. Where delivery is by road transport the Contractor shall unload the materials within one hour of the arrival of the vehicle unless otherwise specified and shall bear all costs resulting from any longer delays. The Contractor shall take charge of the materials upon arrival and shall be responsible for their unloading and/or transport to the bridge site and for their satisfactory storage. The Contractor shall give advance notice to the Superintendent of the dates on which he requires deliveries of materials. The minimum periods of notice are listed in the following Schedule.
 690.04 DELAYS In the event of delay in the supply of materials by the Department of State Growth as specified herein causing delay to the progress of the work, the Contractor will be entitled to claim an extension of time beyond the specified contract time for completion of the work. Such claim for extension of time will be assessed by the Superintendent in accordance with the General Conditions of Contract. However, the Department of State Growth will not accept liability for any other claims which may be made by the Contractor on account of such delays in the supply of materials by the Department of State Growth.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 690 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 690.05 SCHEDULE OF MATERIALS TO BE SUPPLIED
 *** The materials to be supplied, conditions of delivery and advance notice required are listed in the following Schedule.
 
 ##:
 
 Materials
 
 Quantity ##:
 
 Delivery Condition
 ##:
 
 Required Advance
 Notice
 ##:
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 690 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 701 - UNDERGROUND STORMWATER DRAINS
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 175, 610, 619, 632, 687, 689, 703 and 709. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 701.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the supply, delivery, transport, and installation of underground stormwater drains, referred to as culverts, together with the construction of inlet and outlet structures (endwalls, catchpits, basins, etc.), erection of marker posts, and the removal and/or relaying of existing culverts, as shown on the drawings or as specified.
 
 701.02 STANDARDS
 
 Materials, design and construction of underground stormwater drains shall comply with the requirements of relevant Australian Standards including:
 
 AS 1646 AS 1761 AS 1762 AS 1683 AS/NZS 2041 AS 3972 AS 4058 AS 4139
 
 Elastomeric seals for waterworks purposes Helical lock-seam corrugated steel pipes Design and installation of helical lock-seam corrugated steel pipes Methods of testing for elastomers Buried corrugated metal structures General purpose and blended cements Precast concrete pipes (pressure and non pressure) Fibre-reinforced concrete pipes and fittings.
 
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 
 701.03 DEFINITIONS
 Culvert: An underground stormwater drain consisting of pipes, arch or box sections.
 Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipes: Pipes manufactured from Portland cement-based concrete or geopolymer binder-based concrete as specified in Section 703. In the context of the manufacture of reinforced concrete pipes, portland cement concrete and geopolymer binder concrete are equivalent products.
 701.04 MATERIALS
 (a) Precast Reinforced Concrete Box Culverts
 Precast reinforced concrete box culverts shall comply with the requirements of Section 619.
 (b) Precast Reinforced Concrete Pipes
 (i) General Portland cement-based conventional precast reinforced concrete pipes shall comply with the requirements of AS 4058. Geopolymer binder-based precast reinforced concrete pipes shall comply with the requirements of AS 4058 and this section, except that the concrete used shall comply with the requirements of Section 703 for geopolymer concrete with compressive strengths appropriate to the nominated load class performance requirements.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Precast reinforced concrete pipes covered by this section shall be used for drainage not subject to internal pressure and the required sizes and load classes shall be as shown on the drawings. Rubber ring joints shall comply with the requirements of AS 1646. The clear cover to steel reinforcement shall be based on normal environments and shall not be less than shown in Table 3.1 of AS 4058. Aggregates for precast reinforced concrete pipes shall comply with the requirements of Section 703. Pressure pipes shall be as specified on the drawings and in this section.
 (ii) Additional Requirements
 Additional routine sampling and testing of precast reinforced concrete pipes shall include ultimate load, water absorption, cover to steel reinforcement, dimensional accuracy and joint assembly in accordance with the requirements of AS 4058. The design diameter as defined in AS 4058 shall not be less than 95% of the nominal size shown on the drawings for all classes of pipes up to and including Class 4.
 (c) Fibre-Reinforced Concrete (FRC) Rigid Pipes
 (i) General FRC rigid pipes shall comply with the requirements of AS 4139 and shall have a design life of 100 years. FRC rigid pipes shall comply with the rigid pipe strength requirements of Clause 11.1(a) of AS 4139, with the load regression factor (R) determined in a manner consistent with the design life of 100 years. FRC rigid pipes may be supplied in diameter sizes up to and including 750 mm. FRC rigid pipes shall be used for drainage and the required sizes, load classes and installation conditions shall be as shown on the drawings. The FRC rigid pipe jointing shall consist of flexible elastomeric, double V-ring joints in accordance with AS 1646 and an external collar in accordance with AS 4139 Appendix M figure M1 (b)(i). Flush or butt joints shall only be used for the first pipe when extending existing pipes.
 (ii) Additional Requirements Further to the requirements of AS 4139 the following tests shall be undertaken: (1) One pipe per 100 pipes or part thereof of each size and class shall be load tested in accordance with Clause 10.1 of AS 4139. (2) One pipe per 50 pipes or part thereof of each size and class shall be tested for internal diameter, wall thickness, pipe length, squareness of ends, and straightness in accordance with the dimension and tolerance requirements of Clause 9 of AS 4139. (3) Testing for restrictions on chemical content (acid-soluble chloride and sulphate ions) as described in Section 6.1.7 of AS 4139 shall be at 6 monthly intervals. The design diameter as defined in AS 4139 shall not be less than 95% of the nominal size shown on the drawings for all classes of pipes.
 (d) Buried Corrugated Metal Culverts
 Buried corrugated metal culverts shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 632, AS 1761, AS 1762 and AS/NZS 2041.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 2 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (e) Bedding and Backfill Materials
 Materials used for bedding and selected backfill shall be free from perishable matter and lumps and shall conform with the requirements of Table 701.041 and Table 701.042 below.
 Ordinary backfill shall be free from perishable matter and shall conform with the requirements of Table 701.041.
 
 Table 701.041
 Material
 Bedding Selected Backfill Ordinary backfill
 
 Sieve Size - AS (mm)
 
 75.0 37.5 19.0
 
 2.36 0.075
 
 Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 -
 
 -
 
 100
 
 -
 
 5-40
 
 -
 
 100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 5-40
 
 100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 40-100
 
 -
 
 Table 701.042 Test
 
 Test Value
 
 Plasticity Index (Max.)
 
 20
 
 (f) Concrete Cast-in-place concrete edgings, paths and other surfacings shall comply with the requirements of Section 703.
 (g) Mortar Mortar used in the laying of box culvert sections or as jointing for pipes shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.32.
 (h) Marker Posts Marker posts shall comply with the requirements of Section 709.
 701.05 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 The Contractor shall set out the drainage work in accordance with the drawings.
 HP Prior to commencement of excavation for the culverts the Contractor shall confirm the position of all culverts with the Superintendent.
 The culverts constructed shall be constructed true to line and level.
 Where it is necessary to modify the line or levels of drainage lines shown on the drawings the Superintendent shall be notified of the proposed design change prior to excavation for the drainage lines. The design change notice shall include certification by the designer that the change complies with the design requirements.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth Unless specified otherwise the tolerance on location of pipes compared to the design or a change to the design notified in accordance with this clause shall be: (a) offset of entry pits required to match lines of kerbs or barriers 20 mm (b) plan location of pits other than offsets to kerb lines or barriers 100 mm (c) invert level of pipes at pits 50 mm (d) departure from design grade of pipe runs 10 mm in 10 m provided minimum grade is not
 less than 1:250 The location of each run of underground drainage shall be verified by a survey certificate prior to backfilling the culverts and shall be recorded progressively on the Contractor's as-constructed drawings.
 701.06 STOCKPILING OF MATERIALS Materials shall not be stockpiled or stored on any carriageway or footpath without the consent of the Superintendent.
 701.07 PROVISION FOR DRAINAGE DURING CONSTRUCTION The Contractor shall provide for the safe discharge of seepage, and stormwater at all times during the construction of any culvert, and for the effective de-watering of excavations. Before obstructing any waterway, channel, culvert, or pipe, the Contractor shall make provision for temporary diversion of flow, and obtain prior written approval from the relevant waterway authority.
 701.08 INSTALLATION OF CULVERTS IN FILLS UNDER CONSTRUCTION Before laying any single row or multiple row culvert in fill, the fill shall first be constructed and compacted to subgrade level or to a level 0.3 m above the top of the proposed culvert, whichever is the lower, for a distance of not less than 6 m clear on either side of the proposed trench. The trench shall then be excavated through this fill as provided in Clause 701.10 and the culvert installed.
 701.09 CONSTRUCTION LOADING ON CULVERTS Until the minimum compacted thickness of cover specified in Table 701.091 below for a particular range of axle or track loading has been provided over any culvert, construction traffic shall not be permitted to cross that culvert. A temporary embankment extending not less than 15 m on both sides of the culvert may be used to provide the necessary cover.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 701.091
 
 Required Cover Thickness (Metre) (Min.)
 
 Range of
 
 Axle or
 
 Track
 
 Loading
 
 (tonne)
 
 2
 
 Type, Size, and Class of Culvert
 
 Pipe
 
 Pipe Class
 
 3
 
 4
 
 Corrugated Metal D 1200-3600 mm
 
 D<1.2m D>1.2m D<1.2m D>1.2m D<1.2m D>1.2m
 
 09
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 -
 
 9  20
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 1.2
 
 20  35
 
 0.7
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 0.4
 
 1.5
 
 35  50
 
 0.9
 
 0.7
 
 0.6
 
 0.5
 
 0.5
 
 0.4
 
 1.8
 
 50  60
 
 #
 
 #
 
 0.8
 
 0.8
 
 0.7
 
 0.7
 
 2.1
 
 # This range of loading not permissible. D Nominal Pipe diameter D less than 1200 mm not permitted, D more than 3600 mm as directed by the Superintendent.
 
 Box Culvert 90 kN Proof
 Load
 0.1
 0.6
 0.9
 1.2
 1.5
 
 701.10 EXCAVATION
 Excavation for installation of culverts shall include all excavation necessary to prepare the culvert foundation and provide the full specified depth of culvert bedding. Where necessary the foundation shall allow for pipes with protruding sockets. Where practical, trench walls shall be vertical, with temporary protection as required.
 For box culverts, the width of the trench shall be such that the clearance from the outside of the culvert to the wall of the trench is in the range 0.5 to 1.0 times the overall height of the culvert.
 For pipe culverts, the width of trench at and below the level of the top of the pipe shall be such that the horizontal clearance from the outside of the pipe to the wall of the trench is within the limits shown in Table 701.101.
 
 Table 701.101 Pipe Type
 Corrugated Metal Culvert Other
 
 Nominal Pipe Diameter or Width (mm)
 All
 All
 
 Horizontal Clearance to Wall of Trench
 
 Min. (mm) Max. (mm)
 
 300
 
 1,000
 
 300
 
 600
 
 The base of the trench shall be compacted to refusal using mechanical plant.
 The Contractor shall treat or replace all soft, wet or unstable material below the level required to provide the minimum specified thickness of culvert bedding, as specified in Clause 701.11. Replacement material if used, shall be compacted in accordance with Clause 701.15.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 701.11 CULVERT BEDDING
 Bedding material shall be provided and placed for the full width of the trench or, where the culvert is to be placed without trenching, to a width 0.8 m greater than the overall width of the culvert. The compacted thickness of bedding material following any shaping necessary shall be not less than:
 100 mm where D < 1500 mm 200 mm where D  1500 mm where D is the nominal pipe diameter or culvert width.
 When the sections are in position, an additional layer of bedding material shall be placed to a height equal to 30% of the nominal pipe diameter or culvert height. This material shall be placed between the pipe and the outer limits of the lower layers of bedding, and shall be compacted as specified in Clause 701.15.
 
 701.12 LAYING
 
 (a) General
 Laying of pipes or box culverts shall not commence until the Contractor has verified that culvert bedding complies with the specified lines and levels and compaction requirements, and that pipes or box culverts are not damaged and comply with the requirements of Clause 701.04.
 
 (b) Pipe Culverts
 
 Rebate and socket ends of pipe sections shall be placed facing upstream and be fully entered.
 
 The lower portion of the pipe shall be in contact with the bedding for the full length of each section. The compacted bedding shall be shaped to accommodate the joint collar and ensure that the pipe is supported along its full length.
 
 Where applicable, the top of the pipe as marked shall be within five degrees of the vertical axis of the culvert.
 
 Corrugated metal culverts shall be assembled and laid as specified in Clause 701.16.
 
 The spacing for multiple row culverts shall be as shown in Table 701.121.
 
 Table 701.121
 
 Pipe Type
 
 Corrugated Metal
 
 Nominal Diameter (D) or Width (mm)
 Clear space between rows
 
 Less than 2,400
 D/2
 
 Over 2,400
 1.2 m
 
 Corrugated Metal Pipe Arch
 
 Less than 3,600
 
 Over 3,600
 
 D/3
 
 1.2 m
 
 Other
 
 Less than 600 to
 
 600
 
 1,800
 
 0.3 m
 
 D/2
 
 Over 1,800
 0.9 m
 
 (c) Box Culverts
 Consecutive sections of box culverts shall be firmly butted together. The top sections shall be matched to the bottom sections and shall not be lapped over adjoining bottom sections.
 The contact areas between the top and bottom sections shall be mortared.
 Multi-row box culverts shall be laid with the sections in each row in contact with the sections in the adjacent rows.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (d) Cutting of Culverts
 Where it is necessary to cut any culvert section to length or to create a penetration, cutting shall be done by machine to achieve a clean vertical face and any exposed reinforcement shall be coated with an approved epoxy treatment to prevent corrosion.
 701.13 JOINTING
 All interlocking (flush) joint reinforced concrete pipes shall be mortar jointed, or wrapped with a 200 mm wide external joint rubber band. External rubber bands shall be manufactured from natural rubber and have a minimum tensile strength of 18 MPa and a minimum elongation of 400% at break as determined in accordance with AS 1683, Method 11. Rubber band thickness shall not be less than 2 mm. In the case of internally jointed pipes 600 mm diameter and larger, the mortar shall be struck off flush with the bore of the pipe.
 Rubber ring joint pipes shall be jointed with rubber rings. Rubber rings shall be kept undisturbed, clean, and free from dirt and other foreign materials and shall be stored undercover if pipes are not to be installed immediately. Rubber ring joints shall be assembled and prepared in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Where rubber rings are disturbed they shall be cleaned and re-assembled prior to refitting.
 701.14 PLACEMENT OF FILLING
 (a) Unless the culvert is installed through an existing paved area, selected and ordinary backfill shall be placed as follows under, around, and above the culvert after the sections are bedded and compacted as specified in Clause 701.15.
 (i) Culvert Under Area to be Paved Where the trench has been excavated from design subgrade level or above, the trench shall be backfilled to design subgrade level with selected backfill material, and above that level with appropriate pavement material. Where the trench is excavated from below design subgrade level the trench shall be filled with selected backfill material.
 (ii) Culvert Under Area not to be Paved The trench shall be backfilled with selected backfill material to a level 0.3 m above the top of the culvert and with ordinary backfill material above that level.
 (b) Where non-trench conditions are permitted the following shall apply:
 Selected backfill material shall be placed for the full width of the previously placed bedding material to a height of 0.3 m above the top of the culvert, or to subgrade level, whichever is the lower. To provide support for the selected backfill material, ordinary backfill material shall be placed simultaneously with the selected backfill material to a distance two culvert diameters clear of the culvert.
 During filling, the maximum difference between filling placed on opposite sides of the culvert shall not exceed the lesser of one-quarter the height of the culvert or 0.5 m.
 Filling shall not be placed within 2 m of an exposed culvert end where a further section is to be placed.
 (c) Backfilling with cement stabilised sand
 Where approved by the Superintendent, culverts in trenches may be backfilled to half the pipe diameter or box culvert height with 3% cement stabilised sand with a water content sufficient to ensure penetration beneath the pipe or box culvert invert without leaving free surface water.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 701.15 REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING AND ACCEPTANCE OF COMPACTION AND MOISTURE CONTENT
 Bedding and backfill materials shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 150 mm loose thickness.
 Bedding and backfill shall be assessed for compaction and or moisture in lots. The number of tests per lot shall be three. A lot shall consist of one layer of bedding or backfill for a culvert length between adjacent pits or endwalls. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 173, a minimum of 20% of all lots for each culvert shall be tested. The calculation of density and moisture ratios shall be based on standard compactive effort.
 Where the nominal size of bedding or backfill material after compaction is greater than 40 mm, the moisture ratio shall be determined on material that passes the 19.0 mm sieve.
 (a) Bedding Bedding shall be compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment. Bedding material which has a swell equal to or greater than 2.5% shall be maintained at a mean moisture ratio of 92% between the completion of rolling and the placement of the overlying layer.
 (b) Backfill (i) Material of Nominal Size 40 mm or Less After Compaction Backfill material which will have a nominal size after compaction of 40 mm or less shall be compacted to a mean value of density ratio of not less than 97%. Backfill material which has a swell equal to or greater than 2.5% shall be maintained at a mean moisture ratio of 92% between the completion of rolling and the placement of the overlying layer. (ii) Material of Nominal Size Greater than 40 mm After Compaction Backfill material which will have a nominal size after compaction greater than 40 mm shall be compacted using a grading, mixing, watering and rolling procedure. Backfill material which has a swell equal to or greater than 2.5% shall be maintained at a mean moisture ratio of 92% between the completion of rolling and the placement of the overlying layer.
 701.16 ASSEMBLY OF CORRUGATED METAL CULVERTS
 All corrugated metal culvert sections supplied by the Contractor shall be assembled in accordance with the manufacturer's assembly instructions.
 Where culvert sections are supplied free to the Contractor, the following will be provided: Manufacturer's Assembly Drawings Schedule of Parts Supplied General Assembly Instructions
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 701.17 INSTALLATION OF CULVERTS THROUGH EXISTING PAVED AREAS
 
 The trench of culverts through existing paved areas shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material and the pavement restored using materials as shown below: ***
 
 Pavement Layer
 
 Material Type
 
 Thickness (mm)
 
 1. ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 2.
 
 3.
 
 4.
 
 5.
 
 701.18 REMOVAL OF EXISTING CULVERTS
 
 (a) General
 Where specified the Contractor shall remove culverts from existing paved areas.
 Except where the pavement under which the culvert passes is to be abandoned, the trench shall be kept to the minimum width to allow removal of the culvert or laying a replacement.
 
 (b) Treatment of Residual Excavation
 Where a culvert has been removed and the excavation is not to be backfilled, the excavation shall be neatly trimmed to slopes not steeper than 1 in 1.5 and the ends of the trench shaped to facilitate the smooth flow of water.
 Where the trench is to be backfilled, this shall be done in accordance with the provisions of Clause 701.15 and the final surface shall be shaped to conform with the adjoining profile.
 
 (c) Pavement Restoration
 
 ***
 
 Pavement restoration shall be carried out using materials as shown below:
 
 Pavement Layer
 
 Material Type
 
 Thickness (mm)
 
 1. ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 2.
 
 3.
 
 4.
 
 5.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 701.19 INLET AND OUTLET STRUCTURES
 Inlet and outlet structures shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings and specification. Concrete used for the construction of inlet and outlet structures shall comply with the requirements of Section 610.
 Footings shall extend to the depths shown on the drawings or as necessary to achieve a satisfactory foundation. If backfilling to the specified level is required, selected backfill material shall be used.
 When the proposed foundation is unsatisfactory due to neglect or the use of inappropriate methods, no payment will be made for the work and materials necessary to provide a satisfactory foundation at the specified level.
 
 701.20 MARKER POSTS ##(strikethrough if not required):
 At all locations specified the Contractor shall supply and erect guide posts at the edges of the formations on the side of the culvert nearer approaching traffic.
 
 701.21 EXIT AND ENTRY CHANNELS
 Channels shall be excavated to facilitate the flow of water. They shall be of regular shape and sufficient area to take the flow of water without any low spots that might retain water. Any low areas shall be filled with suitable excavated material and firmly compacted.
 
 701.22 FLUSHING OF CULVERTS
 All culverts shall be flushed clean from end to end on completion and maintained in proper working order.
 
 701.23 MINIMUM TESTING REQUIREMENTS
 The Contractor shall test the bedding and backfill material at a frequency as shown in Table 701.231 to ensure that all materials comply with the specified requirements.
 Table 701.231
 
 Test Grading Plasticity Index
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing One per 1000 tonnes or part thereof One per 1000 tonnes or part thereof
 
 701.24 INSPECTION OF DRAINAGE LINES BENEATH PAVEMENTS
 HP Unless approved otherwise by the Superintendent, all drainage lines constructed beneath pavements shall be inspected, after completion of earthworks to subgrade level and prior to construction of pavement layers, by an independent testing organisation using closed circuit television (CCTV). Reporting of the CCTV inspections shall be in accordance with WSA 05-2013  Conduit Inspection Reporting Code of Australia, published by Water Services Association of Australia.
 The report shall be provided to the Superintendent, with a copy of the CCTV record and a summary of the location of any defects detected by the survey. Any sections of damaged pipe shall be removed and replaced prior to construction of the pavement layers and a further CCTV survey shall be undertaken to verify correction of the defects.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 701.25 REPAIRS TO DAMAGED PIPES AND BOX CULVERTS
 (a) Steel Reinforced Concrete Pipes
 Any steel reinforced concrete pipes that have cracks wider than 0.2 mm or are damaged prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected.
 Where inspections after backfilling identify any of the following defects they shall be notified as a non-conformance:  cracks wider than 0.5 mm  spalling of concrete  exposed reinforcement  joints that are not fully engaged.
 Any pipes with defects greater than the following limits shall be removed and replaced:  longitudinal cracks greater than 2 mm  circumferential cracks around the full circumference with width greater than 3 mm or
 with lateral displacement of the cracked sections exceeding 3 mm  circumferential cracks around part of the circumference with width greater than 4 mm  penetrations with area greater than 400 mm2  pipe joints that are separated.
 The Superintendent may agree to accept pipes with defects as noted above subject to demonstration that repairs will ensure that pipes will operate effectively for their design life. Consideration will only be given to products and procedures with proven performance and to the following types of treatments:  hot sprayed epoxy coatings for cracks not wider than 4 mm with no lateral displacement  fibre glass reinforced epoxy sleeving for cracks not wider than 4 mm with lateral
 displacements up to 3 mm  spalled concrete, exposed steel reinforcement and penetrations shall be treated as patch
 repairs and repaired with polymer modified cementitious repair materials in accordance with the requirements of Section 689.
 The Contractor shall submit details of proposed rectification treatments including manufacturer's product specifications and warranties, the area and thickness of repair treatment, detailed repair procedures, and inspection and test plans.
 HP No repairs shall be undertaken without the Superintendent's approval of the repair materials and procedures.
 All repairs shall be inspected using CCTV to verify compliance with the repair specifications.
 (b) Fibre-Reinforced Concrete (FRC) Rigid Pipes
 Any FRC rigid pipes that have cracks wider than 0.1 mm or are damaged prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected.
 Where inspections after backfilling identify any of the following defects they shall be notified as a non-conformance:  cracks wider than 0.1 mm  any other type of defect  joints that are not fully engaged.
 FRC rigid pipes subject to such non-conformance shall be removed and replaced, unless the Superintendent approves repairs to be undertaken in accordance with the FRC pipes manufacturer's repair procedures and materials.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth (c) Other Types of Pipes
 Other types of pipes which exhibit defects or are otherwise damaged prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected. Where inspections after backfilling identify any defects, such pipes shall be removed and replaced, unless the Superintendent approves repairs to be undertaken in accordance with the manufacturer's repair procedures and materials. (d) Box Culverts Box culverts which do not comply with the requirements of Clause 619.14 prior to laying and backfilling shall be rejected and removed from the site. Where inspections after backfilling identify defects which do not comply with the requirements of Clause 619.14, such culverts shall be removed and replaced, unless the Superintendent approves repairs to be undertaken in accordance with the requirements of Section 610, and Section 687 for crack repairs and Section 689 for conventional patch repairs.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 701 (Page 12 of 12)
 
 SECTION 702 - SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 210, 701 and 801. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 702.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the supply and installation of subsurface drainage pipes, geocomposite drains and filter materials as shown on the drawings.
 
 702.02 DEFINITIONS
 Pervious Pipe System
 A pervious pipe system comprises drainage pipes which permit the entry of water from surrounding material and convey it to a discharge point. Such pipes may be perforated, slotted or porous pipes or impervious pipes laid with open joints.
 Subsurface Drain
 A subsurface drain is a pervious pipe system laid in a trench and surrounded by granular filter material or sleeved with a geotextile.
 Geocomposite Drain
 A geocomposite drain comprises a highly permeable core material wrapped in a geotextile. The core shall be non-crushable and flexible, and shall completely support the geotextile fabric. The geotextile shall have the filtration and separation properties to perform the functions of a single or second stage filter.
 Single Stage Filter
 Single stage filter is granular filter material placed in contact with the trench sides and surrounding the pervious pipe system.
 First Stage Filter
 First stage filter is granular filter material or geotextile placed in contact with the trench sides and surrounding a second stage filter.
 Second Stage Filter
 Second stage filter is granular filter material or geotextile placed in contact with the pervious pipe system and surrounded by a first stage filter.
 
 702.03 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 Subsurface drains, whether pipe or geocomposite systems, shall be constructed true to lines, depths or levels as shown on the drawings.
 The invert of the subsurface drainage pipe or the geocomposite drain shall be not more than 25 mm from the specified level and not more than 50 mm from the specified line. Changes of grade shall not be abrupt, or occur at a rate exceeding 10 mm in any 3 m length, or lead to ponding of water within the drainage pipe.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 702 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 702.04 DRAINAGE PIPES AND GEOCOMPOSITE DRAINS Subsurface drainage pipes and geocomposite drains shall be supplied by the Contractor. Subsurface drainage pipes and geocomposite drains are grouped into three categories as follows:
 Category 1: Perforated plastics Class 1000 Precast concrete Class "2"
 Category 2: Perforated plastics Class 400 Category 3: Geocomposite drains. Pipes supplied shall be of the category and diameter shown on the drawings or specified in Clause 702.12 and shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate Australian Standard in accordance with Section 175 or as follows: Perforated plastics - AS 2439 (except for perforation dimensions) Precast concrete - Section 701. Category 1 pipes may be substituted for Category 2. Geotextiles used for the outer covering of the geocomposite drain shall comply with the requirements of Clause 702.06 and Section 210. Perforated plastic pipes and geocomposite drains supplied in coils shall be free from any permanent curved set when uncoiled. Plastic pipes and geocomposite drains shall be stored away from sunlight and shall not be exposed unnecessarily to sunlight during delivery, storage and placement.
 702.05 GRANULAR FILTER MATERIALS (a) General
 Granular filter material shall consist of hard, durable and clean sand, gravel or crushed rock, free from clay balls and organic matter, and shall have a pH value greater than 6.0 and less than 8.0. The portion of granular filter material passing a 4.75 mm AS sieve shall have a Sand Equivalent value not less than 80. The grading of granular filter material shall comply with the requirements of Table 702.051 relevant to the granular filter type specified in Clause 702.12.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 702 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 702.051 - Grading Requirements for Granular Filter Material
 
 Sieve
 Size AS
 (mm) A1
 
 Limits of Grading (% passing by mass)
 
 Single and First Stage Filters
 
 Second Stage Filters
 
 A2
 
 A3
 
 A4
 
 A5
 
 A6
 
 B1
 
 B2
 
 B3
 
 B4
 
 37.5
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 26.5
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 100
 
 19.0
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 -
 
 100
 
 100
 
 70-100
 
 13.2
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 90-100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 90-100 90-100 0-30
 
 9.50
 
 -
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 70-100 65-100
 
 100
 
 70-100 40-70
 
 0-10
 
 4.75
 
 -
 
 90-100 90-100 70-100 28-100 48-82
 
 70-100 28-100 0-15
 
 -
 
 2.36
 
 100 75-100 70-100 0-50
 
 0-28
 
 30-60
 
 0-50
 
 0-28
 
 0-5
 
 0-5
 
 1.18
 
 95-100 50-98 40-65
 
 0-10
 
 0-8
 
 15-40
 
 0-10
 
 0-8
 
 -
 
 -
 
 0.600
 
 70-98 30-80 12-40
 
 -
 
 -
 
 5-25
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 0.300
 
 30-60 10-40
 
 0-16
 
 0-5
 
 0-5
 
 0-10
 
 0-5
 
 0-5
 
 -
 
 -
 
 0.150
 
 0-12
 
 0-7
 
 0-4
 
 -
 
 -
 
 0-5
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 0.075
 
 0
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 0-3
 
 (b) Source Rock
 Source rock for crushed rock components of granular filter material shall comply with the requirements of Section 801 - Source Rock for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates.
 
 (c) Crushed Rock Components
 
 The percentage by mass of unsound and marginal rock in that fraction of an aggregate retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve shall not exceed the values specified in Table 702.052.
 Table 702.052 - Marginal and Unsound Rock
 
 Total of Marginal and Unsound Rock
 % (by mass) (max)
 
 Unsound Rock % (by mass) (max)
 
 10
 
 5
 
 (d) No Fines Concrete
 No fines concrete shall consist of B4 filter as defined in Table 702.051 and mixed with 4.0% by mass of cement and 3.5% by mass of water in a mixing plant.
 
 702.06 GEOTEXTILE FILTERS
 A geotextile filter shall consist of a fabric manufactured from synthetic fibres of a long-chain polymer such as polypropylene, polyethylene, polyester or similar material and shall be stabilised against deterioration due to ultraviolet light. After forming, the geotextile shall be processed so that the fibres retain their relative positions with respect to each other. The geotextile shall be free from defects or flaws which significantly affect its physical and/or filtering properties.
 A geotextile filter may be non-woven or knitted fabric and shall comply with the requirements of Table 702.061 relevant to the geotextile filter type specified in Clause 702.12.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 702 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Continuous knit seamless sleeve geotextile filter may be used as a second stage filter.
 
 Table 702.061 - Requirements for Geotextile Filter
 
 Geotextile Filter Type
 
 Minimum
 Robustness G( 1 )
 
 EOS( 2 ) (microns)
 
 Minimum ( 3 ) Elongation (%)
 
 1. First Stage Filter
 
 900
 
 85 - 230
 
 45
 
 (moderately robust)
 
 2. Second Stage Filter (non-woven)
 
 600 - 900
 
 125 - 350
 
 20
 
 3. Second Stage Filter
 
 N/A
 
 125 - 350
 
 50
 
 (knitted seamless sleeve)
 
 ( 1 ) G = Geotextile strength rating
 
 ( 2 ) EOS = Equivalent Opening Size using AS 3706.7 Determination of Pore Size Distribution - Dry Sieving Method.
 
 (3)
 
 Elongation at break as determined by AS 3706.2
 
 Determination of Tensile Properties - Wide Strip Method.
 
 Geotextiles shall be stored away from sunlight and shall not be exposed unnecessarily to sunlight during delivery and placement.
 
 702.07 DRAINAGE SYSTEM AT STRUCTURES
 Where a geotextile drainage system is used at structures the system shall consist of geocomposite drains placed vertically over the full height of the backfilling at the intervals as shown on the drawings.
 Where a geocomposite drainage material is made up of a permeable drainage layer with one or both faces bonded to a geotextile filter fabric, such a system shall be placed over the full height of fill which is in contact with the structure.
 The geotextile filter used in such drains shall be a non-woven product conforming to the requirements of Clause 702.06.
 The geocomposite drainage layer shall have the following minimum hydraulic properties under unit hydraulic gradient:
 (a) permeability perpendicular to the geocomposite under 0.2 kPa normal pressure - 0.5 cm/sec;
 (b) transmissivity in the plane of the geocomposite 
 
 Normal Pressure
 10 kPa 100 kPa 200 kPa 300 kPa
 
 Transmissivity
 350 x 10-6 m2/sec 250 x 10-6 m2/sec 150 x 10-6 m2/sec 100 x 10-6 m2/sec
 
 Geocomposite drains shall be connected to a collector pipe with an outlet to a fitting immediately adjacent to the structure or as shown on the drawings. The collector pipe shall be fitted with a flush-out riser connected to an inspection opening in the verge adjacent to the structure or as shown on the drawings.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 702 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Preformed PVC fittings shall be used for all connections between the geocomposite drains and the collector pipe and all connections shall be sealed and protected to prevent displacement during backfilling.
 702.08 EXCAVATION
 Where a geotextile is to be used as a first stage filter in contact with a trench wall, the trench wall shall be excavated to allow the geotextile to be in close contact with the wall when the granular filter material is placed against the geotextile.
 The bottom of the trench shall be compacted and shall be not more than 50 mm below the specified level of the invert of the pipe. There shall be no departures from the grade of the base of the trench that would allow ponding of water. Excess trench excavation shall be made good by filling back to grade with compacted material of permeability similar to that of the surrounding material and any loose material shall be removed.
 HP The base of the trench shall be inspected to verify compliance with the requirements in this clause prior to placing bedding in completed excavations. The Superintendent shall be notified at least 24 hours prior to the inspection.
 702.09 INSTALLATION
 (a) Depth Subsurface drainage pipes or geocomposite drains shall be laid to the depths or levels shown on the drawings. The top of any subsurface drainage pipe shall be at least 200 mm below subgrade.
 (b) Grade The grade of pipes or geocomposite drains shall be not flatter than 1 in 250.
 (c) Bedding for Drainage Pipe System A bedding of granular filter material of thickness between 25 mm and 50 mm shall be placed across the bottom of the trench. The bedding shall be tamped and screeded or graded to level. Bedding is not required for geocomposite drains.
 (d) Placing of Pipes Pipes shall be placed centrally in the trench on the prepared bedding and held firmly in place. Slotted pipes shall be laid with the openings in the lower half of the pipe.
 (e) Placing of Geocomposite Drains Geocomposite drains shall be placed such that the drain stands vertical, held firmly in place and is centrally located within the trench.
 (f) Jointing Preformed pipe joints and fittings may be used. Splice joints in geocomposite drains and pipes shall be made either with preformed geocomposite drain joints or fittings, or by butting together the sections of drain to be joined and wrapping the joint area with geotextile. Joints made by butting and wrapping with geotextile shall be secured to prevent separation during installation. The minimum width of geotextile used for wrapping shall be 450 mm.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 702 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Lap joints in geotextile used as first stage filters shall consist of an overlap of not less than 900 mm longitudinally and 150 mm transversely. Lap joints in geotextile used as second stage filters shall consist of an overlap of not less than 300 mm.
 (g) Placing Granular Filter Material Filter material shall be placed moist and compacted with minimal disturbance to pipes or geocomposite drains, geotextiles and trench walls. The loose thickness of layers shall not exceed 300 mm. No fines concrete shall be placed and compacted within 1 hour of mixing.
 HP The method of compaction shall be in accordance with the Contractor's procedures and reviewed by the Superintendent.
 (h) Flushing A flushing test shall be carried out on each subsurface drainage line after completion of subsurface drains, flushers and outlets, and after completion of all adjacent kerb and channel, barriers and road furniture. The test shall be witnessed by a representative nominated by the Superintendent. Each drain shall be flushed with sufficient water to remove material that has entered the pipes during construction and to ensure that the drainage line is free from obstruction. The Contractor shall maintain a record of flushing tests for every sub-surface drainage line including the date and time of notification to the Superintendent, the date and time of flushing, and witnesses to the flushing
 702.10 ACCESS POINTS AND INSPECTION OPENINGS
 Subsurface drainage pipes and/or geocomposite drains shall have access points at the beginning and end of the drainage run and shall have inspection openings at intervals of between 100 and 150 metres along the drainage run.
 Where stormwater drainage pits are used as access points, the invert at the beginning of each drainage run shall be located above the top of the pit outlet and the invert at the end of each drainage run, when not shown on the drawings, shall be located not less than 100 mm above the invert of the pit outlet.
 Flushout risers for drainage pipes shall have the same diameter as the pipe.
 Flushout risers for geocomposite drains shall consist of a preformed riser fitting, or a pipe of diameter not less than 100 mm.
 Flushout risers shall have surface fittings as shown on the drawings.
 The outlet point at the end of each drainage run shall be located at a drainage pit, culvert endwall, or outlet in a fill batter or drain.
 Inspection openings as shown on the drawings shall consist of pits having a diameter not less than 600 mm. Pits shall be fitted with concrete or cast iron frame covers as shown on the drawings.
 702.11 MARKER POSTS
 At all fill batter and drain outlets, supply and erect marker posts as shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 702 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 702.12 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS ***
 
 Drainage Run
 
 Nominal Depth of Trench
 (mm)
 
 Pipe
 
 Category
 
 Diameter (mm)
 
 Perforation Size (mm)
 
 ##:
 
 Filter type
 
 Single or First Stage
 Gran- Geoular textile
 
 Second Stage
 Gran- Geoular textile
 
 EOS of Geotextile
 (microns)
 
 Geocomposite Drain
 
 Type
 
 Width (mm)
 
 Granular Backfill
 
 # Continuous knit seamless sleeve geotextile filter.
 
 702.13 MINIMUM TESTING REQUIREMENTS
 
 The Contractor shall test the granular filter material at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that all materials supplied under the contract complies with the specified requirements but which is not less than that shown in Table 702.131.
 Table 702.131 - Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Test
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Grading
 
 On each production day  one per 300 tonnes or part thereof
 
 Unsound Rock Content
 
 On each production day  one per 300 tonnes or part thereof
 
 Sand Equivalent
 
 One each production month
 
 pH
 
 One each production month
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 702 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 703 - GENERAL CONCRETE PAVING
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 304, 610, 687, 714, 812 and 820. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 703.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials and construction of portland cement-based and geopolymer binder-based concrete paving for edgings, footpaths, other surfacing, and shared use paths, together with the necessary excavation and backfilling.
 In the context of general concrete paving, portland cement concrete and geopolymer binder concrete are equivalent products.
 Concrete for edgings, footpaths, and other surfacings shall be normal class to AS 1379 as specified or equivalent geopolymer concrete as defined in this section.
 Concrete for shared use paths shall be concrete grade VR330/32 in accordance with Section 610 or equivalent geopolymer concrete.
 Requirements for structural concrete for bridgeworks and other major concrete components and structures are specified in Section 610.
 
 703.02 STANDARDS
 
 Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 1379).
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS 1012.3.1 Methods of testing concrete, Method 3.1: Determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete--Slump test
 
 AS 1379
 
 Specification and supply of concrete
 
 AS 1478.1
 
 Chemical admixtures for concrete, mortar and grout  Part 1: Admixtures for concrete
 
 AS 2876
 
 Concrete kerbs and channels (gutters) - Manually or machine placed
 
 AS 3582.1
 
 Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement  Part 1: Fly ash
 
 AS 3582.2 Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended
 
 cement  Part 2: Slag - Ground granulated iron blast furnace
 
 AS 3582.3 Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended
 
 cement  Part 3: Amorphous silica
 
 AS 3610
 
 Formwork for concrete
 
 AS 3799
 
 Liquid membrane-forming curing compounds for concrete
 
 AS 3972
 
 General purpose and blended cements
 
 AS/NZS 4671 Steel reinforcing materials
 
 AS/NZS 4680 Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles
 
 (b) Other Standards and Referenced Specifications
 
 ASTM C1116 ASTM C1609 ASTM C1399 ASTM D792 ASTM D3822
 
 Standard Specification for Fiber-Reinforced Concrete Standard Test Method for Flexural Performance of Fiber-Reinforced Concrete (Using Beam With Third-Point Loading) Standard Test Method for Obtaining Average Residual-Strength of FiberReinforced Concrete Standard Test Methods for Density and Specific Gravity (Relative Density) of Plastics by Displacement Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Single Textile Fibers
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 1 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 703.03 DEFINITIONS
 For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply: Alkaline Component: Combinations of alkali and alkali earth containing salts, minerals and glasses. Cement: Material complying with the requirements of AS 3972. Cementitious Material: Portland cement or a mixture of portland cement with one or more of Fly Ash, Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBF Slag), or Amorphous Silica complying with the requirements of AS 3582.1, AS 3582.2 and AS 3582.3 respectively. Edgings: Kerbs, channels, mowing and other edge strips including those behind kerbs and channels.
 Geopolymer Binder: Binder containing greater than 80% Fly Ash, Ground Granulated Blast Furnace Slag (GGBF Slag) or Amorphous Silica complying with the requirements of AS 3582.1, AS 3582.2 and AS 3582.3 respectively, metakaolin and up to 20% alkaline components. Geopolymer Concrete: Concrete which comprises geopolymer binder, aggregates, water and admixtures. Local Streets: Collector roads and all other local roads and streets. Macro Synthetic Fibres: Fibres used to provide the concrete with significant post-cracking capacity and which, subject to satisfactory test results, provide the same performance as steel reinforcement in ground supported concrete paving and shared use paths. Micro Synthetic Fibres: Fibres that create a support network within the concrete which increases its tensile strain capacity for control of plastic shrinkage cracking, but do not offer concrete post-cracking bearing capacity. Portland Cement: General purpose portland cement Type GP complying with the requirements of AS 3972. Shared Use Path: Path which is designated for shared use by pedestrians, cyclists and maintenance vehicles. Steel Fibres: Straight or deformed pieces of cold-drawn steel wire, straight or deformed cut sheet fibres, melt extracted fibres, shaved cold drawn wire fibres and fibres milled from steel blocks, which are suitable for homogeneous mixing into concrete or mortar to improve prescribed properties.
 Surfacings: Traffic islands, median slabs, grass mowing strips, bicycle paths, footpaths, vehicle and pram crossings and other similar slabs or pathways on prepared bedding. Traffic Routes: All State Roads.
 703.04 KERB AND CHANNEL AND OTHER EDGINGS
 Kerb and channel and other edgings shall comply with the requirements of AS 2876.
 703.05 SUPPLY OF PREMIXED CONCRETE
 (a) Portland Cement-based Concrete Portland cementbased concrete shall be either N20, N25 or N32 standard strength grade, as specified for concrete paving complying with the requirements of AS 1379; or concrete grade VR330/32 for shared use paths.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 2 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Kerb and Channel
 Concrete used in kerb extrusion machines will not be subject to compressive strength requirements but shall have a minimum cementitious material content in the finished concrete as follows:  Traffic Routes  a minimum of, or equivalent to, 320 kg of cementitious material or
 geopolymer binder per cubic metre of concrete  Local Streets  a minimum of, or equivalent to, 280 kg of cementitious material or
 geopolymer binder per cubic metre of concrete.
 Where kerb and channel is placed and compacted with internal vibration between previously placed formwork, concrete shall be:  Traffic Routes  N32 portland cementbased concrete or 32 MPa geopolymer concrete
 standard strength grade; and  Local Streets  N25 portland cementbased concrete or 25 MPa geopolymer concrete
 standard strength grade as specified.
 (c) Geopolymer Concrete
 (i) General
 Geopolymer concrete for concrete paving shall be manufactured to comply with the minimum 28 day compressive strength requirements for each strength grade ranging from 20 MPa to 32 MPa; or for shared use paths, geopolymer concrete equivalent to concrete grade VR330/32.
 The mix design for each geopolymer concrete strength grade shall have a unique identification number.
 Geopolymer concrete shall not be mixed when the air temperature is lower than 5C or greater than 35C.
 Water may be added to the freshly mixed geopolymer concrete prior to commencement of discharge subject to the manufacturer's approval and provided a means of accurately measuring the volume of water is available.
 No water shall be added after commencement of discharge of geopolymer concrete unless expressly approved by the manufacturer.
 Geopolymer concrete which has begun to stiffen shall not be used in the works.
 Prior to the discharge of geopolymer concrete at the site, the mixer or agitator shall be operated at mixing speed for not less than three minutes, until the geopolymer concrete achieves the required uniformity.
 (ii) Water
 The quality of water used in the manufacture of geopolymer concrete shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.09, except that no recycled water shall be allowed.
 (iii) Moisture Content of Aggregates
 The determination of moisture content of the fine and coarse aggregates shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.13(d).
 (iv) Addition of Water at the Slump Stand
 Addition of water to the mixed batch of concrete at the slump stand shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.13(h).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 3 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (v) Delivery Docket All information recorded on the delivery docket shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.13(e).
 (vi) Period for Completion of Discharge The period for completion of discharge shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.13(f) except that this time may be extended beyond 60 minutes provided the geopolymer concrete complies with the specified requirements.
 (vii) Water Left in the Mixer or Agitator Water left in the mixer or agitator from the previous load shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.13(g).
 (viii) Calibration of Weighing and Metering Equipment All batch plant weighing and water metering equipment shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.13(i).
 (ix) Manufacturer Competency Manufacturers and/or licensed technology providers utilised in the supply of geopolymer concrete shall have a minimum of three years continuous experience in commercial supply and a demonstrated competency in the technology of the geopolymer concrete to be applied. Documented evidence shall be available to demonstrate supply experience and competency of manufacturers in the geopolymer concrete technology.
 703.06 AGGREGATES
 Concrete aggregates shall comply with the requirements as set out in Section 610.
 703.07 CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES
 Chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of AS 1478.1. They shall be used in accordance with the requirements of Clause 2.5 of AS 1379 and the manufacturer's recommended method of use. Air entraining admixtures shall not be used unless approved by the Superintendent.
 Chemical admixtures containing calcium chloride, calcium formate or triethanolamine shall not be used.
 Chemical admixture dispensers shall be subject to regular maintenance and calibrated in accordance with the requirements of AS 1379, except that in the case of geopolymer concrete production, they shall be calibrated as specified in Section 610.
 703.08 PLACING, COMPACTING AND FINISHING CONCRETE
 Concrete shall be transported, handled and placed to prevent segregation, loss or leakage of materials. Fresh concrete shall not be placed against concrete which has taken its initial set, except at properly formed construction joints. Concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by means of continuous tamping and internal vibration and shall be worked around any embedments and into corners of formwork or excavations to produce a dense concrete free from voids, honeycombing, segregation or surface defects.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 4 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Unformed surfaces shall be hand tamped to ensure a smooth surface with a uniform colour and appearance, and screeded to achieve the specified level, dimensions, falls and tolerances.
 Geopolymer concrete shall be placed and finished in accordance with this clause and the geopolymer manufacturer's placement guidelines.
 Any concrete repairs shall be carried out using a method and materials accepted by the Superintendent.
 703.09 AMBIENT WEATHER FOR CONCRETING OPERATIONS
 Concreting operations shall comply with the requirements of Clauses 610.17(a), 610.17(b), 610.17(c) and 610.17(d) for limits, restrictions and treatments to be applied for concreting in hot, cold and wet weather, except that curing shall be in accordance with Clause 703.10.
 703.10 CURING OF CONCRETE
 (a) General
 The curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed and shall continue uninterrupted for a period of not less than 7 days after placing the concrete, with the exception of concrete edgings which shall be cured for a period of not less than three days after placing the concrete.
 Concrete shall be cured either by water curing, wet hessian, polyethylene sheeting which is adequately sealed, curing compound or a combination of these. Freshly finished exposed concrete surfaces shall be effectively protected from rain or damage from other sources, until hard set has occurred.
 Curing compounds shall comply with AS 3799. The curing compound shall be applied in two coats using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance. The curing membrane shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing. Any damage to the curing membrane during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application.
 At the end of the curing period, concrete paving and shared use paths shall provide a dense, hard wearing surface.
 (b) Curing of Geopolymer Concrete
 Geopolymer concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of Clause 703.10(a), including the specified minimum curing periods, and as follows:
 (i) The curing methods acceptable for curing of geopolymer concrete are: (1) covering with polyethylene sheet (2) maintaining the formwork in place in accordance with the requirements of Clauses 610.23(e) and Clause 610.23(f) respectively (3) covering with wet hessian blankets. Hessian or burlap mats shall consist of at least two layers of hessian having a combined weight of at least 0.5 kg/m2 dry and shall have a width after shrinkage of at least 300 mm greater than necessary to cover the entire width and vertical faces of concrete paving and shared use paths. The hessian blankets or mats shall be new or have only been used for curing concrete, shall be free from tears and shall be soaked in water for at least one hour prior to concrete placement proceeding.
 (ii) Further to the requirements of this clause curing of geopolymer concrete shall also be carried out in conjunction with the procedures as stated in the manufacturer's placement guidelines.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 5 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 703.11 CONFORMANCE TESTING FOR CONCRETE STRENGTH AND CONSISTENCY
 
 The minimum compressive strength requirements for each strength grade shall be as shown in Table 703.111.
 
 Table 703.111
 
 Portland Cement Concrete Strength
 Grade
 
 Geopolymer Binder Concrete Strength
 Grade
 
 Minimum Compressive Strength at 28 days (MPa)
 
 N20
 
 20
 
 20
 
 N25
 
 25
 
 25
 
 N32
 
 32
 
 32
 
 VR330/32
 
 32
 
 32
 
 Sampling and testing of the strength of concrete shall be carried out in accordance with Clause 6.2 of AS 1379. The frequency of sampling and testing shall provide at least one sample at the point of discharge to be tested of each 50 m3 or part thereof of each strength grade placed on any one day. Where less than 50 m is provided for any one day then one sample shall be tested of each strength grade.
 The consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of each concrete strength sample in accordance with AS 1012.3 and Clause 5.2 of AS 1379. The concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated concrete slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in Table 5.1 of Clause 5.2 of AS 1379.
 Sampling and testing for concrete used in shared use paths shall be in accordance with Section 610.
 Compressive strength testing and slump testing shall not be required for concrete used in extruded kerbs and channels and other edgings.
 
 703.12 FORMWORK
 The materials, design, construction and stripping of formwork shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS 3610. Joints in formwork shall be constructed such that loss of mortar is prevented.
 Prior to placing concrete in an earth excavation, formwork shall be erected so that fresh concrete is not placed directly against the sides of the excavation.
 Formwork shall not be stripped until the minimum times specified in AS 3610 Table 5.4.1 have elapsed from the time of completion of the placing of concrete. The minimum time shall also not be less than:
 (a) 2 days for vertical formwork on external surfaces; and
 (b) 1 day for vertical forms on permanently hidden surfaces.
 
 703.13 STEEL REINFORCEMENT Steel reinforcement shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS/NZS 4671. Galvanising where specified shall be in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 4680.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 6 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The minimum cover of any steel reinforcement to the nearest concrete surface shall be 50 mm unless shown on the drawings. Reinforcement shall be supported using either concrete or plastic chairs. Wire chairs with or without plastic tips, bricks or pieces of timber or coarse aggregate shall not be used to support steel reinforcement.
 703.14 FIBRE REINFORCED CONCRETE
 (a) General Concrete paving and shared use paths may be constructed with fibre reinforced concrete in lieu of steel reinforcement, provided the fibre reinforced concrete provides equivalent performance to steel reinforced concrete in accordance with this section.
 (b) Macro Synthetic Fibres Where it is proposed to replace up to SL82 steel mesh with synthetic fibres, such fibres shall be in the form of fine macro synthetic high performance fibres produced from virgin polypropylene or copolymer. Macro synthetic fibres shall be collated or supplied in water soluble pucks and supplied in fully biodegradable bags to ensure that fibres are uniformly distributed. Micro synthetic fibres shall not be used alone to replace steel reinforcement or to achieve long term crack control. Where required micro synthetic fibres shall only be used for control of plastic shrinkage cracking, impact and abrasion resistance and explosive spalling resistance of concrete. Where specifically designed into concrete paving and shared use paths, micro synthetic fibres shall only be used in conjunction with macro synthetic fibres or steel fibres or with steel reinforcement.
 (c) Steel Fibres Where specified the type and quantity of steel fibres used shall as a minimum provide equivalent performance to concrete paving and shared use paths constructed with steel reinforcement. The use of steel fibres in concrete paving and shared use paths shall be such that the steel fibres are not exposed at the surface to eliminate any potential injury to users.
 (d) Performance Requirements Fibres shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1116 and shall be supported with documentary evidence confirming their long term resistance to deterioration when in contact with the moisture and alkalis present in cementitious paste or the substances present in chemical admixtures and shall have nil absorption. A current certificate of compliance shall be provided to the Superintendent. Fibres shall be tested to the requirements of ASTM C1609 (flexural toughness) and ASTM C1399 (average residual strength of fibre reinforced concrete). Fibres shall be added to the concrete in such a manner to ensure that they are uniformly distributed, balling does not occur, and the concrete mix remains workable and cohesive without any segregation.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 7 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (i) Macro synthetic fibres
 The macro synthetic fibre shall be capable of absorbing maximum energy without breakage and shall be designed to retain its cross sectional shape and avoid brittle failure.
 
 (1) Properties of macro synthetic fibre
 
 The macro synthetic fibres shall possess the following properties:
 
  Tensile strength (ASTM D3822)
 
 > 400 MPa
 
  Modulus of elasticity (ASTM D3822)
 
 > 5.0 GPa
 
  Specific gravity (fibre density) (ASTM D792) > 0.91 g/cm
 
  Fibres shall be at least 45 mm or at least twice the length of the aggregate that will be used in the concrete mix (i.e. 20 mm aggregate requires minimum 40 mm fibre).
 
  Where specifically designed and tested, macro synthetic and micro synthetic fibres may be used in combination to address both early age and long term crack control provided the minimum performance requirements of this clause are satisfied.
 
 (2) Properties of macro synthetic fibre reinforced concrete
 
 Macro synthetic fibre reinforced concrete shall possess the following properties:
 
  Average residual strength (ASTM C1399)
 
 > 0.56 MPa
 
  Flexural toughness (ASTM C1609)
 
 > 1.5 MPa
 
  Re3 (Flexural toughness factor) (ASTM C1609) > 30% Note: Re3 = % of flexural strength at 3 mm deflection of standard beam test.
 
 Macro synthetic fibres shall have supporting evidence in the form of satisfactory test results by an accredited and independent testing facility stating that the fibres, at the dosage rate specified by the manufacturer, provide the same performance as the steel reinforcement being replaced.
 
 Where macro synthetic fibres are proposed to replace SL82 steel mesh, they shall be added into the concrete mix at the minimum dosage rate of 5.6 kg per cubic metre in fully degradable and disintegrating bags. Where macro synthetic fibres are proposed to replace up to SL72 steel mesh, they shall be added into the concrete mix at the minimum dosage rate of 4.6 kg per cubic metre.
 
 (ii) Steel fibres
 
 Steel fibre reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of ASTM A820 for Type I, cold drawn wire, or Type II, cut sheet.
 
 All fibres shall be deformed and have a minimum tensile strength of 800 MPa and an aspect ratio between 40 and 70.
 
 (e) Fibre Content
 Determination of fibre content shall be based on a sample of a known volume not less than 6 litres at the minimum sampling frequency as stated in Clause 703.11. The sample volume shall be determined to the nearest 0.1 litres. The fibre content shall be separated from the concrete (for example, by sieving and/or washing) and then dried. Where synthetic fibres are used, the samples may be soaked with alcohol, stirred until the fibres float to the surface and the fibres recovered. The dried fibre content shall be weighed to the nearest 1 gram. The actual fibre content shall then be calculated and reported to the nearest 0.1 kg per cubic metre. The worksheet and/or report for determination of fibre content shall be submitted to the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 8 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 703.15 TOLERANCES ON LINE, LEVEL AND SHAPE
 All surfaces shall be finished in conformity with the lines, grades, thicknesses and cross sections shown on the drawings or as specified, within the following limits: (a) Concrete paving including footpaths, edgings, other surfacings and shared use paths shall
 be shaped to match existing fixtures, e.g. pit covers, edgings and vehicle crossings, within 5 mm. (b) The departure of the finished work from line or level shall not exceed 10 mm at any point, and the rate of change of deviation from line or level shall not exceed 10 mm in 10 m. Except on curves or in shaped areas, the deviation of the finished work from a 3 m straightedge shall not exceed 5 mm at any point. (c) Section dimensions shall not differ from those shown on the drawings by more than 5 mm except that overall width shall not exceed the specified width by more than 15 mm; and on dimensions less than 25 mm the tolerance shall be 3 mm. (d) Where median surfacings are to be constructed between edge sections of the same level, paving shall be crowned to produce a crossfall between 1% and 3% towards the edges. (e) Kerb and channel shall be constructed to the level of the adjoining pavement with a tolerance of -0 to +10 mm. Except on curves or in shaped areas, the deviation of the finished work from a 3 m straightedge shall not exceed 5 mm at any point.
 703.16 THICKNESS AND STEEL MESH REQUIREMENTS
 The following thickness and steel mesh requirements shall apply: (a) Concrete paving including footpaths, edgings and other surfacings shall be 125 mm thick,
 and when steel reinforcement is specified, they shall be reinforced with SL72 steel mesh. (b) Shared use paths shall be 150 mm thick, and when steel reinforcement is specified, they
 shall be reinforced with SL82 steel mesh. (c) Median surfacings within 2 m of the edges of medians and bays of footpath adjacent to
 intersecting kerb and channel shall be 150 mm thick and reinforced with SL72 steel mesh. (d) Private entrance vehicle crossings shall be 150 mm thick and when steel reinforcement is
 specified, they shall be reinforced with SL72 steel mesh. (e) Commercial vehicle crossings shall be 170 mm thick, and when steel reinforcement is
 specified, they shall be reinforced with SL82 steel mesh.
 703.17 SETTING OUT
 The Contractor shall set out the work in accordance with the drawings and as specified.
 HP The Superintendent will review and confirm the set out. The work shall be constructed in accordance with the confirmed set out to the line and level and cross-sectional profiles as shown on the drawings.
 703.18 PROVISION FOR DRAINAGE DURING CONSTRUCTION
 Before obstructing any waterway, channel or culvert, the Contractor shall make appropriate provision for its temporary diversion, and obtain prior written approval from the relevant waterway authority. The Contractor shall make provision for the safe discharge of drainage and stormwater at all times during construction.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 9 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 703.19 HOUSEHOLD DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS Existing household drains which are not connected to underground stormwater drains shall be altered as necessary and connected through the kerbing to drain into the channel. Provision shall be made for connection of future household drains as specified or shown on the drawings.
 703.20 EXCAVATION The Contractor shall carry out any necessary excavations and disposal of excavated material. The Contractor shall box out to a sufficient depth to allow for the required compacted thickness of bedding material under the full width of concrete paving. Where it is necessary to excavate existing pavement, the excavation shall not extend more than 150 mm from the edge of the adjacent face. Existing asphalt or bituminous surfacing shall be saw cut for a sufficient depth to produce a neat vertical face.
 703.21 BEDDING PREPARATION All bedding material used for cast in place concrete paving works shall be compacted size 20 mm Class 3 or Class 4 crushed rock or Class 3 or Class 4 crushed concrete, manufactured and supplied in accordance with Sections 812 or 820 respectively. Bedding material for shared use paths shall be compacted size 20 mm Class 3 crushed rock or Class 3 crushed concrete in accordance with Section 812 or 820 respectively, and Section 304.
 (a) Edgings Where edgings are constructed over pavement layers, bedding shall be provided between the pavement layer and the underside of the edging, or the edging thickened to match the pavement layer. Where edgings are not constructed over pavement layers, bedding shall be not less than 100 mm compacted thickness.
 (b) Shared Use Paths Bedding shall be not less than 150 mm thick compacted in accordance with Section 304.
 (c) Footpaths and other Surfacings Bedding shall be not less than 100 mm compacted thickness. Bedding shall be trimmed to the appropriate levels, moistened as necessary, and firmly compacted.
 For footpaths, other surfacings and shared use paths the foundation shall be true to grade and cross section as shown on the drawings by filling and excavating as necessary. All soft wet or unstable material shall be removed to a depth of not less than 100 mm below the design level of the underside of bedding and filled with bedding material moistened and compacted to form a stable foundation. Immediately before concrete is placed, the bedding shall be moist but shall have no free water on the surface.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 10 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 703.22 PROVISION FOR PERMANENT SIGNS Sign post sockets shall be supplied and placed by the Contractor to provide for erection of permanent signs in the areas to be paved. Sockets shall be placed at the locations shown on the drawings. Socket depths, dimensions and installation requirements shall be in accordance with Section 714.06(d). Any concrete which falls into the sleeve shall be removed.
 703.23 MACHINE EXTRUSION Where an extrusion or slip-form machine is used, the datum for grade and alignment of the section to be extruded shall be established by the Contractor. Concrete shall be fed to the machine at a uniform rate. The machine shall be operated to produce a satisfactorily compacted, dense mass of concrete free of any faulty or honeycombed patches. Surfaces shall be substantially free from surface pitting larger than 5 mm diameter. Where work using fixed forms is combined with extruded work and similar concrete mixes are used for both, the concrete in the fixed form sections shall be compacted with internal vibration to produce a satisfactory compacted mass of concrete.
 703.24 PROFILE TRANSITIONS AND MATCHING EXISTING SECTIONS Where it is necessary to join to an existing section of profile different from that being constructed, the change of profile shall be made at a constant rate between 10 and 20 mm per metre. Transitions between different profiles shall be made in accordance with the drawings. Matching of new to existing concrete paving shall be such that it appears identical to the existing section. When replacing damaged sections of concrete paving or shared use paths, the damaged section shall be removed completely to the nearest construction joint and replaced with identical material to the existing.
 703.25 SURFACE FINISH Exposed surfaces shall be treated as follows:
 (a) Edgings All edgings shall be rendered and have a steel trowel finish. Rendering shall be applied within 30 minutes of placing or extruding concrete. The mortar used shall consist of two parts of fine aggregate, one part of cement, and sufficient water to produce a mix of suitable consistency. The thickness of rendering shall not exceed 3 mm. Exposed surfaces shall be given a steel trowel finish.
 (b) Footpaths, other Surfacings and Shared Use Paths Fresh concrete shall be compacted with internal vibration and worked until all the coarse aggregate is below the surface and the mortar comes to the top. It shall then be struck off and finished to grade and cross section with a wooden float to produce a lightly textured non skid surface. All outside edges of slabs and all joints shall be finished with a suitable edging tool.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 11 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 After finishing, all work shall present a consistently neat appearance of uniform colour. All edges shall be sharp and clean and bullnoses shall be regular and of uniform radius. All discoloured concrete shall be cleaned or replaced by the Contractor.
 Permanently hidden concrete surfaces of concrete paving including footpaths, edgings, other concrete surfacing, and shared use paths shall have a Class 4 surface finish in accordance with AS 3610.
 All other concrete elements constructed with reference to Section 703 shall have a Class 3 surface finish for external surfaces and a Class 4 surface finish for permanently hidden surfaces in accordance with AS 3610.
 703.26 JOINTS
 Transverse joints shall be constructed at right angles to the back of edgings and the edge of footpaths and shared use paths. Joints in footpaths and shared use paths shall be opposite to joints in adjacent edgings.
 (a) Edgings
 (i) Transverse Joints
 Transverse joints shall be constructed at regular intervals not exceeding 2.5 m. For extruded edgings this shall be done by a method which does not damage or distort the adjacent surfaces. For edging constructed using fixed forms, templates shall be removed as soon as practicable after finishing the work. The guillotine (for extruded work) or template (for fixed work) shall cut between 40% and 70% of the area of the section. In both cases the resultant slot in the edging shall be tooled to a depth of 20 mm to produce a neat groove not less than 5 mm wide on the exposed surfaces, following which a vertical cut shall be made through the base of the groove to a depth not less than 50 mm from the surface.
 (ii) Expansion Joints
 Expansion joints shall be placed at junctions with bridges, and shall be 15 mm wide and filled with cork or bituminous impregnated particle board strip extending for the full width and full depth of the edging. The filler shall be placed in position before concrete is placed, and shall be held firmly in position during the placing of the concrete.
 (b) Footpaths, other Surfacings and Shared Use Paths
 (i) Expansion Joints
 Expansion joints shall be placed at intervals not exceeding 10 m, on either side of vehicle crossings, at junctions with existing footpaths and shared use paths, at junctions with bridges and around all abutting structures such as pits, utility services, power poles, kerbs and other such features. The expansion joint shall be 15 mm wide and filled with cork or bituminous impregnated particle board strip extending for the full width and full depth of the paving. The filler shall be placed in position before concrete is placed, and shall be held firmly in position during the placing of the concrete.
 Where required dowelled expansion joints shall be installed in accordance with the details and locations as shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 12 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (ii) Control Joints Control joints at least 25% of the paving thickness deep and 5 mm wide shall be formed with a cutting tool at 2.5 m intervals along the full width of footpaths, other surfacings and shared use paths, within four hours of placing the concrete where the air temperature measured at the time of placement is between 20C and 35C and within 24 hours of placing the concrete where the air temperature measured at the time of placement is less than 20C.
 (c) Between Concrete Paving and Shared Use Path Except on narrow medians (less than 2.0 m wide) surfaced full width, bonding between the concrete paving or shared use path and the edging shall be prevented by painting the back of the edging with bitumen, or by using a strip of bituminous felt material between the edging and the concrete paving or shared use path.
 703.27 PROTECTION OF CONCRETE
 All concrete shall be protected from damage from early loading by pedestrians, animals, vehicles and from rain or any other cause.
 The Contractor shall ensure that no vehicles are permitted to cross over private entrance or commercial vehicle crossings a minimum of four days after completion of casting of the concrete. Vehicles equal to or less than 1.5 tonnes in weight may be permitted to cross after 4 days, vehicles greater than 1.5 tonnes may be permitted to cross after 7 days.
 703.28 MARKING OF CONDUIT POSITIONS
 The positions of any existing conduits passing under edgings shall be marked by a chase in the edging immediately above the conduit together with a suitable identification mark.
 703.29 BACKFILLING AND PAVEMENT RESTORATION
 As soon as the concrete has cured sufficiently and not earlier than 3 days after placing, topsoil material, free from perishable matter and lumps, shall be placed and firmly compacted in layers not exceeding 150 mm in thickness and to a width not less than 300 mm behind the edging to the top of the edging.
 Where edging has been constructed alongside an existing pavement, part of which has been excavated to permit the construction of the edging, the excavated space shall be backfilled to the surface level of the existing pavement. Size 7 or Size 10 asphalt shall be used for this work and firmly compacted in layers not exceeding 100 mm in thickness.
 703.30 CRACKING OF CONCRETE
 The concrete shall have no surface cracks at any stage after construction of width greater than 0.2 mm. Where such cracks exist, they shall be identified as a non-conformance.
 Cracked sections of concrete shall be either removed and replaced, or repaired in accordance with Section 687  Repair of Concrete Cracks, as directed by the Superintendent.
 For damaged kerb and channel and edgings, a length of at least 1 m shall be removed and the replacement section shall be: (a) constructed on compacted bedding; (b) dowelled into the adjoining sections with 12 mm diameter hot dip galvanised dowels
 embedded at least 100 mm each side of the joint; and (c) shaped and finished with curved trowels to match the profile and surface finish of
 adjoining sections.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 703 (Page 13 of 13)
 
 SECTION 704 - PRECAST CONCRETE KERB
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 701. If Section 701 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 701 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 704.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the supply and placing of precast concrete kerb as shown on the drawings or at locations as specified.
 
 704.02 SUPPLY OF KERBS ##[strikethrough (a) or (b) below]:
 *** (a) All kerbs required under this Contract will be supplied free of cost to the Contractor on site or at another agreed location in lengths of 1.2 m.
 All sections shall be carefully inspected at the time of delivery by the Contractor's representative, and any damaged sections clearly marked in the presence of the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall notify the Superintendent at least two weeks in advance of the date on which kerb sections are required.
 *** (b) All kerbs required under this Contract shall be supplied by the Contractor and shall conform with the profiles shown on the drawings.
 Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, concrete shall be N20 standard strength grade complying with the requirements of AS 1379 - Specification and supply of concrete. Aggregates for the concrete mix shall comply with the requirements as set out in Table 701.021 of Section 701. The construction of the items covered by this section shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS 3600 - Concrete Structures and as specified herein.
 Kerbs shall be cast in lengths of 1.2 m, and in order to ensure that all sections butt together neatly, holes for placing dowels or interlocking joints shall be provided in each section.
 Any section damaged during handling, storing and transporting shall not be used.
 The surface of all sections shall be consistently smooth and of uniform colour.
 
 704.03 PLACING OF PRECAST KERBS
 (a) Preparation of Base
 The foundation shall be excavated or filled to levels 75 mm below the levels fixed for the base of the kerb. All soft, wet or unstable material shall be removed to a further depth of 75 mm and the resulting space filled with earth, sand or gravel of a quality that when moistened and compacted will form a stable foundation. Bedding material consisting of sand, gravel or crushed rock shall then be placed and fully compacted to the specified level.
 (b) Placing
 The kerb shall be set so that the top conforms with the line and grade specified within a tolerance of 15 mm. All sections shall be firmly butted together.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 704 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth 704.04 PLACING OF PRECAST SPIKED KERBS Where precast kerbs are to be pinned to existing pavements, they shall be placed true to line with adjoining sections firmly butted together. Where necessary, the sections shall be bedded on 6 to 1 cement mortar in order to maintain an even grade along the top of the kerb. The kerb sections shall be held in position by 12 mm diameter steel spikes 300 mm long driven into the pavement so that the tops are at least 10 mm below the tops of the kerbs. The holes in the tops of the kerbs shall then be filled level with the top with 3 to 1 cement mortar. 704.05 BACKFILLING Where specified filling shall be placed and thoroughly compacted behind and up to the level of the top of the kerb.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 704 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 SECTION 705 - DRAINAGE PITS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 610, 611, 689, 701 and 703. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 705.01 GENERAL
 This section specifies the requirements for the supply of materials and construction of drainage pits including the associated excavation, backfilling, culvert connections and supply and fitting of covers and associated components.
 The supply of concrete and construction of items covered by this section shall comply with the requirements of Section 610.
 
 705.02 STANDARDS
 
 Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS/NZS 4680).
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 AS/NZS 3679.1 Structural steel  Hot rolled bars and sections
 
 AS/NZS 4671 Steel reinforcing materials
 
 AS/NZS 4680 Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles
 
 AS 5100
 
 Bridge Design Set
 
 (b) Other Standards and Referenced Specifications
 
 ASTM C1116 Standard Specification for Fiber-Reinforced Concrete
 
 ASTM C1609
 
 Standard Test Method for Flexural Performance of Fiber-Reinforced Concrete (Using Beam With Third-Point Loading)
 
 ASTM C1399
 
 Standard Test Method for Obtaining Average Residual-Strength of FiberReinforced Concrete
 
 ASTM D792
 
 Standard Test Methods for Density and Specific Gravity (Relative Density) of Plastics by Displacement
 
 ASTM D3822 Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of Single Textile Fibers
 
 ASTM A820
 
 Standard Specification for Steel Fibres for Fibre-Reinforced Concrete
 
 Section 175 details the relevant references to these documents.
 
 705.03 DEFINITIONS
 Drainage pit: A reinforced concrete chamber constructed or installed below ground, which is designed to receive water from the surface and from connected upstream underground stormwater drain(s) and facilitate its discharge into a connected downstream stormwater drain.
 Fibre reinforced concrete (FRC): A concrete mixture containing uniformly dispersed and randomly oriented fibres.
 Prototype testing: Load testing of the first type of unit(s) from a specific design and production.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 705 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 705.04 MATERIALS
 
 (a) Concrete
 
 (i) Conventional Portland Cement-based Concrete
 
 All concrete shall be manufactured to the concrete mix design registered by State Growth and comply with the requirements of Section 610. Concrete grades shall comply with Table 705.041
 
 Table 705.041
 
 Minimum Concrete Grade Used for :
 
 VR330/32
 
 Drainage pits reinforced with steel reinforcement
 
 VR450/50
 
 Precast drainage pits using fibre reinforcement
 
 (ii) Geopolymer Concrete
 Geopolymer binder-based concrete as defined in Section 703 may be used for the construction of drainage pits provided the supply of geopolymer concrete and construction comply with the requirements of Section 610 and satisfy the concrete grade requirements of Table 705.041.
 (b) Registration of Concrete Mix Designs
 Concrete mix designs shall be registered in accordance with the requirements of Section 610, and re-registered on an annual basis, unless mix components change prior to the expiry of registration.
 (c) Covers, Grates, Lids and Lintels
 Covers, grates, lids and lintels shall be as shown on the drawings.
 (d) Step Irons
 Step irons shall be manufactured from steel to AS/NZS 3679.1 Grade 250, or AS/NZS 4671 Grade N500 and after fabrication shall be prepared, pre-treated and hot dip galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 4680 with a minimum average coating thickness equivalent to 600 g/m2, or manufactured from 13 mm steel bar covered with polypropylene plastic to a design and sample approved by the Superintendent.
 (e) Reinforcement
 All steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of Section 611.
 (f) Fibres
 When relevant to the registered concrete mix, fibres shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C1116 and shall be supported with documentary evidence confirming their long term resistance to deterioration when in contact with the moisture and alkalis present in cementitious paste or the substances present in chemical admixtures.
 Fibres shall be tested to the requirements of ASTM C1609 (flexural toughness) and ASTM C1399 (average residual strength of fibre reinforced concrete) to ensure compliance of the fibre reinforced concrete with the requirements of AS 5100.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 705 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Fibres shall be added to the concrete in such a manner to ensure that they are uniformly distributed, balling does not occur, and the concrete mix remains workable and cohesive without any segregation.
 
 (i) Synthetic Fibres
 
 Synthetic fibres shall be in the form of fine micro and macro virgin copolymer or polypropylene, consisting of twisted bundle non-fibrillated monofilament and fibrillated network fibre.
 
 The synthetic fibre shall be capable of absorbing maximum energy without breakage and shall be designed to retain its cross sectional shape and avoid brittle failure.
 
 (1) Properties of synthetic fibre
 
 The synthetic fibres shall possess the following properties:
 
  Tensile strength (ASTM D3822)
 
 > 550 MPa
 
  Modulus of elasticity (ASTM D3822)
 
 > 5.0 GPa
 
  Specific gravity (fibre density) (ASTM D792) > 0.91 g/cm
 
  Aspect ratio (length divided by the equivalent diameter of the fibre) between 70 and 170)
 
 (2) Properties of synthetic fibre reinforced concrete
 
 Synthetic fibre reinforced concrete shall possess the following properties:
 
  Average residual strength (ASTM C1399)
 
 > 1.0 MPa
 
  Flexural toughness (ASTM C1609)
 
 > 4.5 MPa
 
  Re3(Flexural toughness factor) (ASTM C1609) > 40% Note: Re3 - % of flexural strength at 3 mm deflection of standard beam test.
 
 (ii) Steel Fibres
 
 Steel fibres shall comply with the requirements of ASTM A820 for Type I, cold drawn wire, or Type II, cut sheet.
 
 All fibres shall be deformed and have a minimum tensile strength of 800 MPa and an aspect ratio between 40 and 70.
 
 705.05 EXCAVATION
 (a) General Excavation shall be to the depth indicated on the drawings or as necessary to secure a satisfactory foundation. Backfill material conforming to the requirements of Section 701 shall be supplied, placed and compacted in accordance with Clause 705.17.
 (b) Precast Pits For precast pits the excavation shall provide a clearance from all external faces of the pit to each face of the excavation of not less than 400 mm. Bedding conforming to the requirements of Section 701 shall be supplied, placed and compacted to a thickness not less than 80 mm on a clay foundation or 150 mm on a rock foundation.
 705.06 CAST IN PLACE PITS
 Cast in place pits shall be constructed at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the drawings.
 Cast in place pits shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of Section 610.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 705 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 705.07 PRECAST STEEL REINFORCED CONCRETE DRAINAGE PITS
 Precast steel reinforced concrete drainage pits shall be manufactured, supplied and installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 610.
 Where precast steel reinforced concrete drainage pits do not conform to the drawings, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent detailed drawings and design computations carried out by a pre-qualified consultant and proof engineered by a Proof Engineer who is pre-qualified in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for pre-qualification, or approved by the Superintendent.
 705.08 PRECAST FIBRE REINFORCED CONCRETE DRAINAGE PITS
 (a) General
 Precast fibre reinforced concrete (FRC) drainage pits shall be manufactured, supplied and installed in accordance with the requirements of Section 610.
 Precast FRC drainage pits shall be subject to the following conditions:
 (i) The design of FRC drainage pits shall comply with the requirements of AS 5100 and the following additional loading requirements: (1) the combined factored lateral pressure from axle loadings at any point at the ultimate limit state shall be not less than 25 kPa (2) adequate drainage to be provided to pit walls to avoid hydrostatic pressure (3) vertical load 210 kN applied anywhere on the pit (4) equivalent minimum reinforcement area to be 150 mm2/m.
 The design shall as a minimum provide equivalent performance to drainage pits constructed with steel reinforcement.
 (ii) The design of the FRC drainage pits shall be supported by detailed drawings and design computations carried out by a pre-qualified consultant and proof engineered by a Proof Engineer who is pre-qualified in accordance with the VicRoads scheme for prequalification.
 (iii) FRC drainage pits shall not be located under roads.
 (iv) Concrete used for the construction of FRC drainage pits shall comply with the requirements of Clause 705.04 and Section 610.
 (b) Prototype Testing
 A sample of two prototype FRC drainage pits shall be load tested in accordance with the requirements of AS 5100 to demonstrate that FRC drainage pits manufactured under the same conditions, and to the same design, satisfy the requirements of this section.
 Where a new design or a significant departure from a proven design is proposed, prototype testing, appropriate to the design or design change, shall be carried out in accordance with the requirements of this section.
 A significant change to an existing design shall be a change in the concrete mix design, decrease in the quantity of reinforcing fibre, change in the agreed brand, type and source of reinforcing fibre or decrease in the design wall thickness.
 (c) Fibres
 Fibres used in the manufacture of precast FRC drainage pits shall comply with the requirements of Clause 705.04(f).
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 705 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 705.09 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PRECAST CONCRETE DRAINAGE PITS
 (a) General Precast pits shall be installed at the locations and to the dimensions shown on the drawings.
 (b) Provision for Stormwater Drainage Connections Provision shall be made for the connection of all stormwater drainage, culverts and subsurface drains as shown on the drawings. Holes for subsurface drains shall be 150 mm diameter. Weepholes of 50 mm diameter shall be provided in all precast pits and shall be placed between the midpoint and top of the stormwater drain in those walls which have openings for drains.
 (c) Segments If a precast pit is cast in segments, each section of the pit shall be rebated to ensure correct alignment and to prevent horizontal movement. A minimum rebate of 15 mm shall be used.
 (d) Completion on Site Where precast pits are to be completed on site, the provision of cut outs and protruding reinforcement shall be as specified or in accordance with the drawings.
 705.10 STORMWATER DRAINAGE CONNECTIONS
 All stormwater drainage connections to pits shall be neatly made, and where necessary the ends of all drains shall be trimmed off and finished with cementitious mortar as stated in Clause 705.14.
 Openings into drainage pit walls to facilitate stormwater drainage connections shall be neatly saw cut to the required size.
 Weepholes or holes installed on site shall be cut. Breaking out of holes is not permitted. Pits shall be replaced if circumferential or longitudinal cracking occurs as a result of installing holes or if the hole exceeds the pipe diameter by more than 50 mm.
 Reinforcement exposed by the cutting of holes shall be coated with an approved epoxy treatment to prevent corrosion prior to rendering around the pipes.
 705.11 STEP IRONS
 Pits greater than 1.0 m deep shall be fitted with step irons as shown on the drawings. Steps shall be located so that they do not obstruct openings and that water does not discharge onto them. Steps shall be set into a wall which has no openings, or beside an opening, or across a corner of the pit.
 Step irons shall be installed horizontal, vertically in line and shall project uniformly from drainage pit walls.
 Where drainage pits are extended in height from the lowest pit, step irons shall be located such that an equidistant spacing between step irons is still maintained.
 Step irons of an approved proprietary type shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 705 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where step irons are cast in place, they shall be epoxy mortared into drilled holes using an epoxy material and method approved by the Superintendent. The joints between the step irons and the shafts shall be completely filled and neatly pointed so that the step irons are held rigid and the joints are watertight.
 705.12 SHAPING OF FLOOR Pit floors shall be smoothly shaped from the inlets to the outlet for a height of one-third of the diameter of the outlet pipe with cementitious mortar, to provide a profile that will ensure smooth flow conditions between inlet and outlet pipes and prevent any snagging of debris. The cementitious mortar shall comply with the requirements of Clause 610.32.
 705.13 SURFACE FINISH The method of construction and the materials used in the concrete and formwork shall remain consistent and shall comply with the requirements of this specification for surface finish. Surfaces shall be finished uniform in appearance with a Class 2 surface finish in accordance with the requirements of Section 610.
 705.14 JOINTING The ends of components shall be free of any foreign matter at the time of jointing and shall be arranged to give best fit. The joints between various components such as drainage pits, access chambers and pipes shall be made watertight using a cementitious mortar in accordance with the requirements of Clause 610.32. The joint areas shall be thoroughly cleaned and wetted just prior to filling. The cementitious mortar shall be used within its allowable application time and shall not be retempered. The joints shall be finished to provide smooth surfaces, uniform with the inner surfaces of pits and access chambers. Mortared joints and recesses shall be cured for a period of not less than 48 hours. Backfilling operations against end structures shall not be carried out during the curing period.
 705.15 CONCRETE REPAIRS The method of repair of minor surface imperfections including porous spots, shallow honeycombing, rough areas and blow holes not conforming to the class of surface finish as specified in Clause 705.13, and the method of cementitious patch repair of other concrete defects shall be in accordance with Section 689. Epoxy materials shall not be used for the patch repair of concrete. The exposed surface of the repaired area shall be similar in texture and colour to the surrounding concrete.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 705 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth 705.16 FITTING OF COVERS Frames for pit covers shall be cast into the top of the pit or bedded on fresh mortar, 5 mm thick, consisting of two parts of sand, one part of cement and sufficient water to produce a mix of suitable consistency. The level at every point of the perimeter shall be within 10 mm of the design level for that point, and the line of the cover shall be within 10 mm of the design kerb line. 705.17 BACKFILLING AROUND PITS Backfilling around pits shall be placed in layers not exceeding 300 mm loose thickness and compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment. 705.18 TOLERANCES The tolerances listed in Clause 610.36 are the allowable deviations of the finished product from the dimensions shown on the drawings. These tolerances will be a basis for acceptance of the work.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 705 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 706 - INSTALLATION OR REPLACEMENT OF UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE WITHIN ROAD RESERVES
 ##This section cross-references Section 173. If Section 173 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 173 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 706.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers requirements for the installation or replacement of utility infrastructure (e.g. conduits, pipes, service pits, poles, aerial services/cables) within the State road network reserves, as shown on the drawings, or as specified.
 
 706.02 LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
 
 All road crossings by any cable or water supply pipeline less than 225mm nominal diameter shall be installed in a conduit.
 
 Drainage culverts shall not be used to accommodate a service crossing.
 
 For minimum surround clearances between the service and conduits refer to Table 706.021.
 
 Table 706.021 Surround Clearances
 
 PIPE AND CABLE DIAMETER < 100mm > 100mm
 
 SURROUND CLEARANCE INSIDE CONDUIT 20mm 50mm
 
 For water supply pipelines, pipes shall be of the material and classes shown on the drawings or in the project specification. Fittings for pipework shall be rated to the class of pipe specified. Conduits shall be UPVC pipe of at least class 9 with a minimum diameter of 100 mm or a reinforced concrete pipe class 3 with a nominal diameter of 300 mm.
 
 706.03 POSITIONING, DEPTH AND HEIGHT CLEARANCE
 All utility infrastructure within road reserves shall be clear of road carriageways and parallel or at right angles to the centreline of road carriageways unless otherwise agreed with the Superintendent.
 Unless otherwise shown on the drawings or specified, utility infrastructure and associated conduits installed under road carriageways for all State roads shall be at depths to provide the following cover over the top of the infrastructure (including conduit): (a) 1200 mm minimum cover to the finished road surface level; and (b) 750 mm minimum cover to the invert level of road carriageway open drains.
 706.04 BORING UNDER CARRIAGEWAYS
 Unless otherwise specified or approved by the Superintendent, all utility infrastructure (including conduits) under road carriageways shall be installed by boring.
 Detailed proposals for boring under carriageways or alternative underground methods proposed by the Contractor shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review two weeks prior to the programmed commencement of work.
 Unless otherwise specified, boring by water jetting will not be permitted.
 
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 706 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Unless otherwise specified, the annulus between the bore and the pipe or carrier-conduit shall be filled by pressure grouting.
 
 706.05 EXCAVATION
 Where the open trench method of crossing under a carriageway pavement is accepted, the line of the trench shall be straight, at right angles to the carriageway, and form the shortest link between terminals wherever practical. The width of trench shall be not greater than that necessary to carry out the work.
 The edges of all trenches located within a road pavement shall be sawcut.
 Any infrastructure located within the road reserve that is disturbed as a result of the work shall be reported immediately to the Superintendent and shall be reinstated promptly in consultation with the relevant infrastructure manager.
 
 706.06 MATERIALS
 
 Unless otherwise specified, materials used for bedding and backfilling shall be uniform in composition and free from perishable matter and shall comply with the requirements specified in Table 706.061.
 Table 706.061 Material Properties
 
 Material
 
 Sieve Size - AS (mm) Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 Plasticity Index
 
 Bedding Selected backfill
 
 75.0 -
 
 37.5 -
 100
 
 19.0 100
 -
 
 2.36 -
 
 0.075 10-40 10-40
 
 min max
 
 2
 
 10
 
 5
 
 20
 
 Common backfill 100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 40-100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 Pavement material shall be as specified in Clause 706.12 and shall comply with the requirements of the specified sections as applicable.
 
 706.07 BEDDING
 Where specified in Clause 706.12 that bedding is required, bedding shall be placed below, around and above the pipe or carrier-conduit for the full width of the trench. Not less than 25 mm compacted depth of bedding shall be placed below, and not less than 150 mm compacted depth of bedding shall be placed above, the pipe or carrier-conduit. Bedding shall be placed in layers not exceeding 150 mm loose thickness and shall be compacted as specified.
 
 706.08 BACKFILLING
 Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, selected and common backfill shall be placed and compacted as follows under, around, and above the conduit after the sections are bedded:
 (a) Conduits under Area to be Paved, including Shoulders and Verges
 Where the trench has been excavated from the nominated or designed subgrade level or above, the trench shall be backfilled up to the nominated or designed subgrade level with selected backfill material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 150 mm loose thickness, and above that level with common backfill material.
 
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 706 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where the trench is excavated from below the nominated or design subgrade level, the trench shall be filled with selected backfill material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 150 mm loose thickness. (b) Conduits under Area not to be Paved
 The opening shall be backfilled with common backfill placed and compacted as specified in layers not exceeding 200 mm loose thickness.
 (c) Conduits through Existing Paved Areas including Shoulders and Verges
 Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, the opening shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 150 mm loose thickness and the pavement material placed and compacted in layers not exceeding 100 mm loose thickness using materials in accordance with Clause 706.12 (b).
 706.09 COMPACTION STANDARDS
 (a) Bedding and Backfill (except pavement)
 Unless otherwise specified, bedding and backfill shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range 85% to 115% of the optimum moisture content as determined in the Standard compactive effort. For backfill of nominal size greater than 40 mm the fraction of material passing the 37.5 mm sieve shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range 85% to 115% of the optimum moisture content as determined for that fraction in the Standard compactive effort.
 Bedding and backfill shall be compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical equipment.
 Backfilling beneath areas to be paved shall be assessed for compaction in lots as defined in Section 173. The number of tests per lot shall be three. Backfill, the whole of which passes the 37.5 mm AS sieve, shall be compacted to a mean value of density ratio of not less than 97%. The calculation of density ratio shall be based on Standard compactive effort. A lot shall consist of a single layer of work. A minimum of 20% of all lots constructed shall be tested.
 Detailed proposals for the compaction of backfill materials of nominal size greater than 40 mm shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review before commencing work.
 (b) Pavement
 Unless otherwise specified, pavement material shall have during compaction a uniform moisture content within the range 85% to 115% of the optimum moisture content as determined in the Modified compactive effort.
 Pavement material shall be assessed for compaction in lots as defined in Section 173. The number of tests per lot shall be three. All pavement layers shall be compacted to a mean value of density ratio not less than the percentage specified in Clause 706.12(b). The calculation of density ratio shall be based on Modified compactive effort. All pavement layers shall be tested.
 706.10 CLEANING OF SITE
 Surplus excavated material shall be removed from the road reserve. Areas affected by the work shall be restored to a condition similar to that which existed prior to the commencement of the work.
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 706 (Page 3 of 4) Section 706 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 706.11 MAINTENANCE OF PAVEMENT
 The reinstated surface shall be maintained in a trafficable condition after the completion of backfilling. Additional pavement material shall be placed in the trench and compacted as specified where in paved areas settlement or loss of material from the surface exceeds 20 mm measured from a straight edge laid across the top of the trench.
 
 706.12 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 *** (a) Bedding (Clause 706.07) - ##(strikethrough `Required' or `Not Required'):Required / Not required
 *** (b) Pavement Material (Clause 706.06)
 
 Pavement Layer
 1. ##: 2. 3. 4. 5.
 
 Material Type
 
 Thickness Density Ratio
 
 (mm)
 
 (Modified)
 
 Department of State Growth - August 2016 Section 706 (Page 4 of 4) Section 706 (Page 3 of 4)
 
 SECTION 707 - FENCING
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 703. If Section 703 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 703 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 707.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the supply and quality of materials, preparation of the site, removal of existing fencing, supply and installation of all fencing materials, including gates and connections to existing fencing at the locations shown on the drawings or described in this specification.
 The Contractor shall conduct its operations in such a manner as to prevent the escape or improper movement of livestock.
 Existing fencing shall not be removed until the new fencing has been erected and is stock-proof.
 Existing fencing which has been damaged by the Contractor and which is required to remain in place shall be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the Superintendent at the Contractor's expense.
 707.02 AUSTRALIAN STANDARDS
 AS 1074 Steel tubes and tubulars for ordinary service AS/NZS 1111 ISO Metric hexagon commercial bolts and screws AS/NZS 1112 ISO Metric hexagon nuts, including thin nuts, slotted nuts and castle nuts AS 1214 Hot-dip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners AS 1237 Flat metal washers for general engineering purposes (metric series) AS/NZS 1390 Cup head bolts with ISO metric coarse pitch threads AS 1604 Timber, preservative treated, sawn and round AS 1725 Galvanized rail-less chainwire security fences and gates AS 2082 Timber  hardwood  visually graded for structural purposes AS 2334 Steel nails  metric series AS 2423 Coated steel wire fencing products for terrestrial, aquatic and general use AS 2858 Timber  softwood  visually graded for structural purposes AS 3600 Concrete Structures AS 3750.9 Paints for steel structures  Organic zinc-rich primer AS 4534 Zinc and zinc/aluminium-alloy coatings on steel wire AS 4680 Hot dipped galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles
 707.03 MATERIALS
 Unless specified otherwise, all fencing materials and products shall be supplied by the Contractor and shall be of the dimensions, manufacture, quality and structural grade in accordance with the requirements of this specification and drawings.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 707 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (a) Untreated Timber Posts and Stays
 Untreated timber posts and stays shall be hardwood timber in accordance with AS 2082 and shall be cut from sound timber, stripped of all bark and backed off with ends sawn square and dried to equilibrium moisture content. Posts and stays shall be straight and of dimensions not less than shown on the detailed drawings.
 (b) Treated Timber Posts and Stays
 Treated timber posts and stays shall be hardwood timber in accordance with AS 2082 or pine in accordance with AS 2858 and be of sound timber treated to comply with the requirements of AS 1604 for Hazard Level 4 protection. Treated timber posts and stays shall be of round or sawn rectangular shape and be free of any defect making them unsuitable for the purpose intended.
 Round posts and stays shall be peeled to remove all bark, except that strips of inner bark may remain if not over 15 mm wide or over 75 mm long. All knots shall be trimmed flush with the sides, spurs and splinters removed and ends cut square.
 The slope of grain in sawn rectangular posts, for the full length, shall not exceed 1 in 10; and knots shall be sound, tight, well spaced, and shall not exceed 40 mm in size in any face.
 Treated timber posts and stays shall be straight and of dimensions not less than shown on the detailed drawings. Posts to be driven shall be square ended, or shall be blunt pointed prior to treatment to a bevel angle not exceeding 30 degrees.
 (c) Tubular Steel Posts, Rails and Stays
 Tubular steel posts, rails and stays shall be from medium grade steel tube in accordance with AS 1074 and hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AS/NZS 4680, free from distortion and with the galvanizing intact.
 Posts shall be properly adapted, before galvanizing, to provide means for attaching the fencing to the posts in a manner that will not damage the posts or fencing material, and shall be fitted with watertight galvanized steel tops.
 The galvanized coating shall also remain intact and protected from damage at pipe connections.
 Any damage to the galvanized coating of tubular steel posts, rails and stays and other galvanized products specified in this section shall be repaired using an organic zinc-rich primer complying with AS 3750.9.
 (d) Steel Posts other than Tubular Steel Posts
 Non-tubular steel posts shall be of `Star' or other specified cross section and shall be black varnished or hot-dip galvanized in accordance with AS/NZS 4680 and drilled to suit the spacings of the wires and the lengths shown on the drawings.
 (e) Reinforced Precast Concrete Posts
 Precast concrete posts shall be steel reinforced and designed in accordance with AS 3600. Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, concrete shall be N32 standard strength grade, placed, compacted and cured in accordance with the requirements of Section 703. Steel reinforcement shall comply with the requirements of AS 3600.
 (f) Droppers
 Timber droppers shall be sawn hardwood timber in accordance with AS 2082 or pine in accordance with AS 2858 and free from cross grain and large knots and of the length shown on the drawings.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 707 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Bored hardwood droppers shall be of 50 mm x 38 mm nominal size timber. Treated hardwood droppers to AS 1604 attached without boring shall be not less than 35 mm x 19 mm section.
 Pine droppers shall be 42 mm x 35 mm minimum size timber and be pressure treated with preservative to AS 1604.
 Metal droppers shall be hot dipped galvanized in accordance with AS/NZS 4680 and to the lengths shown on the drawings.
 (g) Wire
 All wire products including tie wire shall comply with the requirements of AS 2423, galvanized in accordance with AS 4534 and be of the gauge and type specified on the drawings. Fabricated wire fencing shall be standard proprietary manufactured item. The width, mesh and gauge shall be as specified or as shown on the drawings.
 (h) Gates
 Gates shall be standard proprietary manufactured items with galvanized tubular steel frame in accordance with AS 4680 of the type and dimensions specified or shown on the drawings.
 Hinges, catches and other fittings for gates shall be standard proprietary manufactured items fabricated from grade 250/300 structural steel and hot-dipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AS 4680.
 (i) Miscellaneous Materials
 All ferrous bolts, nuts and washers, shall be standard proprietary manufactured items complying with the requirements of AS/NZS 1111, AS/NZS 1390, AS/NZS 1112 and AS 1237. Bolts, nuts and washers shall be hot-dipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AS 1214. Ties, staples and other minor fittings for fences shall be galvanized standard proprietary manufactured items.
 All brackets for steel posts and treated timber posts shall be standard proprietary manufactured items fabricated from grade 250/300 structural steel and hot-dipped galvanized in accordance with the requirements of AS 4680.
 All concrete specified or shown on the drawings shall be strength grade N20 complying with the requirements of Section 703.
 Steel nails shall be manufactured in accordance with AS 2334 and shall be hot-dipped galvanized to 300 g/m coating mass in accordance with AS 4680.
 (j) Electrical Insulation Materials
 All fittings shall be standard proprietary manufactured items of the type and dimensions specified or shown on the drawings.
 (k) Certificate of Compliance
 The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent not less than 14 days prior to the proposed use of fencing materials, gates and connections to existing fencing, a signed Certificate including relevant test reports demonstrating the compliance of the materials and components required for the construction of each type of fencing, gates and connections to existing fencing, comply with the requirements of this specification.
 The Certificate of Compliance shall identify the item and record the product certification, inspection or test records that verify conformance. All certification, inspection and test records shall be available for review upon request by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 707 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 707.04 CONSTRUCTION
 Fences shall be constructed true to the lines pegged on the ground. All logs, stumps, saplings and undergrowth within 1 m of the fence line, and all trees which will interfere with the proper construction of the fence shall be removed and disposed of by the Contractor. Any high points which interfere with the placing of wire or wire netting shall be cut down to provide the clearance shown on the detailed drawings, and any low spots shall be filled with surplus earth from holes and trimmings.
 Fences shall be constructed in accordance with the drawings. All posts shall be set in line so that the tops line up uniformly without sudden dips or irregularities.
 Unless otherwise specified, surplus earth from holes and trimming shall be spread within the road reserve and the area shall be left clean and tidy on completion of the work.
 Straining of wires shall be done using an approved friction type wire strainer which incorporates a non-scarring wire grip and a tensioning gauge with calibrating springs for measurement of the tension as shown on the drawings or to the manufacturer's recommended maximum tensions. The Contractor shall take all precautions necessary to avoid kinking and overstraining of the wire during handling and installation.
 (a) Post and Wire Fences
 Timber and concrete posts shall be set in dug or drilled holes, except that posts of treated round timber may be driven provided the method of driving does not damage the post. Posts shall be set solidly and any space left around the posts shall be backfilled and the backfilling compacted. Posts to be driven shall be driven small end down. Other posts shall be placed butt end down.
 Steel posts shall be set by driving using a method that does not damage the posts or their galvanizing.
 At all grade changes where posts are liable to be lifted by strained wires, posts shall be at least 2.1 m long, set at least 900 mm into the ground and tied down. Tie down posts comprising 600 mm galvanized star steel posts shall be driven into the ground at an angle of 45 degrees, and the bottom four wires preferably adjacent to a post or dropper shall be tied to it by galvanized tie wire at least 2 mm diameter.
 Unless otherwise shown on the drawings all other posts shall be set at least 600 mm into the ground.
 Strainer assemblies shall be provided at all ends, angles, abrupt changes of grade, and intersections of cross fences as shown on the drawings. Intermediate strainer assemblies shall be provided on straights at intervals not exceeding 200 m, and spaced to the best advantage in the circumstances.
 Strainer assemblies at ends and gates shall be single strainer except where provision of double strainer assemblies is specified. Intermediate strainer assemblies shall be single strainer assemblies with both diagonals braced. Corner posts shall be braced in two directions and gate posts shall be braced in one direction.
 Plain wires shall be reeved through holes drilled in the posts except that where treated round posts are used wires may be attached with staples after straining. The length of staples shall be 50 mm for pine posts and 40 mm for hardwood posts. Barbed wire shall be secured with galvanized tie wire of not less than 2.5 mm diameter passed through holes bored in the posts, and twisted to the barbed wire on each side of the post, or shall be stapled to treated posts with staples. Top and bottom wires shall be firmly attached to droppers by preformed ties or twisted galvanized tie wire of not less than 2.5 mm diameter. Intermediate wires shall be similarly attached or shall be threaded through holes bored in the droppers.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 707 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Wire Netting Fences
 Posts and wire shall be erected as for post and wire fences. The netting shall be tightened between posts, and shall be fastened to timber posts and droppers with 25 mm staples at 150 mm intervals and to steel posts and droppers with proprietary galvanized clips or 2.5 mm galvanized tie wire, at 150 mm intervals. The netting shall also be fastened to each wire with 2.5 mm diameter galvanized tie wire or proprietary galvanized clips at intervals not exceeding 1 m.
 (c) Wire Mesh Fences
 Posts and wire shall be erected as for post and wire fences.
 Wire mesh shall be attached to posts and droppers by stapling or tying the top and bottom line wires and at least every alternate intermediate wire to each post after straining.
 (d) Chain Wire Fences
 Posts shall be set in concrete footings of the dimensions shown on the drawings, with the top of the concrete crowned to shed water. End, corner and gate posts shall be braced as shown on the drawings. Line posts shall be braced as shown on the drawings at not more than 120 m intervals. Chain wire shall comply with the requirements of AS 1725.
 Chain wire shall be tightened and securely fastened to posts and line wires on the side as shown on the drawings. Fastening to end, corner and gate posts shall be by lacing through each outer mesh with 2.5 mm diameter galvanized tie wire. Chain wire shall be fastened to line posts and line wires with 2.5 mm diameter galvanized tie wire or clips. The fastenings shall be spaced at not more than 400 mm intervals on line posts and at not more than 500 mm intervals on line wires.
 (e) Steel Post and Welded Mesh Fences
 Posts shall be set in concrete footings of the dimensions shown in the drawings, with the top of the concrete crowned to shed water.
 Welded mesh panels shall be attached to posts with standard proprietary manufactured galvanized fittings.
 (f) Paling and Timber Post Sound Attenuation Fences
 Posts shall be set in concrete and the fence shall be constructed to the dimensions and locations as shown on the drawings.
 Palings shall be straight and clean, and free from splits and major defects. Palings shall be fixed to each rail as shown on the drawings.
 (g) Electrical Insulation of Fences
 Where specified, insulation panels and fittings shall be incorporated in fences in close proximity to overhead power transmission lines, in accordance with the drawings.
 707.05 GATES
 The Contractor shall install gates of the type, size and location as specified, or shown on the drawings. Gate posts shall be of the dimensions shown on the drawings and be firmly set into the ground to the depth specified or as shown on the drawings. Each post shall be fitted with a strut as shown on the drawings. Tubular metal posts shall be set in concrete as detailed. At gateways in wire netting fences, a timber sill shall be set tightly between the posts and flush with the ground.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 707 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 All gates shall be hung with galvanized hinges securely attached to the gate posts and be able to swing freely. Each gate shall be fitted with a galvanized catch for holding them securely closed, of a type to suit the gate and adjoining fence. For wire netting fences, gates shall be finished so as to be rabbit-proof when closed.
 
 707.06 JUNCTIONS WITH EXISTING FENCES
 New fences shall be connected to existing cross fences and existing fences which continue the line of the new fences. Posts with braces for every direction of strain shall be placed at the junction with existing fences. The wire in existing fences shall be strained and securely fastened to the junction posts.
 
 707.07 REMOVAL OF EXISTING FENCES
 Where specified or shown on the drawings, existing fences, including all wires, mesh, posts, rails, strainers, netting and concrete footings shall be removed and re-erected to the pattern existing prior to removal.
 Fences no longer required shall be removed. All materials comprising the removed fences shall become the property of the Contractor and shall be removed from the site. All footing, post and strainer holes shall be backfilled and compacted in layers of a maximum depth of 150 mm with surplus earth or topsoil to the relative compaction of the surrounding ground material.
 
 707.08
 
 CONSTRUCTION TOLERANCES
 
 Unless stated otherwise, tolerances for the construction of fencing shall be as follows: (a) the vertical tolerance on the height of fencing shall be  20 mm from the design line; (b) the longitudinal line tolerance for fencing shall be  20 mm in plan view; and (c) the tolerance on the verticality of fencing shall be 1 in 50.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 707 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 SECTION 708 - STEEL BEAM GUARD FENCE
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 703, 711, 812 and 820. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 708.01 GENERAL
 
 This section covers the requirements of steel beam guard fence including proprietary guard fence systems and guard fence terminals for: ##(strikethrough inapplicable options below):
 
 *** *** ***
 
 supply only installation only supply and installation.
 
 708.02 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS
 
 The following documents are referred to in this Section:
 
 Reference AS 1012.3.1
 AS 1111 AS 1112 AS 1214 AS/NZS 1365 AS 1379 AS 1391 AS/NZS 1554.1 AS/NZS 1594 AS 1627 AS 1720.2 AS/NZS 1906.2
 AS 3569 AS 3610.1
 AS/NZS 3750.9 AS 3799 AS/NZS 3845 AS 4100 AS/NZS 4680 Supplement to AGRD Part 6, Section V6.7.12 VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2 RDN 06-04 VicRoads Guidelines
 
 Title Methods of testing concrete - Determination of properties related to the consistency of concrete - Slump test ISO Metric hexagon bolts and screws ISO Metric hexagon nuts Hot-dip galvanized coatings on threaded fasteners Tolerances for flat-rolled steel products Specification and supply of concrete Metallic materials - Tensile testing at ambient temperature Welding of steel structures Hot-rolled steel flat products Metal finishing Timber structure  Timber properties Retroreflective materials and devices for road traffic control purposes Retroreflective devices (non-pavement application) Steel wire ropes  Product specification Formwork for concrete - Part 1: Documentation and surface finish Paints for steel structures  Part 9 : Organic zinc-rich primer Liquid membrane-forming curing compounds for concrete Road safety barrier systems Steel Structures Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles Provision of Concrete Paving Adjacent to Traffic Barriers
 Guide Posts and Delineators
 Accepted safety barrier products Standard drawings for Roadworks
 
 Section 175 details the references to these documents.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 1 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Other Documents Manufacturer's recommendations and any applicable VicRoads requirements for each proprietary end treatment.
 708.03 DEFINITIONS
 The following definitions below will apply to this section.
 Manufacturer's recommendations: The specification, installation manual and drawings for a specific proprietary safety barrier device, prepared by or for the manufacturer, detailing the components, the device, and the methods and/or procedures for installation.
 Nested w-beams: Two or more steel w-beams erected together (one inside the other) to increase stiffness. Nested w-beams share bolts.
 Definition of terms: The meaning of terms and definitions in this section shall be as defined in AS/NZS 3845.
 Snug-tight: Is the tightness attained by at least two impacts of an impact wrench or by the full effort of a person using a standard podger spanner in accordance with AS 4100.
 708.04 GUARD FENCE COMPONENTS
 (a) Identification
 Mark on any steel w-beams, posts at both ends and all plastic components of proprietary end treatments unobtrusively and permanently in text not more than 20 mm high, the following information: (i) name of the manufacturer (ii) batch number, or date of manufacture (iii) strength grade and base metal thickness of the steel w-beams.
 (b) Material test certificates
 The properties of all steel for the Works shall be evidenced by test certificates.
 HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent all test certificates related to the supply of steel for the Works at least 14 days prior to commencement of installation.
 All tests shall be carried out in accordance with the appropriate Australian Standard by officers experienced in the test methods described in the Contract, in a laboratory accredited by the National Association of Testing Authorities (NATA) for those test methods. All tests shall be endorsed in accordance with the NATA registration for that laboratory.
 For steel sourced outside of Australia, all tests shall be carried out in a laboratory accredited by and with endorsement of the relevant national accreditation authority which has mutual recognition arrangements with NATA. Where the certification of the steel is incomplete, the Contractor shall arrange for the adequate testing to be carried out by a NATA accredited laboratory to demonstrate compliance of the material, at the rate of one test per 1000 lineal metres of material.
 For galvanised steel components, the Contractor shall include a manufacturer's certificate of compliance certifying that the zinc coating mass is in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 4680, or, for components of proprietary end treatments, the manufacturer's recommendations and any specified requirements.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 2 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Metal components
 Metal components supplied by the Contractor shall be new and conform to the dimensions shown on the drawings.
 (i) W-beams The w-beams shall be manufactured from steel which meets the requirements of AS/NZS 1594 Grade HA350. The mechanical properties of the base metal shall conform to the following requirements when tested in accordance with AS 1391: Minimum yield strength .............................. 350 MPa Minimum tensile strength ........................... 430 MPa Minimum elongation in 80 mm .................... 16% The base metal shall comply with the following tolerances when measured in accordance with the methods of AS/NZS 1365: Base metal thickness .................................. 2.7 mm -0.10 mm, +0.21 mm Mill tolerance on strip width ........................ +2.5 mm, -0.0 mm Mill camber tolerance on 2500 mm length ..... 10.0 mm maximum
 (ii) Steel Posts and Blocks Steel posts and blocks shall be manufactured from steel which meets the requirements of AS/NZS 1594 Grade HA250. The base material thickness shall be 6.0 mm 0.27 mm.
 (iii) Terminal sections Terminal sections and stiffener plates shall be manufactured from steel which meets the requirements of AS/NZS 1594 Grade HA350.
 (d) Protective treatment
 Unless stated otherwise in the manufacturer's recommendations, the surfaces of all ferrous metal components including posts, blocks, beam elements, anchor plates, connectors and end treatment pieces must, after fabrication, be treated in accordance with the requirements of AS 1627 - Parts 1 and 4, and finished by hot-dipped galvanising in accordance with AS/NZS 4680.
 All galvanised coatings shall be smooth, adherent and free from stains, gross surface imperfections, markings, brand names and/or inclusions. Appearance is of prime importance and colour shall be uniform.
 Hot-dipped galvanised coating on bolts, nuts and washers shall comply with AS 1214.
 Where the galvanising on guard rail or associated fittings has been damaged, the coating shall be repaired by regalvanising or by painting with a minimum of two coats of a zinc-rich inorganic paint in accordance with AS/NZS 3750.9 and one coat of aluminium paint.
 Where curved w-beam of less than 45 m curve radius is specified, the curving operation shall be carried out off site in a manner that will not result in damage to the galvanising.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 3 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (e) Timber Timber posts and blocks shall be supplied to the dimensions shown on the drawings. Timber posts and blocks shall be seasoned timber dried to equilibrium moisture content and sawn from species complying with Class 1 or 2 durability and stress grading as specified. All timber shall be straight and sound, and free from shakes, pipes, cores, flaws and other imperfections. The timber shall be sawn parallel to the grain, and exposed knots shall be sound, tight, well spaced and shall not exceed 25 mm in size on any face.
 (f) Wire rope Wire rope in anchor assemblies for post and w-beam end treatments shall comply with the requirements of AS 3569 and the details shown on the Drawings. Wire rope used in proprietary devices must comply with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 (g) Concrete
 Concrete for guard fence maintenance strips shall comply with the requirements of AS 1379, and as specified in VicRoads Section 703, for either: (i) Portland cement-based concrete, N20 strength grade, or (ii) Geopolymer binder-based concrete, 20 MPa strength grade.
 The use of chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of Section 703.
 708.05 MATERIAL HANDLING AND STORAGE
 The Contractor shall ensure that loading, transport, unloading, stacking and handling operations before and after fabrication, are carried out in such a way that items are protected from distortion and that galvanised surfaces are protected from damage.
 All materials and components shall be stored in such a manner that damage and corrosion are prevented. Generally, storage at least 200 mm above the ground on platforms, slabs, or other supports under cover will be satisfactory. Rusted or bent or damaged steel shall be rejected.
 The Contractor shall store components in such a manner that the freshly galvanised surfaces are protected from the attack of `white rust', which can occur on freshly galvanised articles that are transported or stored under damp or badly ventilated conditions (including contact stacking).
 If stacks are located behind a serviceable road safety barrier system, the clear space between the road safety barrier system and the stack must allow for the dynamic deflection of the system and be at sufficient distance from the ends of the system to allow the proper functioning of the end treatments.
 708.06 CONSTRUCTION
 (a) General Construction of guard fence includes supply, delivery, handling and assembly of component and devices, setting out, and supply and installation of delineation. The Contractor shall plan and execute the work in a manner that prevents damage to underground and above ground facilities such as utilities, services, structures, pavements, vegetation, etc.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 4 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall construct the guard fence to form a smooth line vertically and horizontally, when viewed along the line of the installation, free of humps, sags, or other irregularities, within tolerances.
 Any component of a guard fence must not be welded or flame cut in the field under any circumstances. Welding and flame cutting in a workshop may be undertaken only where shown on the Drawings or in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 (b) Damage
 Where the galvanising on guard fence components or associated fittings has been damaged, the coating shall be repaired by regalvanising or by painting with a minimum of two coats of a zinc-rich inorganic paint in accordance with AS/NZS 3750.9 and one coat of aluminium paint.
 (c) Sequence of work
 Where the guard fence is being constructed on a road open to traffic, the Contractor shall carry out the work so end treatments and transitions can be commissioned at the earliest practicable time, desirably on the day of installation. Where this cannot be achieved on the day, temporary end treatments to the satisfaction of the Superintendent shall be provided until the permanent treatment is complete.
 (d) Removal of redundant safety barrier systems
 Removal of an existing installed safety barrier system includes: (i) dismantling or demolition of safety barriers, transitions and end treatments; (ii) extracting all posts, anchors and other in-ground components and materials; (iii) removing all components and waste materials from the site; (iv) cleaning, backfilling and mechanically compacting all excavations and holes formed by
 the extraction of posts, anchors and other in-ground components and materials; and (v) stacking or disposing of components and waste materials.
 Following the removal of all redundant posts, anchors and other in-ground components by extraction or excavation, the holes shall be cleaned and backfilled. Backfilling and compaction of holes shall proceed in 150 mm layers using similar materials to existing surrounding layers. The backfill shall be compacted to not less than the density of the surrounding layers.
 708.07 INSTALLATION
 HP Prior to installation the Contractor shall confirm with the Superintendent the required location and length of all guard fence.
 The guard fence shall be installed at the positions so confirmed and shall be constructed true to line and level.
 (a) Posts
 Posts shall be installed to the depth, line and spacing shown on the drawings, and to the tolerances in Clause 708.07(d).
 Posts shall be orientated to the direction of traffic as shown on the drawings.
 Posts shall be installed by driving, provided there is no distortion or damage which may reduce their effectiveness. The installation must not cause any damage to the pavement beyond 100 mm from any part of any post, including any soil plate attached to the post.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 5 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 If site conditions dictate that the posts cannot be driven, then the posts shall be installed in holes. The bottom of the holes shall be adequately compacted to achieve the same density as the surrounding soil. The posts shall be supported to true line and level while the holes are backfilled with clean, well-graded, non-cementitious subbase or base course granular material and compacted to achieve the same density as the surrounding soil.
 All post holes in rock shall have a 75 mm minimum clearance from the back of the post to the face of the hole.
 Except for anchorage posts, post holes in rock shall be backfilled with granular material. Other post holes shall be backfilled with selected earth, free of rock. The backfilling shall be firmly compacted in layers not exceeding 100 mm compacted thickness. Where posts are located in areas to be paved with concrete or premixed bituminous material, the backfilling of the post holes shall be finished 50 mm below the underside of such paving and the remaining depth of the holes shall be filled and compacted with material similar to the surrounding material.
 The foundation of any post shall be deemed complying when the displacement at ground level does not exceed 3 mm when a 1 kN force is applied 200 mm below the top of the post in any direction. For any posts failing the test, the Contractor shall take remedial measures and retest the rectified post plus one other similar post within 5 m.
 HP Prior to the installation of any w-beam barrier system where non standard post lengths are required or other special measures (e.g. shallow concrete foundations) are proposed to be used, the Contractor shall provide details of the measures proposed and evidence that the effectiveness of the barrier system will be maintained, for consideration by the Superintendent. Where shallow foundations that require a concrete ground beam are proposed to be constructed, the design shall be proof engineered by a Department of State Growth pre-qualified consultant.
 Alternative methods of support are not permitted for end treatments unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. For proprietary systems requiring alternative arrangement, the Contractor shall consult with and implement the requirements of the licensed product supplier. The Contractor may submit proposals for extending the guard fence to a location where installation of the end treatment is feasible, or proposals for a different end treatment.
 Surplus excavated material remaining after the guard fence has been constructed shall be disposed of off site by the Contractor.
 (b) W-beams
 The w-beam sections shall be lapped so that the exposed ends face away from near-side approaching traffic. The edges of the w-beam section or backing plate adjacent to posts shall be fixed in contact with the post or post blocks and all bolts shall be fully tightened.
 End treatments of the types specified shall be constructed in accordance with the details shown on the drawings.
 Posts attached to bridges and culverts shall be bolted to supporting members and/or set on mortar pads as shown on the drawings.
 All bolts used in guard fence construction, other than nuts on wire rope assemblies, shall be tightened to a snug-tight condition.
 All bolts on the traffic side of w-beam installations shall be flush with the w-beam.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 6 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) End treatments During installation of wire ropes in the end treatments of w-beam, the Contractor shall ensure that no twisting of the rope occurs. When rope assemblies are used, the nuts at each end of the rope shall be tightened to a minimum torque of 50 Nm on the assemblies or as per the manufacturer's requirements. The Contractor shall maintain tension in the wire ropes in end treatments until the Date of Completion, by keeping the nuts at both ends tightened to 50 Nm or to manufacturer's requirements.
 (d) Tolerances W-beam guard fence shall be erected to the following tolerances: (i) Variation from true plan position of posts ...............................20 mm (ii) Variation of line of w-beams from specified vertical profile ........10 mm (iii) Variation of w-beams from specified horizontal alignment.........20 mm (iv) Variation of posts from vertical (measured at top of the post) ...15 mm (v) Orientation of block and/or post to w-beam ............................+0 mm, -15 mm (measured at the point of greatest offset between the block or post to the w-beam) (vi) Dimension of holes ..............................................................-0 mm, +50 mm (vii) Top of bolt head relative to w-beam.......................................-0 mm, +5 mm
 After installation the top of the rail shall be within 25 mm of the specified level and 50 mm of the specified line. Variations from specified line and level shall not occur at a rate exceeding 15 mm in any 5 m length. Notwithstanding these requirements the line and level of the guard fence shall be adjusted where necessary to provide a smooth and even vertical and horizontal alignment. For proprietary systems refer to manufacturer requirements.
 (e) Offsets to kerb and channel or shoulder Where practicable, w-beam guard fence should not be installed behind kerb and channel. Where kerb and channel is essential, the guard fence should be installed to the offsets shown on Standard Drawing3402-4/P58-6.
 (f) Height of guard fence Where the face of the guard fence is erected within 0 to 1 m behind the back of kerb, the mounting height (vertical dimension from ground surface to centre of w-beam) shall be measured from the lip of kerb. Where the face of the guard fence is erected within 1.5 m from edge of carriageway without kerb, the mounting height shall also be measured from that edge of carriageway (typically the edge line). For distances beyond 1.5 m, the mounting height shall be measured from the nominal ground surface at the guard fence location.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 7 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 708.08 PROTECTION OF GUARD FENCE POSTS FOR MOTORCYCLIST SAFETY
 Where specified, steel rub rail or other proprietary under-run systems shall be attached below the w-beam in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and the following:  installation shall only be on nominated sections of barrier as shown on the drawings  rails are to be placed in line with the face of w-beam  rails shall be placed in accordance with the requirements for steel guard fence.
 708.09 COMPLIANCE AUDITING OF BARRIER SYSTEM INSTALLATION
 HP Further to Clause 708.07 Installation, and prior to the issue of the Certificate of Practical Completion, the Contractor shall arrange for a safety barrier compliance audit on all proprietary guard fence end treatments constructed under the Contract.
 The audit shall be undertaken and a report prepared by the Australian Licensed Supplier of the safety barrier system. A Compliance Audit Report (CAR), signed by the Contractor's Representative and the Licensed Supplier, shall be provided certifying that the products have been installed in accordance with the manufacturer's Installation Manual and this specification. A CAR shall be provided for each proprietary guard fence and end treatment installed.
 In addition, the Contractor shall complete and submit to the Superintendent a signed copy of the manufacturer's Installation Checklist / Inspection and Test Plan as per the manufacturer's Product and Installation Manual.
 708.10 DELINEATORS
 The Contractor shall supply and fasten delineators to the top of the w-beam, comprising flexible plastic mounting brackets fitted with 100 cm2 of Class 1A retro-reflective material, as defined in AS/NZS 1906.2. Delineators shall be installed at 15 m spacing and shall not be placed on flared sections.
 The Contractor shall arrange delineators so that vehicles approaching from either direction at night will only see:  red delineators on the left side of one-way and two-way roadways;  white delineators on the right side of two-way roadways; and  yellow delineators on the right side of one-way roadways.
 Delineators shall not be installed on guard fence when the barrier offset is greater than 4 m from the traffic lane. White guide posts with delineators shall be installed in accordance with VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2.
 Where guard fence delineators are required to be installed as part of the Works, they shall be installed in accordance with VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2.
 *** 708.11 MAINTENANCE STRIP FOR GUARD FENCE ##(strikethrough if not applicable):
 The Contractor shall provide a concrete maintenance strip beneath the guard fence and terminals in unpaved areas of median or outer verge applications as shown on the drawings.
 The concrete maintenance strip shall be placed parallel to the barrier, such that it extends a minimum of 300 mm clear of the rear of the post and 300 mm clear from the face of w-beam. It shall be constructed with minimum 2% crossfall away from the road and shall be flush with the adjacent ground level so the finished level does not impede road runoff.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 8 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The concrete maintenance strip shall be placed between and around the posts to not affect the performance of the guard fence.
 All bedding material used for cast in place concrete construction works shall be in accordance with Section 812 for Class 3 Crushed Rock or Section 820 for Class 3 Crushed Concrete.
 The concrete maintenance strip shall consist of 75 mm depth of N20 strength grade portland cement-based concrete or 20 MPa geopolymer binder-based concrete conforming to the requirements of Clause 708.04(g), on 75 mm of compacted Class 3 crushed rock.
 The edges of the infill area shall be boarded up prior to placing concrete to ensure smooth edges are produced. The edge board shall be placed parallel with the steel beam guard fence. The surface of the maintenance strip shall be finished with a wooden float to produce a lightly textured surface.
 Where the maintenance strip is adjacent to kerb or pavement, separation from the kerb or pavement by the use of a cork expansion joint (or approved alternative) shall be produced. Full depth expansion joints shall be provided perpendicular to the line of the steel beam guard fence 200 mm each side of every post.
 The Contractor shall topsoil and grass all disturbed areas as necessary to ensure that the concrete maintenance strip is flush with the adjacent ground surface level.
 708.12 INTERACTION OF GUARD FENCE WITH EXISTING ASSETS
 The Contractor shall install the guard fence to provide for its dynamic deflection that does not interfere with any existing roadside furniture.
 The Contractor shall remove any existing guard fence located between existing assets, such as gantry legs, variable speed signs and bridge piers. The Contractor shall allow for the interaction between all roadside furniture, including slip base light poles, and the guard fence by providing for the dynamic deflection zone or providing reduced post spacing as per the Drawings.
 The Contractor shall integrate the guard fence with any existing lengths of safety barriers protecting ends of bridge parapets as shown on the drawings and in accordance with Clause 708.13.
 The Contractor shall remove and dispose of existing guide posts that conflict with a new guard fence, including any in front of a new guard fence located within a 4 m offset from the traffic lane and any behind a new guard fence greater than 4 m offset from the traffic lane, as well as bollards or other roadside furniture affected by the Works or where shown on the drawings or instructed by the Superintendent.
 708.13 MODIFICATION TO THE GUARD FENCE AT THE INTERFACE WITH WRSB
 The Contractor shall be responsible for any alteration and/or relocation of any existing WRSB, including the removal and disposal of existing redundant WRSB, dismantling and reinstating existing WRSB (including terminals) and extension of existing WRSB (including the provision of a concrete maintenance strip) where required and as shown on the drawings.
 The Contractor shall terminate the guard fence at the interface with the WRSB ensuring sufficient overlapping of systems as detailed on the drawings.
 Any variations to the interface of the guard fence with the WRSB shall be reviewed for acceptance by the Superintendent prior to installation of the guard fence.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 9 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Any modifications to the WRSB shall be in accordance with Section 711 and the relevant Standard Drawings.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all materials and labour necessary to undertake the modification works as specified above and as shown on the drawings.
 708.14 MINIMUM EXTENT OF GUARD FENCE AT ROADSIDE HAZARDS
 The minimum lengths of guard fence provided at any median or outer verge hazard shall be in accordance with the requirements of the relevant Standard Drawings.
 Where short sections of guard fence comprise back to back G.R.E.A.Ts, the terminals shall be separated by a minimum of 5m of w-beam.
 Median or outer verge hazards shall be considered to be any rigid object or non-driveable terrain within the design clear zone, including:  bridge piers;  sign gantries;  variable speed signs;  sections of existing WRSB (including terminals);  roadside vegetation;  culvert endwalls;  non-driveable table drains; and  non-driveable batter slopes.
 708.15 ASSOCIATED PAVEMENT (SHOULDER) WIDENING
 Where specified, the Contractor shall widen the existing shoulder on the median or outer verge applications adjacent to locations where guard fence is to be installed as shown on the typical cross section, drawings or specification.
 The Contractor shall provide additional pavement between the edge of existing pavement and the guard fence. The Contractor shall adopt the nominated pavement design. Where a nominated pavement design has not been specified the Contractor shall construct the widening with a pavement that matches the existing.
 The edge of shoulder shall be saw-cut to provide a neat straight edge against which the additional pavement can be placed.
 708.16 PLACING, COMPACTING AND FINISHING CONCRETE
 Concrete shall be transported, handled and placed so as to prevent segregation, loss or leakage of materials. Fresh concrete shall not be placed against concrete, which has taken its initial set, except at properly formed construction joints. Concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by means of continuous tamping and internal vibration and shall be worked around any embedments and anchorages and into corners of formwork or excavations to produce a dense concrete free from voids, honeycombing, segregation or surface defects.
 Unformed surfaces shall be hand tamped to ensure a smooth surface and screeded to achieve the specified level, dimensions, falls and tolerances. Surfaces shall be finished uniform in appearance with a Class 3 surface finish in accordance with AS 3610.1.
 Any concrete repairs shall be carried out using a method and materials approved by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 10 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth
 708.17 CURING OF CONCRETE
 The curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed and shall continue uninterrupted for a period of not less than 7 days after placing the concrete.
 Concrete shall be cured either by water curing, wet hessian, polyethylene sheeting which is adequately sealed against evaporative moisture losses, curing compound or a combination of these. Freshly finished exposed concrete surfaces shall be effectively protected from rain or damage from other sources, until hard set has occurred.
 When used, curing compounds shall comply with AS 3799. The curing compound shall be applied in two coats using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance. The curing membrane shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing. Any damage to the curing membrane during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application.
 Where used, geopolymer concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of Section 703.
 708.18 CONFORMANCE TESTING FOR CONCRETE STRENGTH AND CONSISTENCY
 Sampling and testing of the strength of concrete shall be carried out in accordance with Clause 6.2 of AS 1379. The frequency of sampling and testing shall provide at least one sample to be tested for each 50 m3 or part thereof of concrete placed on anyone day, at the point of discharge. Where less than 50 m3 is provided for any one-day then one sample shall be tested.
 The consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of each concrete strength sample in accordance with AS 1012.3.1 and Clause 5.2 of AS 1379. The concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated concrete slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in Table 5.1 of Clause 5.2.3 of AS 1379.
 708.19 EXISTING SIGNS AND MARKINGS
 All existing signs that are temporarily removed or relocated during the execution of the works shall be reinstated to their original location as soon as practicable to ensure that adequate information is provided to road users. In all cases the Contractor shall provide continuity of regulatory and warning signs.
 The Contractor shall reinstate all signs to a standard not less than the pre-existing condition and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall reinstate any existing painted edge lines, including audible edge lines and reinstate or replace any missing Raised Reflective Pavement Markers (RRPMs) along the length of the Works, including RRPMs damaged by the installation process for the guard fence.
 708.20 MEDIAN CROSSINGS
 Where a median crossing is removed, the Contractor shall reinstate the median with a treatment consistent with the surrounding area. Any redundant median crossing signs within the Limit of the Works shall be removed and delivered to a storage area nominated by the Superintendent.
 Median crossings within the Limit of the Works shall be retained by the Contractor.
 Where detailed on the drawings, new median crossing points shall be constructed in accordance with the pavement details specified, to provide for adequate access for emergency vehicles and shall be integrated with the guard fence installation.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 11 of 12)
 
 Department of State Growth 708.21 EXISTING VEGETATION The Contractor shall ensure that the existing vegetation within the Limit of Works is not affected by the Works. Areas where no works are required shall not be disturbed. Any damage to existing vegetation shall be rectified immediately to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. 708.22 GRASSING OF DISTURBED AREAS (a) General
 All disturbed areas shall be topsoiled and grassed. All areas are to be cultivated to a minimum 50 mm depth, and moistened prior to the application of grass seed and fertiliser. Grass seed shall be applied at a rate of not less than 200 kg/Ha. Fertilizer shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. HP A joint inspection of all grassed areas shall be carried out between the
 Contractor and Superintendent three months after sowing has taken place. Areas with less than 90% cover shall be re-sown by the Contractor. Any remedial works required are to be performed within two weeks of the date of inspection. (b) Maintenance of grassed areas The Contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of grassed areas, including mowing, for the duration of the Defects Liability Period for the Whole of the Works.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 708 (Page 12 of 12)
 
 SECTION 709 - GUIDE POSTS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 709.01 GENERAL
 This specification sets out the requirements for the supply and installation of guide posts. Refer to VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-10 for a list of accepted guide posts. Posts complying with AS 1742.2 will also be accepted.
 
 709.02 DEFINITIONS
 Delineator Small retro reflective panel or sheeting attached to guide posts to provide a consistent pattern of delineation of the edges of road carriageways to aid road users during night time driving.
 Guide Post Posts used to mark the edge of the road carriageway and give road users an indication of the approaching alignment and geometry of the road.
 Rigid Guide Post A guide post which fractures or remains intact and horizontal when impacted.
 Semi-Flexible Guide Post A guide post which fails by bending when impacted and can be reinstated to vertical position with maintenance intervention.
 Flexible Guide Post A guide post which deflects when impacted and then returns to a vertical position, without maintenance intervention.
 
 709.03 PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS
 All guide posts including delineators installed in a section of road shall be uniform material and design.
 (a) General Requirements
 Guide posts shall be between 90 mm and 100 mm across the face visible by traffic. The tops of guideposts shall be flat, the bottom ends made to suit the method of installation as recommended by the manufacturer.
 Guide posts shall be straight, smooth, structurally sound and of a shape that allows delineators to be permanently and securely attached. The above ground section of each guide post shall be free of sharp edges and burrs and discoloration or other defects that may affect its appearance and/or serviceability.
 The supplier shall state the type of material used in manufacture of the guide posts as well as recommended methods of installation, anchoring depth, cleaning, removal, and disposal. Test certification shall be submitted to the Superintendent, addressing post strength, flexibility, impact performance, durability, heat resistance, fire retardant ability, corrosion resistance and cold resistance. The supplier shall provide a performance guarantee statement clearly indicating the nature of the guarantee and the service life expectancy. Where a product is a VicRoads approved guide post product the above shall not be required.
 All types of guideposts shall respond in a safe manner when struck, and not present a further danger in their damaged condition.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 709 (Page 1 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Delineators
 The Contractor shall fix retro reflective type delineators to guide posts on both sides of the carriageway to expose to approaching traffic a red delineator on the left and a white delineator on the right.
 Delineators shall be either: (i) circular 80 mm diameter Type A corner cube retro reflectors conforming with Type `A'
 delineator in AS 1906.2; or (ii) Class 1A retro reflective sheeting having a total minimum reflective output equivalent to
 100 cm2, as defined in AS/NZS 1906.1. The nominal dimension of retro reflective material shall be 50 mm x 200 mm. Delineators made from retro reflective sheeting shall be installed such that the sheeting manufacturer's preferred orientation for optimum performance is followed.
 Delineators shall be placed centrally between the edges of posts, with the top of the delineator 50 mm below the top edge. Delineators shall be attached to posts following completion of final protective coatings by a vandal-proof and weatherproof means so they can be replaced if necessary without damaging the post.
 (c) Markings
 To enable traceability of the manufacturer, each post shall be legibly and indelibly marked with the manufacturer's name, date of manufacture and warranty period with lettering no greater than 10 mm high. The markings shall be placed at the bottom of the guide post just above recommended ground level installation depth. Guide posts shall be clearly marked to show the recommended ground level installation depth. Markings shall be installed on one side of the guide post only, and remain visible for the full life expectancy of the guide post.
 709.04 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
 The finished surface of guide posts shall be uniform and free from discontinuities, areas of discoloration, blisters, runs and other surface defects which affect appearance and serviceability. Guide post surfaces shall be durable gloss or semi-gloss opaque white capable of being repeatedly cleaned. All materials used shall retain 85% of the original colour, appearance and physical properties and be resistant to ultraviolet radiation for at least ten (10) years when exposed to all weather conditions experienced inTasmania.
 Guide posts shall be designed to resist bending, twisting and displacement due to wind. They must be effective in resistance to vertical displacement of +5 mm for the life of the guidepost, with the exception of any displacement associated with impact or physical force. Flexible guide posts shall return to within +5 mm of the original vertical position following impact or physical force application for the life of the guide post.
 709.05 INSTALLATION
 Installation of guide posts includes setting out, excavation, supply, placement, backfilling, erection, driving, removal and disposal of guide posts.
 Guide posts shall be installed in accordance with the requirements ofAS 1742.2, as shown on the drawings, or as specified by the Superintendent. Guide posts shall be placed at a uniform distance from the road pavement edge with the widest face presenting to oncoming traffic. Posts shall be set into the ground so that the posts are vertical and the tops present a uniform profile.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 709 (Page 2 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Guide posts shall be installed such that the exposed length above ground is nominally 1000 mm and minimum anchoring depths recommended by the manufacturer to achieve the specified performance requirements under service conditions. Allowance shall be made in the height of guide posts above the ground for the effects of superelevation and other road geometry in order to keep guide posts within the range of the beam of vehicle headlights.
 Guideposts shall be installed as per the manufacturer's recommendation.
 Where guide posts are to be set in the ground they shall be erected in excavated holes which are subsequently backfilled and compacted to a density that is not less than that of the adjacent undisturbed ground.
 Guide posts shall be installed such that they effectively resist removal by persons other than personnel using recommended removal tools.
 Where guide posts are to be installed directly onto concrete, asphalt of any other hard wearing surface, the Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent the details of the proposed installation method.
 (a) Wire Rope Safety Barrier Installations
 Where new installations of Wire Rope Safety Barrier (WRSB) are proposed on the edge of shoulder, and will conflict with guide post installation locations, WRSB posts shall be converted into guide posts in accordance with the above product requirements. Posts shall be spaced in accordance with the Drawings or the requirements of Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2. The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent the details of the proposed installation.
 (b) Underground Services
 Underground service locations shall be determined prior to installation of posts.
 (c) Tolerances
 Maximum installation tolerances are as follows: (i) within 3 degrees of true vertical position (ii) within +5 mm across the face visible by traffic
 (iii) within +50 mm of the uniform profile height (nominally 1000 mm) (iv) within 200 mm longitudinally of the design spacing requirement and 100 mm
 transversely of the plan position with reference to the design line for the road, or as per the requirements of Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2.
 (d) Removal and Disposal of Existing Guideposts
 Existing guide posts where required, are to be removed as directed by the Superintendant.
 All holes left after removal shall be backfilled and compacted to a density that is not less than that of the adjacent undisturbed ground, or the same characteristics of the shoulder material from where they were removed. All existing guide posts removed by the Contractor shall be disposed of offsite. Existing guideposts manufactured from recyclable materials shall be recycled.
 709.06 ACCIDENT SITE MARKERS
 Accident site markers shall be in accordance with Policy Guidelines for their use. Accident site markers are normally installed and maintained by the Local Government Authority. Fatality site markers shall be a black guidepost with a white reflective cross. Serious injury markers shall be a red guidepost with a white reflective dash.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 709 (Page 3 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 709.07 Areas Subject to Snow and Fog
 
 Table 709.071 lists the roads that are subject to snow and fog. The maximum spacing of guide posts in these areas shall be 60 m. Snow markers shall be also be provided in areas subject to snow on the links, or part thereof, as listed in Table 709.071. Snow markers shall be provided at the fog spacing.
 
 Snow markers shall be international standard orange (AS2700 colour 0100) rebounding posts. Older style Snow Markers on posts consisting of a black band 100mm in width, surrounding the post with the top of the band 300mm below the top of the post shall progressively be replaced. Alternative types of snow markers shall not be intermixed. Maximum spacing of guideposts in areas subject to snow and/or fog shall be 60m.
 
 Table 709.071 Roads to Have Snow Markers and Fog Guide Post Spacing
 
 (Numbers represent Links/Chainages)
 
 ROAD Anthony Main Road Arthur Highway Bass Highway Batman Highway Bell Bay Main Road Blessington Main Road Boyer Secondary Road Bridport Main Road Cradle Mountain Dev. Road Cradle Mt. Tourist Road East Derwent Highway East Tamar Highway Elephant Pass Main Road Esk Main Road Evandale Main Road Ferry Main Road Frankford Main Road Glen Huon Main Road Gordon River Main Road Huon Highway Illawarra Main Road Kings Meadows Main Road Lake Dobson Tourist Road Lake Secondary Road
 Lake Leake Main Road Lake St. Clair Tourist Road Leighlands Secondary Road Lilydale Main Road
 
 SNOW 48/0 to 6.0
 05, 56 to 94/6.99 41,63, 87, 94, 96/0 to 2.36
 05/6.0 to 94/8.38 30/8.0 to 35, 42, 49, 53, 58, 63, 70, 77, 82, 85/0 to 5.70
 05
 
 FOG
 68, 73 03, 06, 09
 05 05 05, 25, 43 05, 94 94 05, 56, 94 41, 63, 87, 94, 96 05,29,94 15, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 05, 94 05 05 05 05 05, 94 19, 98, 27, 36 17, 26, 34 05, 94 05
 05, 12, 18
 36, 58
 05 08
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 709 (Page 4 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ROAD
 
 SNOW
 
 FOG
 
 Lollara Main Road
 
 05
 
 Lyell Highway Lymington Main Road
 
 35/6.00 to 38, 43, 46, 48, 51, 05, 12, 25, 28, 30, 33, 35, 38 53, 56, 60, 62/0 to 1.00 05
 
 Marlborough Secondary Road
 
 05,19,44,93
 
 Meander Valley Secondary Road
 
 04, 07, 24, 46, 90
 
 Midland Highway Mt. Barrow Tourist Road
 
 15, 20, 24, 26, 37, 43, 74, 80, 85, 90, 96
 07
 
 Murchison Highway
 
 39,45, 52/0 to 9.25
 
 Nicholl's Rivulet Main Road
 
 05, 94
 
 Pipers River Secondary Road
 
 05
 
 Poatina Main Road
 
 05,12,25 to 40/0 to 9.00
 
 05, 12, 25
 
 Ranelagh Secondary Road
 
 05
 
 Scotts Secondary Road
 
 05
 
 Spring Hill Main Road
 
 05
 
 Tasman Highway Waratah Main Road
 
 68/6.50 to 10.00 05, 28, 46/0 to1.55
 
 15, 16, 18, 20, 40, 51, 53, 68, 82, 84,86, 88, 90
 
 West Tamar Highway
 
 05, 25, 41, 63, 94
 
 Youl Main Road
 
 05
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 709 (Page 5 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 710 - FIXING RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS
 710.01 DESCRIPTION This section covers the fixing of both reflective and non-reflective raised pavement markers to asphalt, concrete or sealed pavements using epoxy adhesive or hot melt bitumen adhesive.
 710.02 TOLERANCES ON POSITION Markers shall be affixed to the pavement at the positions shown on the drawings, or specified or directed by the Superintendent within the following limits, unless otherwise specified.
 (a) Markers in Line with Broken Line Segments Transverse position within 25 mm of the centreline of the segments. Longitudinal position within 0.5 m of the specified position.
 (b) Markers in a Longitudinal Group Transverse position of the centre of each marker within 25 mm of the specified position and within 10 mm of a line joining the centres of the end markers of the group. Longitudinal position of the end markers of the group within 0.5 m of the specified position. Spacing of markers within the group within 50 mm of the specified spacing.
 (c) Markers Adjacent to Unbroken Line Clearance to edge of line within 5 mm of that specified. Longitudinal mismatch between markers in transverse pairs at barrier line not more than 25 mm. Longitudinal position of markers within 0.5 m or 10% of the specified spacing, whichever is the less.
 (d) Orientation of Reflective Markers Lower edge of the reflective face at 85 to 95 to the centreline of the roadway or any adjacent line.
 710.03 MATERIALS
 The Contractor shall supply all materials required to complete the work covered by this section, unless otherwise specified.
 (a) Markers Markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS 1906, Part 3. Only markers approved for use by the Department of State Growth shall be used and all raised non-reflective pavement markers shall be of the ultra hard plastic type unless otherwise directed. Glass faced raised reflective pavement markers shall be used on all National Roads and State Freeways unless specified otherwise.
 (b) Adhesive Epoxy adhesive shall be Standard Set or Rapid Set adhesive complying with the relevant requirements of AS 3554. Only adhesives approved for use by the Department of State Growth shall be used.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 710 (Page 1 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 710.04 MIXING EPOXY ADHESIVE
 Adhesive components shall be batched so that the mixed adhesive contains not less than 45% nor more than 55% by volume of either component. Before starting work each day, or when changing to a different batch of adhesive, a hand-mixed colour standard shall be prepared for reference during the day.
 When machine mixing is used the mixing equipment shall use positive displacement pumps which proportion the two components in the specified range. At the beginning of each day and at any other time ordered by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall check the proportions in the presence of the Superintendent. Adhesive which has remained in the mixing head for longer than 90 seconds for rapid set adhesive or 180 seconds for standard set adhesive shall be discharged to waste.
 When hand-mixing is used not more than 500 g of each component shall be mixed at any time. The components shall be mixed on a flat surface and the mixed adhesive shall be used within 10 minutes of the time the two components are brought together.
 Only standard set adhesive shall be mixed by hand, unless the Superintendent consents otherwise.
 710.05 PREPARING HOT MELT ADHESIVE
 Hot melt bitumen adhesive shall not be used on days of total fire ban without the written approval of the Tasmanian Fire Service. Two 9 kilogram Dry Powder extinguishers and one knapsack sprayer shall be carried at all times.
 The hot melt bitumen adhesive shall be heated in accordance with the manufacturer's specification in a heater designed specifically for the purpose. It shall be regularly stirred in the heater during the laying operation to maintain uniformity of the component proportions.
 710.06 PAVEMENT PREPARATION
 The Contractor shall sweep or air blast each marker site as necessary to remove loose material before placing markers. Markers shall only be placed at locations where the pavement is free from dirt, oil, grease, paint, or any other material which would adversely affect the bond of the adhesive to the pavement, unless otherwise specified.
 Unless specified otherwise, the Contractor shall clean the pavement to remove oil or grease at every marker site by sand blasting, chipping or burning of bitumen as appropriate to ensure that the surface is clean and sound.
 710.07 PLACING MARKERS
 Markers shall not be placed in any of the following circumstances:  when the pavement is wet;  when the relative humidity is greater than 80%;  when the ambient temperature or the temperature of the road surface is less than 15C for
 standard set adhesive or 0C for rapid set or hot melt adhesive.
 Epoxy adhesive shall be placed on the base of the marker in such quantity and manner as to completely cover the base of the marker and extrude slightly all round when the marker is placed on the road. The marker shall be then positioned correctly on the pavement and pressure shall be applied until the adhesive is uniformly extruded from each edge of the base of the marker indicating that the full base area is supported by adhesive. The thickness of adhesive remaining under the marker shall be approximately 1 mm. The orientation and position of the marker should then be visually checked and if necessary immediately corrected.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 710 (Page 2 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Hot melt bitumen adhesive shall be placed on the road in the correct position and the marker quickly placed, correctly orientated and pressed into the adhesive.
 Adhesive of either type on the exposed surfaces of the marker shall be removed using soft rags moistened with kerosene, petrol, or mineral turpentine. Any adhesive on the pavement which might obscure the reflective faces or aspect of the marker shall be removed using a square-ended spatula or similar.
 Where a marker is not positioned correctly within 10 seconds for hot melt bitumen adhesive, 2 minutes for rapid set machine mix adhesive, 4 minutes for standard set machine mix, or 10 minutes for standard set hand mix from the time mixing commences, it shall be discarded and a new marker placed.
 Similarly, any marker dislodged by traffic after these times up to the end of the maintenance period shall be removed and replaced with a new marker.
 On concrete and asphalt pavements, wherever possible markers shall be placed clear of longitudinal or transverse joints and on all pavements markers shall be placed clear of any surface cracks or positions from which markers have been removed and the surface is damaged.
 
 710.08 PROTECTION FROM TRAFFIC
 Markers shall be protected from traffic after placing for periods not less than those shown in Table 710.081 below, unless the Superintendent directs or consents otherwise.
 Table 710.081
 
 Ambient Temperature
 (C)
 
 Standard Set Adhesive (hours) (min)
 
 35
 
 1
 
 30
 
 2
 
 25
 
 3
 
 15
 
 6
 
 10
 
 -
 
 5
 
 -
 
 0
 
 -
 
 Rapid Set Adhesive (minutes)
 (min) 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 60
 85
 
 Hot Melt Adhesive (minutes)
 (min) 4
 4
 3
 3
 2
 2
 2
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 710 (Page 3 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 711 - WIRE ROPE SAFETY BARRIER (WRSB
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 703, 708 and 812. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 711.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for the supply of materials and installation, of wire rope safety barrier (WRSB) systems and associated works.
 
 711.02 STANDARDS
 
 (a) Australian Standards
 
 Australian Standards are referenced in an abbreviated form (e.g. AS 1012).
 
 AS 1012
 
 Methods of testing concrete
 
 AS 1379
 
 Specification and supply of concrete
 
 AS/NZS 3000 Wiring rules
 
 AS 3610
 
 Formwork for concrete
 
 AS 3799
 
 Liquid membrane-forming curing compounds for concrete
 
 AS/NZS 3845 Road safety barrier systems
 
 (b) Other Documents
 
 Proprietary
 
 Manufacturer's specification and drawings for the proprietary WRSB system and associated national or international standards.
 
 NCHRP 350 National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 350
 
 AASHTO
 
 Manual for Assessing Safety Hardware (MASH-1) 2009
 
 VicRoads
 
 Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2
 
 VicRoads
 
 Road Design Note RDN 06-02C - The use of wire rope safety barriers (WRSB)
 
 VicRoads
 
 Road Design Note RDN 06-04G - Accepted safety barrier products
 
 Section 175 details the reference to these documents.
 
 711.03 WRSB SYSTEM
 The WRSB shall be a four wire rope proprietary system, which satisfies the requirements of the current version of VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 0602, including:
 (a) Conformance with the Recommended Procedures for the Safety Performance Evaluation of Highway Features, National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) Report 350 with the matrix of test conditions, as follows:
 (i) minimum Test Level 3 for the length of need and transition as shown in Table 3.1; and
 (ii) minimum Test Level 3 for all terminals as shown in Table 3.2.
 (b) Conformance with the requirements of AS/NZS 3845.
 (c) Details of the particular WRSB systems (longitudinal barrier and terminals) have been submitted to VicRoads and accepted for use in accordance with the current version of VicRoads Road Design Note 06-04.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 1 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 711.04 MATERIALS
 
 (a) WRSB Materials
 Materials for the WRSB shall be manufactured in accordance with the specification for the proprietary WRSB system and satisfy the requirements of the system for a minimum design life of 20 years. The proprietary WRSB systems shall have the same composition, mechanical properties and geometry as those used in the verification and acceptance tests in its country of origin.
 The Contractor shall nominate, supply and install one type of proprietary WRSB system throughout the Works.
 
 (b) Concrete
 (i) Portland Cement-based Concrete
 Portland cementbased concrete shall be N20, N25 or N32 standard strength grade, as specified for the application and complying with the requirements of AS 1379 and as stated in Table 711.041.
 (ii) Geopolymer Binder-based Concrete
 Geopolymer binder-based concrete shall comply with the requirements of Section 703 and manufactured to comply with the minimum 28 day compressive strength requirements for each strength grade ranging from 20 MPa to 32 MPa as stated in Table 711.041.
 
 The use of chemical admixtures shall comply with the requirements of Section 703.
 
 Table 711.041
 
 Portland Cement Concrete Strength
 Grade
 
 Geopolymer Binder Concrete Strength
 Grade
 
 Minimum Compressive Strength at 28 days (MPa)
 
 N20
 
 20
 
 20
 
 N25
 
 25
 
 25
 
 N32
 
 32
 
 32
 
 711.05 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE OF MATERIALS, COMPONENTS AND PROCESSES
 The Contractor shall submit for review by the Superintendent not less than 14 days prior to the proposed use of materials and components, a signed statement including relevant test reports demonstrating the compliance of the materials and components with the specification for the proprietary WRSB system and this specification.
 HP The installation of the WRSB shall not proceed until the signed statement and certificates of compliance have been accepted by the Superintendent.
 The Contractor's statement shall also be supported with certificates of compliance certifying that the zinc coating mass of galvanised steel components, the powder coating and welding procedures for relevant components of the proprietary WRSB systems are in accordance with the manufacturer's specification and the associated national or international standards and the specification.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 2 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor's statement and supporting documentation shall identify all relevant national or international standards with which the various materials, components or fabrication and welding processes must comply.
 711.06 MATERIAL HANDLING AND STORAGE
 All materials and components shall be handled and stored such that damage that may affect performance is avoided, particularly to threaded components. Care shall be taken to avoid damage to galvanised and powder coating systems. Any damage that occurs shall be made good in accordance with the national or international standard with which the various materials or components must comply, the specification, and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Wire ropes shall be supplied on reels and shall not be twisted or kinked.
 The Contractor shall provide, for each of the materials and components, a copy of the manufacturer's information as specified below: (a) Manufacturer's name (b) Product reference (c) Certificate of date of manufacture.
 All posts shall be permanently and clearly marked with the manufacturer's identification mark, which shall be clearly visible at the completion of the installation.
 711.07 INSTALLATION OF WRSB
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall install the WRSB in accordance with the drawings and the manufacturer's requirements.
 (b) Post Foundations and Anchor Blocks
 (i) Where no geotechnical investigation is undertaken the proprietary WRSB supplier's nominated default anchor and post footing shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's product manual and VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-04.
 (ii) A geotechnical investigation shall be undertaken to determine the soil properties and to ensure the accuracy of the installation and performance of the barrier where:
 (1) The Contractor proposes to use an approved alternative anchor or post foundation as identified within the manufacturer's product manual and VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-04.
 (2) Where site constraints restrict the use of the default or an approved alternative anchor or post foundation. In which case the Contractor shall provide the geotechnical information to the proprietary WRSB supplier and obtain a written statement from the supplier that the anchor block size and post foundation size are appropriate for the existing natural or constructed ground conditions and the installation meets the operational requirements.
 The geotechnical investigation shall ensure that the completed in situ concrete post foundation system meets the requirements of the proprietary WRSB system and will not crack, lift or displace during impact by a vehicle equivalent to the design vehicle during the design life of the barrier.
 The Contractor shall confirm with the supplier the geotechnical information required, but shall include as a minimum:  soil bearing pressure  soil type  average allowable soil stress.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 3 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall include sufficient time for the geotechnical investigation in its program.
 HP Anchor blocks and post foundations shall not be constructed until the design and manufacturer's acceptance has been reviewed by the Superintendent.
 (iii) General Construction and Concrete Requirements
 HP Anchor blocks and post foundation shall not be cast until inspected by the Superintendent.
 Anchor block foundation and post foundation holes shall be free of loose material, debris and water prior to the placement of concrete.
 Further to any installation guidelines for construction of anchor blocks for a proprietary WRSB system, the Contractor shall form anchor block holes by excavating the hole to the correct dimension, shape, level and alignment specified by the proprietary system.
 Over-excavation of the anchor block excavation shall not be reformed with form work or soil, but shall be cleaned out and filled with concrete forming the concrete anchor block.
 In situ concrete post foundations shall be constructed using N25 strength grade concrete or 20 MPa geopolymer binder-based concrete conforming to the requirements of Clause 711.04(b).
 Notwithstanding the specific proprietary WRSB system requirements, the anchor blocks shall be constructed using N32 strength grade concrete or 32 MPa geopolymer binderbased concrete conforming to the requirements of Clause 711.04(b).
 All anchor frames, posts, sockets and reinforcing rings shall be positioned to the line and levels as specified in the drawings and shall be secured against displacement during placing of the concrete.
 No construction joints shall be provided within the anchor block.
 The finished surface of all anchor blocks and footings shall be shaped such that water cannot pool on the surface.
 (c) Wire Rope and Posts
 The Contractor shall install the wire rope and posts to the line, level and height as shown on the drawings, the specification, manufacturer's specification and to the tolerances specified in Clause 711.08.
 Posts shall be spaced in accordance with the manufacturer's specification unless otherwise required by the design requirements of VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-02. Posts shall be installed with their correct profile in the direction of travel.
 Intermediate anchors shall be spaced in accordance with the lesser of the manufacturer's specification or Section 4.3.7 of VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-02, and installed as per the manufacturer's specification and drawings.
 The vertical alignment of the wire ropes shall be smooth and uniform, without sudden changes in gradient and generally consistent with the vertical alignment of the edge of the traffic lanes. The length of the post socket or overall length of the post may be adjusted in accordance with the tolerances specified by the manufacturer to achieve the specified vertical alignment. Any such adjustment shall be as per the manufacturer's specification and obtained written statement of advice, which shall be submitted by the Contractor for review by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 4 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 HP The WRSB shall not be installed until the set out alignment of the posts has been reviewed and accepted by the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall allow the Superintendent a minimum of one working day to inspect the pegged alignment and a further minimum period of five working days to provide its acceptance including details of any required changes in alignment, length or number of installations or terminals.
 In the event that the horizontal and/or vertical geometry of the alignment do not satisfy the manufacturer's requirements or the specification, the Contractor shall immediately notify the Superintendent advising details of the deficient areas along with the proposed dispositions. Any adjustments accepted by the Superintendent shall then be made to the alignment or the level of the median or outer verge to ensure that the installation complies with the requirements of the proprietary WRSB system and the specification.
 (d) Location of Posts adjacent to Batter Hinge Points
 WRSB posts constructed with the manufacturer's default post footing design shall be located at the greater of a minimum 1 m offset from the batter hinge point and the manufacturer's specification, subject to dynamic deflection requirements being met. The batter hinge point is defined as per VicRoads Standard Drawing SD 4551.
 Where the minimum offset to the batter hinge point is to be reduced, the depth of footing is to be adjusted as per the manufacturer's specification and the Contractor shall obtain a written statement of advice from the manufacturer based on geotechnical testing. This shall be submitted by the Contractor for review by the Superintendent. Side Load Testing as per Clause 711.07(f) shall also be undertaken at 45 degrees to the WRSB in ALL directions at locations nominated by the Superintendent.
 (e) Tensioning of the Wire Rope
 Each wire rope shall be tensioned in accordance with the relationship between rope tension and ambient temperature, applicable to the proprietary WRSB system as per the manufacturer's specification. The tension shall be measured using a tension meter supported with a current calibration certificate. Prior to commissioning the WRSB system, the tension in each wire rope shall be checked, and re-tensioned if required, to ensure compliance with the ambient temperature/rope tension relationship.
 The Contractor shall prepare and submit a tensioning report for review by the Superintendent within seven days of the tensioning works being carried out.
 (f) Loading Test of Post Foundations
 Side load testing of posts shall be undertaken at locations nominated by the Superintendent prior to the installation of the wire rope to provide evidence that the foundations satisfy the specification requirements and will not crack, lift or displace during impact by a vehicle equivalent to the design vehicle during the design life of the barrier.
 The Superintendent may request side load testing be undertaken at the discretion of the Superintendent:  where non-standard post foundations are to be used, i.e. not the manufacturer's nominated
 default foundation  in the event that the soil type cannot be verified  ground conditions are such that the required depth of footing cannot be installed  in certain geological conditions, i.e. a rock cut section where the post foundation may be
 reduced in length, or where soft clay or medium to loose sand profiles have been identified and the standard foundation dimensions may be insufficient  where posts are required to be located at the minimum offset to batter hinge points [refer Clause 711.07(d)].
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 5 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Side load testing of posts shall be carried out by applying a force of 10 kN (approximately 1 tonne) to the post 600 mm above ground level at an angle of 45 degrees to the WRSB. The top of the footing shall not move more than 3 mm. If the footing withstands the force with a movement of less than 3 mm at ground level then the footing shall be considered acceptable.
 The test shall be carried out by placing a post into the completed concrete footing and using a lever hoist or equivalent and calibrated load cell anchored to a truck.
 At the completion of the load testing, the Contractor shall remove the test posts and rectify any disturbed or damaged post foundations.
 The result of all tests shall be recorded digitally (photograph) and logged against location. For any footings failing the test the Contractor shall seek advice from the Superintendent based on relevant advice from the manufacturer, take remedial measures and re-test the rectified post plus one other similar post at no cost to the Principal.
 (g) WRSB over Box Culverts and Concrete Pipes
 Where WRSB has been designed to straddle a box culvert or a concrete pipe crossing, as shown on the drawings or as stated in this specification, the post spacing shall be located centrally about the box culvert or concrete pipe. Adjacent post spacing at box culverts or concrete pipe crossings may be locally reduced to meet this requirement.
 711.08 CONSTRUCTION TOLERANCES
 Tolerances for construction of the WRSB system shall be in accordance with the lesser of the manufacturer's specification or as follows: (a) vertical tolerance on the height of the WRSB shall be  20 mm from the design line (b) longitudinal line tolerance for the WRSB system shall be  20 mm in plan view (c) tolerance on post spacing shall be  25 mm.
 WRSB height shall be measured from the road pavement when it is located within 1.5 m of the edge of pavement. For distances beyond 1.5 m, the WRSB height shall be measured from the ground surface at its location.
 711.09 COMPLIANCE AUDITING OF BARRIER SYSTEM INSTALLATION
 HP Further to Clause 711.07 Installation of WRSB, and prior to the issue of the Certificate of Practical Completion, the Contractor shall arrange for a safety barrier compliance audit on all WRSB installations constructed under the Contract.
 The audit shall be undertaken and a report prepared by the Australian Licensed Supplier of the safety barrier system. A Certificate of Compliance (CoC) signed by the Contractor's Representative and the Licensed Supplier shall be provided certifying that the product systems (including terminals) have been installed in accordance with the manufacturer's Installation Manual and this specification. A CoC shall be provided for each length of WRSB installed including terminals.
 In addition the Contractor shall complete and submit to the Superintendent a signed copy of the manufacturer's Installation Checklist / Inspection and Test Plan as per the manufacturer's Product and Installation Manual.
 711.10 DELINEATORS
 The Contractor shall supply and fasten delineators to the WRSB system, comprising post caps fitted with 50 x 100 mm Class 1A retro-reflective material, as defined in AS/NZS 1906.2, or placed on the front top of the post above the wire ropes. Delineators shall be installed at approximately 12.5 to 15 m spacing. Delineators shall not be placed on flared sections.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 6 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Contractor shall arrange delineators so that vehicles approaching from either direction at night will only see:  red delineators on the left side of one-way and two-way roadways;  white delineators on the right side of two-way roadways; and  yellow delineators on the right side of one-way roadways.
 Delineators shall not be installed on WRSB posts when the WRSB offset is greater than 4 m from the traffic lane. White guide posts with delineators shall be installed in accordance with the VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2.
 Where guard fence delineators are required to be installed as part of the Works, they shall be installed in accordance with the VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2.
 711.11 STRAY CURRENT EFFECTS ON WRSB
 All wires within a WRSB system shall be tested for induced currents and voltages relative to all other adjacent wires and the ground using calibrated equipment in accordance with AS/NZS 3000 Wiring Rules by a qualified electrical contractor. Tests shall be undertaken at each location where two sections of WRSB overlap at anchorage points. Where an induced current or voltage is recorded, or high voltage powerlines are within 50 m of the barrier, the WRSB system shall be earthed to remove current or voltage running through the wires.
 All wires in the WRSB and overlapping sections of WRSB shall be connected to earth using a flexible system, detailed in a submission for acceptance by the Superintendent. The earthing shall occur at the location of overlapping WRSB and at a maximum of 500 m intervals along the length of each affected section of WRSB.
 Prior to putting the WRSB system into service the earthing shall be checked to ensure that any further stray current effects have been eliminated.
 711.12 INTERACTION OF WRSB WITH EXISTING ASSETS
 The Contractor shall install the WRSB to provide for its dynamic deflection that does not interfere with any existing roadside furniture.
 The Contractor shall remove any guard fence located between existing assets, such as gantry legs, variable speed signs and bridge piers, and the WRSB as shown on the drawings. The Contractor shall allow for the interaction between the WRSB and all roadside furniture, including slip base light poles, by providing for the maximum barrier deflection as per VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-02, or providing reduced post spacing therefore reducing the WRSB dynamic deflection as per VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-04 and the manufacturer's specification.
 The Contractor shall integrate the WRSB with any existing lengths of safety barriers protecting ends of bridge parapets as shown on the drawings and in accordance with Clause 711.13.
 The Contractor shall not connect new WRSB to existing WRSB unless it is the same system comprising the same components.
 The Contractor shall remove and dispose of existing guide posts that conflict with a new WRSB, including any in front of a new WRSB located within a 4 m offset from the traffic lane and any behind a new WRSB greater than 4 m offset from the traffic lane, as well as bollards or other roadside furniture affected by the Works or where shown on the drawings or instructed by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 7 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 711.13 MODIFICATION TO THE WRSB AT THE INTERFACE WITH GUARD FENCE
 The Contractor shall be responsible for any alteration and/or relocation of any existing guard fence, including the removal and disposal of existing redundant guard fence, dismantling and reinstating existing guard fence (including terminals) and extension of existing guard fence (including the provision of a concrete maintenance strip) where required and as shown on the drawings.
 The Contractor shall terminate the WRSB at the interface with the guard fence ensuring sufficient overlapping of systems as detailed on the drawings.
 Any variations to the interface of the WRSB with the guard fence shall be reviewed for acceptance by the Superintendent prior to installation of the WRSB.
 Any modifications to the guard fence shall be in accordance with Section 708 and the relevant Standard Drawings.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all materials and labour necessary to undertake the modification works as specified above and as shown on the drawings.
 711.14 MINIMUM EXTENT OF WRSB AT ROADSIDE HAZARDS
 The minimum lengths and post spacing of WRSB provided at any median or outer verge hazard shall be in accordance with the requirements of VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-02, VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-04, and Standard Drawing SD 4311.
 Median or outer verge hazards shall be considered to be any rigid object or non-driveable terrain within the design clear zone, including but not limited to:  bridge piers;  sign gantries;  variable speed signs;  sections of existing guard fence (including terminals);  roadside vegetation;  culvert endwalls;  non-driveable table drains; and  non-driveable batter slopes.
 711.15 ASSOCIATED PAVEMENT (SHOULDER) WIDENING
 The Contractor shall widen the existing shoulder on the median or outer verge applications adjacent to locations where WRSB is to be installed or as shown on the typical cross section, drawings or specification.
 The Contractor shall provide additional pavement between the edge of existing pavement and the WRSB. The Contractor shall adopt the nominated pavement design. Where a nominated pavement design has not been specified the Contractor shall construct the widening with a pavement that matches the existing.
 The edge of shoulder shall be saw-cut to provide a neat straight edge against which the additional pavement can be placed.
 711.16 MAINTENANCE STRIP FOR WRSB
 Not used.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 8 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 711.17 PLACING, COMPACTING AND FINISHING CONCRETE
 Concrete shall be transported, handled and placed to prevent segregation, loss or leakage of materials. Fresh concrete shall not be placed against concrete which has taken its initial set, except at properly formed construction joints. Concrete shall be thoroughly compacted by means of continuous tamping and internal vibration and shall be worked around any embedments and anchorages and into corners of formwork or excavations to produce a dense concrete free from voids, honeycombing, segregation or surface defects.
 Unformed surfaces shall be hand tamped to ensure a smooth surface and screeded to achieve the specified level, dimensions, falls and tolerances. Surfaces shall be finished uniform in appearance with a Class 3 surface finish in accordance with AS 3610.
 Any concrete repairs shall be carried out using a method and materials accepted by the Superintendent.
 711.18 CURING OF CONCRETE
 The curing of exposed concrete surfaces shall commence immediately after finishing operations are progressively completed and shall continue uninterrupted for a period of not less than seven days after placing the concrete.
 Concrete shall be cured either by water curing, wet hessian, polyethylene sheeting which is adequately sealed against evaporative moisture losses, curing compound or a combination of these. Freshly finished exposed concrete surfaces shall be effectively protected from rain or damage from other sources, until hard set has occurred.
 Curing compounds shall comply with AS 3799. The curing compound shall be applied in two coats using a fine spray at the rate stated on the certificate of compliance. The curing membrane shall be maintained intact for not less than the specified period of curing.
 Any damage to the curing membrane during the period of curing shall be repaired immediately at the original rate of application.
 Where used, geopolymer concrete shall be cured in accordance with the requirements of Section 703.
 711.19 CONFORMANCE TESTING FOR CONCRETE STRENGTH AND CONSISTENCY
 The minimum compressive strength requirements for each strength grade shall be as shown in Table 711.041.
 Sampling and testing of the strength of concrete shall be carried out in accordance with Clause 6.2 of AS 1379. The frequency of sampling and testing shall provide at least one sample to be tested for each 50 m3 or part thereof of each strength grade placed on any one day, at the point of discharge. Where less than 50 m3 is provided for any one day then one sample of each strength grade shall be tested.
 The consistency of the concrete shall be determined by a slump test of each concrete strength sample in accordance with AS 1012.3 and Clause 5.2 of AS 1379. The concrete represented by the samples shall be deemed to comply with the nominated concrete slump if the measured slump is within the limits given in Table 5.1 of Clause 5.2 of AS 1379.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 9 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 711.20 EXISTING SIGNS AND MARKINGS
 All existing signs that are temporarily removed or relocated during the execution of the works shall be reinstated to their original location as soon as practical to ensure that adequate information is provided to road users. In all cases the Contractor shall provide continuity of regulatory and warning signs.
 The Contractor shall reinstate all signs to a standard not less than the pre-existing condition and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall reinstate any existing painted edge lines and reinstate or replace any missing Raised Reflective Pavement Markers (RRPMs) along the length of the Works, including RRPMs damaged by the installation process for the WRSB.
 
 711.21 SUPPLY OF ADDITIONAL MATERIALS
 The Contractor shall supply additional posts and associated fittings as specified. These posts and fittings shall be delivered to a storage area nominated by the Superintendent and shall include all appropriate components as required by the proprietary WRSB system to repair damage which occurs beyond the expiration of the Defects Liability Period.
 The Contractor shall provide details of the posts and associated fittings as required by the proprietary WRSB system. The Contractor shall make due allowance for the supply and delivery of all required components to be paid under the relevant Provisional Quantity items.
 
 711.22
 
 ACCIDENT DAMAGE TO WRSB
 
 In the event of any damage to the WRSB caused by errant vehicles prior to the Date of Practical Completion and during the Defects Liability Period, the Contractor shall make the area immediately safe for traffic and shall be responsible for repairs, including all associated traffic management measures. Repairs shall be undertaken within five working days of an impact or of a request by the Superintendent.
 
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all WRSB materials including any concrete necessary to undertake the repair works to be paid under the relevant Provisional Quantity items.
 
 During the Contract period, the Contractor shall record the number of vehicle impacts where damage has occurred to the WRSB so that the Department of State Growth can maintain a maintenance history of the WRSB installations.
 
 711.23 MEDIAN CROSSINGS
 Where a median crossing is removed, the Contractor shall reinstate the median with a treatment consistent with the surrounding area. Any redundant median crossing signs within the Limit of the Works shall be removed and delivered to a storage area nominated by the Superintendent.
 Median crossings within the Limit of the Works shall be retained by the Contractor.
 Where detailed on the drawings, new median crossing points shall be constructed in accordance with the pavement details specified, to provide for adequate access for emergency vehicles and shall be integrated with the WRSB installation.
 
 711.24 EXISTING VEGETATION
 The Contractor shall ensure that the existing vegetation within the Limit of Works is not affected by the Works. Areas where no works are required shall not be disturbed. Any damage to existing vegetation shall be rectified immediately to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 10 of 11)
 
 Department of State Growth 711.25 GRASSING OF DISTURBED AREAS (a) General
 All disturbed areas shall be topsoiled and grassed. All areas are to be cultivated to a minimum 50 mm depth, and moistened prior to the application of grass seed and fertiliser. Grass seed shall be applied at a rate of not less than 200 kg/Ha. Fertilizer shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. HP A joint inspection of all grassed areas shall be carried out between the Contractor
 and Superintendent three months after sowing has taken place. Areas with less than 90% cover shall be re-sown by the Contractor. Any remedial works required are to be performed within two weeks of the date of inspection. (b) Maintenance of Grassed Areas The Contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of grassed areas, including mowing, for the duration of the Defects Liability Period for the Whole of the Works.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 711 (Page 11 of 11)
 
 SECTION 712 - BLOCK PAVING
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 166. If Section 166 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 166 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 712.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for paving driveways, parking areas, medians, verges, footpaths and traffic islands using manufactured paving blocks.
 
 712.02 MATERIALS
 Unless otherwise specified, the Contractor shall supply all materials necessary to construct the paving including paving blocks, bedding crushed rock or gravel, bedding sand, jointing sand, and concrete or timber edging.
 Paving blocks shall meet the requirements specified in Clause 712.13.
 Bedding and jointing sand shall consist of clean, hard, durable, naturally occurring grains free from clay, dust, soft or flaky particles, shale, salt, alkali, organic matter, soil or other deleterious substances.
 Bedding and jointing sand shall be maintained at a uniform moisture content.
 Bedding sand shall comply with the grading requirements shown in Table 712.021.
 
 Table 712.021
 
 AS Sieve 9.50 mm 4.75 mm 2.36 mm 1.18 mm 0.600 mm 0.300 mm 0.150 mm 0.075 mm
 
 % Passing
 
 100
 
 95-100 80-100 50-85
 
 25-60
 
 10-30
 
 5-15
 
 0-10
 
 Jointing sand shall be dry, free flowing and shall all pass the 1.18 mm sieve with 10-20% passing the 0.075 mm sieve. Bedding sand shall not be used for joint filling.
 
 712.03 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 All surfaces shall be finished in conformity with the lines, grades, thicknesses and cross sections shown on the drawings or specified within the following limits:
 (a) Paving shall be shaped to match the level of existing fixtures, (e.g. pit covers, edgings and driveways) to within 5 mm. Elsewhere the deviation of the finished work from line or level shall not exceed 20 mm at any point, and the rate of change of deviation from line or level shall not exceed 20 mm in 10 m or 2 mm between adjacent blocks. Except on curves or in shaped areas, the deviation of the finished work from a 3 m straightedge shall not exceed 15 mm at any point.
 (b) Unless otherwise specified all paving shall be shaped to shed surface water from the entire paved area in the direction of natural slope or towards constructed surface drains. The slope at any point on the paving except on a ridge shall be not less than 1%.
 (c) Where median or other surfacing is to be constructed between edge sections of substantially the same level, the paving shall be crowned to produce a crossfall towards the edges not exceeding 3% and not less than 1%.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 712 (Page 1 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 712.04 SETTING OUT ##[strikethrough (a) or (b) below]:
 The work shall be set out in accordance with the drawings by: *** (a) The Contractor. *** (b) Initially by the Superintendent. The alignment and level pegs will be indicated to the
 Contractor on the site by the Superintendent prior to the commencement of work.
 712.05 PROVISION FOR TRAFFIC
 The Contractor shall make provision for traffic in accordance with Section 166 as provided for in this specification. Deliveries of material to the site shall be made in such a manner as to minimise interference to traffic and material shall not be placed on any carriageway or footpath.
 If a traffic lane closure is required the Contractor shall submit details of the proposed signing to the Superintendent for review.
 712.06 TEMPORARY WORKS AND PROTECTION OF PROPERTY
 Before obstructing any waterway, channel, culvert, or pipe, the Contractor shall make provision for temporary diversion and submit the proposal to the Superintendent for review.
 The Contractor shall make provision for the safe discharge of drainage and storm water at all times during the construction of the Works.
 The Contractor shall take every precaution necessary to protect property, including fences, buildings, poles, hedges, shrubs, gardens, and the like on or adjacent to the Works.
 712.07 TRIMMING AND BEDDING
 The areas on which block paving is to be placed shall be trimmed by the Contractor to an even and stable surface to allow a layer of bedding material not less than the minimum specified thickness to be placed.
 Lower bedding shall consist of graded crushed rock or natural gravel, watered as necessary and compacted to form a hard, dense surface.
 Upper bedding shall consist of bedding sand complying with the requirements of Clause 712.02 placed in accordance with the following requirements: (a) Sand shall be spread loose in a uniform layer of 30 mm nominal thickness and shall be
 screeded in a loose condition to achieve a layer of uniform thickness, to the specified design level, following compaction of the paving. (b) The spread sand shall be carefully maintained in a loose condition and protected against precompaction both prior to and following screeding. Sand shall be lightly screeded in a loose condition to the predetermined depth just ahead of the laying of the paving units. Under no circumstances shall the sand be screeded in advance of the laying face to an extent to which paving will not be completed on that day.
 712.08 EDGE TREATMENT
 Where it is specified that paving shall match concrete edgings any protrusions on the line of the edging shall be removed to allow paving blocks to be placed abutting a straight edge. Chamfered blocks shall be placed adjacent to all concrete edgings with the lower edge of the chamfer set at the level of the top of the edging.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 712 (Page 2 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Where concrete edging does not exist and is not specified, the Contractor shall supply and construct a timber edge strip to match the finished level of paving. Unless otherwise specified the edge strip shall be constructed from rough sawn 100 mm x 50 mm pressure treated Standard Grade Radiata Pine using the longest lengths that are practicable in each situation. The strip shall be firmly bedded and supported by 100 mm x 50 mm hardwood or pressure treated radiata pine stakes 450 mm long placed at each end of a timber strip with intermediate stakes at no more than 2 m intervals. The stakes shall be placed on the opposite side of the strip to the paving, driven to a level 25 mm below the top of the timber edging, and secured to the strip by two 75 mm galvanized nails.
 Following installation of the edge strip the ground surface not to be paved adjacent to the strip, shall be reinstated or filled with soil to match the finished level of the edge strip.
 Part width paving blocks at the edge of the paved area with or without concrete edgings, shall be saw-cut along the line of the edge.
 712.09 PROVISION FOR PERMANENT SIGNS
 Where shown on the drawings or specified, sign post sleeves supplied by the Department of State Growth shall be placed by the Contractor to provide for erection of permanent signs in the areas to be paved.
 Sign post sleeves will be not greater than 500 mm long and they shall be placed vertically with the top of the sleeve 5-15 mm below the finished level of the paving and shall be installed before paving is commenced. Any sand or debris which falls into the sleeve shall be removed.
 712.10 LAYING PAVING BLOCKS
 Unless otherwise specified, paving shall be laid in a stretcher bond pattern commencing at the longest straight edge with the long sides of the pavers parallel to that edge.
 Paving blocks shall be placed with gaps nominally 2 to 4 mm wide between adjacent blocks such that all joints are correctly aligned.
 In each row all whole blocks shall be laid first. Closure blocks shall be cut and fitted subsequently. Such closure blocks shall consist of not less than 25% of a whole block. Spaces less than 25% of a full block shall be filled with a mortar consisting of four parts sand and one part cement and coloured to match the colour of the paving blocks.
 Except where it is necessary to correct any minor variations occurring in the laying pattern the paving blocks shall not be hammered into position. Where adjustment of position is necessary care shall be taken to avoid premature compaction of the sand bedding.
 Any foot or barrow traffic shall use boards overlying and raised above the paving to prevent disturbance of blocks prior to compaction. No other construction traffic shall be allowed on the paving at this stage of construction.
 712.11 COMPACTION AND JOINT FILLING
 As soon as practicable after laying the paving blocks, the paving joints shall be filled with joint filling sand and the paving shall be compacted. Joint filling sand shall be spread over the paving and broomed into the joints and not less than two passes of a plate compactor shall be used with compaction and brooming continuing until lipping has been eliminated between blocks and the joints completely filled with sand. Any blocks that are cracked or broken during compaction shall be immediately removed and replaced. All paving shall be fully compacted on the day of laying, provided that compaction shall not proceed closer than 1 m from any face where paving will be continued.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 712 (Page 3 of 4)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 712.12 CLEAN UP
 At the completion of work all unused materials and trimmed material shall be removed from the site and the paving shall be swept clean.
 
 712.13 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS
 
 *** (a) Type/shape of block
 
 *** (b) Colour of block
 
 *** (c) Size of block
 
 *** (d) Thickness of block
 
 (e) Thickness of bedding
 
 ***
 
 Upper bedding
 
 ***
 
 Lower bedding
 
 ##: ##: ##: ##: (mm)
 ##: (mm) ##: (mm)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 712 (Page 4 of 4)
 
 SECTION 713 - BEACHING
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 210, 703 and 801. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 713.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the supply and placement of rock, stone or manufactured block beaching for the protection of batter slopes, drainage channels and culvert endwalls as shown on the drawings. Six types of beaching are covered by this section:
 Type 1: Un-grouted rock beaching Type 2: Grouted rock beaching Type 3: Grouted flat stone beaching Type 4: Butted paving block beaching Type 5: Melbourne Water waterway beaching Type 6: Armour Stone.
 
 713.02 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 The finished surface of the beaching shall conform to the levels, lines and grades as shown on the drawings or as specified.
 
 713.03 MATERIALS
 The Contractor shall supply all materials necessary, including rock or paving blocks, bedding, filter materials, geotextile, concrete, mortar, reinforcement and drainage pipes.
 Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall nominate the source of the proposed materials, supply specified test results and provide a representative sample for approval by the Superintendent.
 Materials used for rock beaching shall be resistant to weathering action of air, wind and water and shall be free from staining, laminations, cracks and other structural defects which may reduce its mechanical strength.
 All rock materials used for beaching shall comply with the material requirements for `sound' rock as specified in Section 801 and the Los Angeles Value (LAV) requirements of Table 801.033. The rock shall have a minimum apparent particle density of 2.5 t/m3 when tested in accordance with the requirements of the current Australian Standard - Method for sampling and testing of aggregates-Particle density and water absorption of coarse aggregate-Weighing-in-water method as listed in Section 175. In addition, the rock beaching shall have a minimum wet strength of 100 kN and a wet/dry strength variation not exceeding 45% when tested in accordance with the requirements of the current Australian Standard  Methods for Sampling and Testing AggregatesWet/Dry Strength Variation as listed in Section 175.
 .
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 713 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (a) Beaching Material
 (i) Type 1  Ungrouted rock beaching
 Rock for Type 1 beaching shall consist of field or quarry rock.
 All rocks shall have a mass of between 20 and 70 kg and at least 60% by number shall be over 40 kg. Rocks shall be of such size that the layer of beaching is not less than 225 mm thick.
 (ii) Type 2  Grouted rock beaching
 Rock for Type 2 beaching shall consist of field or quarry rock. The rocks shall be uniform in colour.
 All rocks shall have a mass of between 10 kg and 40 kg and at least 60% by number shall be over 25 kg. Rocks shall be of such size that the layer of beaching is not less than 150 mm thick.
 (iii) Type 3  Grouted flat stone beaching
 Type 3 beaching shall consist of dense, flat stone.
 Beaching stone shall be uniform in size, shape and colour. Each piece shall be not less than 65 mm thick and have a face area not less than 0.1 m2. At least 50% of the pieces by number shall have an area of more than 0.2 m2.
 (iv) Type 4  Butted paving rock beaching
 Paving blocks shall be of the type, face size, thickness and colour specified.
 All masonry units used for Type 4 beaching shall be solid units and shall comply with the requirements for masonry units in AS/NZS 4455.1. Masonry units shall be sampled to AS/NZS 4456.1 and tested in accordance with AS/NZS 4456.4, and shall have a minimum unconfined compressive strength for masonry units in AS/NZS 4455.1.
 (v) Type 5  Melbourne Water waterway beaching
 Rock for Type 5 beaching shall consist of field or quarry rock, preferably of a type/colour that is indicative of the local area.
 Primarily the material will be angular in shape, and of even grading (including 5% by weight of rock fines), that creates an interlocked effect when constructed.
 The nominal rock size/thickness, D50, is to be specified by the designer and signed off by Melbourne Water. Unless otherwise specified, the minimum D50 shall be a 300 mm rock sizing, with a depth of 2 x D50 (600 mm).
 All beaching on Melbourne Water assets shall be structurally stable and scour proof, and as per Melbourne Water requirements. Final Melbourne Water rock beaching is to support agreed revegetation.
 Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall provide a record of Melbourne Water design acceptance to the Superintendent for approval.
 (vi) Type 6  Armour stone
 Armour stone shall comply with the requirements of Type 1 beaching, unless specified, and all armour stone shall have a mass of between ##: and ##: kg and at least 60% by number shall be over ##: kg. Rocks shall be of such size that the layer of beaching is not less than ##: mm thick.
 Armour stone used on Melbourne Water assets shall include rock fines to create an interlocked effect when constructed.
 Prior to the commencement of work on a Melbourne Water waterway, the Contractor shall provide a record of Melbourne Water design acceptance to the Superintendent for approval.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 713 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Bedding
 Type 1 beaching shall not routinely require a granular bedding, however a very robust needlepunched non-woven geotextile (mass >250 g/m2) shall be laid over the trimmed surface where rock beaching is to be placed. Geotextiles used shall comply with and be placed in accordance with Section 210. The geotextile shall be buried to a depth of 300 mm at the edges of beaching and placed under and around the excavation for the toe wall and for any other perimeter walls provided. The geotextile shall be laid evenly with no kinks or folds, and joints shall be formed by overlapping the geotextile by not less than 300 mm and not more than 500 mm.
 Type 2 beaching shall not require bedding unless specified or shown on the drawings.
 Bedding for Type 3 beaching shall consist of at least 30 mm depth of mortar, comprising one part portland cement and nine parts sand.
 Bedding for Type 4 beaching shall consist of a 50 mm minimum layer of bedding sand or stabilised sand with a slow setting binder.
 Type 5 beaching shall be developed in conjunction with Melbourne Water. The rock used for the granular filter layer is to be well graded and where a granular bedding is required, limited to 0-100 mm in size. The thickness of the granular filter will depend on site and hydraulic conditions but shall not be less than 100 mm. Sites composed of sandy, dispersive soils may require the use of a geotextile filter layer beneath the granular filter/embedment layer.
 Armour stone shall not require bedding unless specified or shown on the drawings.
 713.04 PREPARATION OF UNDERLYING SURFACE
 Areas on which beaching is to be placed shall be compacted and trimmed as required to provide a finished surface level of beaching in accordance with the drawings. Any scours or hollows in the surface shall be filled with compacted Class 4 crushed rock.
 Trimmed material shall be removed from the site.
 For treatment of socurs and hollows on or near Melbourne Water assets, contact Melbourne Water for the necessary treatment.
 713.05 BEACHING PLACEMENT
 (a) General
 Wherever practicable, the placement of beaching materials shall be by mechanical means. For beaching materials with a mass greater than or equal to 12 kg, placement by mechanical means is mandatory.
 Prior to commencement of any work where placement of rock beaching is proposed, a detailed job safety assessment shall be undertaken by a suitably qualified and experienced professional and a suitable Safe Work Method Statement developed to cover all necessary elements.
 The completed job safety assessment and the Safe Work Method Statement shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review.
 The documentation submitted must demonstrate compliance with Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 in particular Part 4.2  Hazardous Manual Tasks, Part 4.4  Falls, and Chapter 6  Construction Work.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 713 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Beaching materials shall be firmly bedded on the prepared embankment and/or bedding if required and laid in courses commencing from the bottom of any slope.
 Un-grouted beaching when placed shall form a tight `interlocking grid', which shall prevent the removal of individual rocks.
 The general surface of the finished beaching shall not vary from a 3 metre straight edge laid across the surface of the beaching by more than:
 100 mm for Type 1 Beaching 75 mm for Type 2 Beaching 30 mm for Type 3 Beaching 20 mm for Type 4 Beaching 75mm for Type 5 Beaching (unless otherwise specified by Melbourne Water Authority)
 Finished surface levels of rock beaching placed in open drains shall be flush with adjacent soil levels to allow mowing and maintenance. Rock beaching shall not protrude more than 50 mm above the surrounding ground levels.
 The finished rock surface shall be stable to allow public access and shall comply with the safe design requirements of Section 22 of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012.
 (b) Type 1 Beaching
 Gaps between rocks shall be as narrow as practicable and not exceed 60 mm on average. Voids shall be filled to at least mid-height of the rocks with topsoil.
 The level of the topsoil shall be increased where planting is required within Type 1 rock beaching. The topsoil depth shall be increased to finish flush with the general rock surface and adjacent ground level.
 (c) Type 2 Beaching
 Width of joints may vary between 10 mm and 60 mm, with an average not exceeding 40 mm. Level difference between edges of adjacent rocks shall not exceed 40 mm. The joint pattern shall be random and the joints kept free from debris before grouting.
 (d) Type 3 Beaching
 Beaching material shall be thoroughly cleaned and saturated with water before being bedded on fresh mortar as specified in Clause 713.03(b).
 The joint pattern shall be random and the joints kept free from debris prior to grouting. Width of joints may vary between 10 mm and 60 mm, with an average not exceeding 40 mm. Level difference between edges of adjacent stones shall not exceed 25 mm.
 (e) Type 4 Beaching
 The blocks shall be placed on the specified bedding sand and laid in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation. Edge blocks shall be neatly cut to establish straight edges. Dry sand shall be broomed into the joints on completion and lightly watered. The sand used in this mixture shall all pass a 1.18 mm AS sieve and 10-20% shall pass a 0.075 mm AS sieve.
 Type 5 Beaching Rocks shall be placed to allow for the formation of a tightly interlocked rock mass in which the larger rocks are not free to move. All voids are to be sealed with smaller graded rock for stability and sufficient for water to flow over the top and not within or underneath the beaching. All leading and edge rocks shall finish flush with the surrounding ground level.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 713 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth The following photos are typical examples of Melbourne Water accepted rock beaching and armour stone showing well graded rock including the proportion of `fines'.
 Photo 1: Melbourne Water accepted Type 5 rock beaching
 Photo 2: Melbourne Water accepted Armour Stone
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 713 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 713.06 GROUTING
 Grouting with mortar shall be carried out when the air temperature is above 5C and work shall be kept moist for three days after grouting.
 Joint mortar shall consist of one part portland cement and three parts sand by volume, and be thoroughly mixed with water to produce grout of suitable consistency. Propriety cementitious mortars with equivalent performance may be used if approved by the Superintendent.
 Grouted rock beaching (Type 2) and grouted flat stone beaching (Type 3) shall be initially placed on a bed of mortar which infiltrates joints and final grouting shall ensure that mortar is firmly tamped into joints to fill the joints to 20 mm below the general top of beaching level.
 The joints shall be neatly finished by filling with mortar. The final level of the mortar shall not be within 10 mm of the finished rock surface. Care shall be taken to keep the exposed rock face clean. Brooming of mortar across the face of the rocks will not be permitted.
 713.07 PERIMETER AND TOE WALLS
 Perimeter and toe walls shall be constructed where shown on the drawings.
 For Type 1 Beaching, toe walls 600 mm wide by 600 mm deep shall be constructed. They shall be lined with geotextile fabric and filled with hand packed rock, the larger voids between rocks being filled with smaller stones. Where Type 1 beaching is used in streams, similar walls 600 mm wide by 600 mm deep shall also be constructed across the upstream end of the beaching.
 For Types 2, 3 and 4 Beaching, concrete perimeter walls shall be constructed around exposed edges of the beaching. Concrete used for this purpose shall be N20 strength grade complying with Section 703.
 Toe walls shall be 300 mm wide by 400 mm deep at the front face and reinforced with L8TM trench mesh top and bottom. The upper surface of the toe wall shall slope upwards at either the slope of the rock beaching or the adjacent verge as shown on the drawings. Side walls and other perimeter walls shall be 150 mm wide by 250 mm deep. The top of the walls shall be continuous with the beaching.
 For Type 5 Beaching, perimeter and toe edge rocks will depend on site and hydraulic conditions and shall be constructed in conjunction with Melbourne Water. Perimeter and toe edge rocks shall be trenched into in situ ground before bedding placement. Such rocks shall have a minimum embedment depth of 600 mm and shall finish flush with the surrounding ground.
 Perimeter and toe edge rocks may require a granular bedding and an underlying geotextile filter layer, if warranted by the site and hydraulic conditions. All rocks shall be carefully placed into position, rather than dumped directly, so as to avoid segregation of the rock sizes.
 713.08 DRAINAGE
 (a) Where specified or shown on the drawings, a 100 mm diameter PVC pipe shall be laid down the batter in a trench beneath the bedding to discharge immediately above the top of the toe wall. The pipe shall be securely bedded within the backfilled compacted crushed rock or natural gravel trench.
 (b) Weepholes consisting of 75 mm diameter PVC pipes shall be placed through the beaching at 2 m centres immediately above the top of the concrete toe wall and cut off flush with the face of beaching. Weepholes and other drainage lines shall not directly discharge onto areas of public access or shared user pathways.
 713.09 CLEANING
 On completion of the work, the beaching shall be cleaned to remove all foreign materials and discolouration from the beaching surface. Any joint mortar adhering to the surrounding rock surfaces shall be removed.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 713 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 SECTION 714 - SIGN INSTALLATION
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 631 and 703. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 714.01 SCOPE
 This section covers the installation of signs and sign supports that comply with:  the VicRoads Supplement to AS 1743  Australian Standard AS 1742 Manual of uniform traffic control devices and AS 1743 Road
 Signs  Specifications  the VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2  VicRoads Supplements to Australian
 Standards.
 Cantilever sign structures and sign gantries are outside of the scope of this document.
 
 714.02 SUPPLY OF MATERIALS AND COMPONENTS All materials shall be supplied by the Contractor.
 
 714.03 TRANSPORT, HANDLING AND STORAGE OF SIGNS
 The Contractor shall collect signs and sign components from the specified storage location and transport them to the specified sign location.
 Signs shall be transported, handled stored in a manner that prevents damage to and deterioration of sign components.
 If any damage or deterioration should occur to sign components, the Contractor shall repair or replace the affected item. Repairs shall restore the sign to the original condition using proprietary materials obtained from the sign manufacturer or alternative materials compatible with the original.
 
 714.04 CONFORMITY WITH DRAWINGS
 The sign installation shall be as described in the schedule and as shown on the contract drawings.
 If the Contractor proposes to use an alternative method of installation, the Contractor shall submit full details to the Superintendent for approval not later than four weeks before the commencement of sign installation.
 
 714.05 TOLERANCES
 (a) Foundations
 The finished surface of concrete foundations shall be between 50 mm and 100 mm above the finished surface at the base of the sign and shall be shaped to ensure free drainage of water away from the base of the post.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 714 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Posts (i) Posts shall be straight (ii) Posts shall be vertical with a maximum deviation of 1 in 100
 (iii) Post tops shall be 50 mm  10 below the top edge of the sign
 (c) Signs (i) Signs shall be mounted level with a maximum deviation of 1 in 100. (ii) Signs shall be mounted symmetrically on their posts unless the drawings indicate that an offset is required or if directed by the Superintendent.
 (iii) Where the sign comprises two or more signs above each other, the individual sign faces shall be mounted with the adjacent edges touching unless otherwise shown on the sign drawings.
 (iv) Sign faces shall present an even surface free from twists, cracks, indentations or any other faults after erection.
 714.06 POSTS AND FOUNDATIONS
 HP The required positions of all posts and signs shall be as directed by the Superintendent who shall confirm the positions before the erection of posts commences.
 Post details shall be as shown on the Standard Drawings and in accordance with the VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2. Refer to VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-09 for a list of VicRoads accepted frangible post systems.
 If the Contractor proposes the use of an alternative post and sign installation, full details of the proposals shall be supplied to the Superintendent for review not later than four weeks before installation.
 (a) Steel and Timber Posts The Contractor shall conform to the requirements of Clause 714.04 and the Sign and Post Schedule. Where posts are to be mounted in sockets, the post shall be securely fixed into the socket by an approved vandal-proof method. Signs to be mounted on two or more posts shall have posts positioned such that the sign face is rotated away from the approaching traffic to avoid direct reflection. Posts shall be positioned such that the sign is rotated away from the cross section by an amount equal to one tenth of the width of the sign (approximately 5). Posts specified as frangible hardwood shall be set at a level such that the centre of the lower hole of each post is 75 mm above the finished surface at the base of the post.
 (b) Coatings for Sign Supports Steel posts shall be hot-dip galvanized in accordance with the Australian Standard for Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles. Sign supports shall be unpainted unless otherwise shown on the drawings. Any paints shall be in accordance with Section 631.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 714 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Foundations
 All posts shall be set in concrete foundations to the depths shown in the Sign and Post Schedule and with the following hole diameters:
 
 Foundation Hole Diameter
 
 Post size and type (mm)
 
 Diameter (mm)
 
 32 mm and 50 mm nominal bore steel
 
 225
 
 80 mm to 150 mm nominal bore steel
 
 300
 
 180mm x 100 mm frangible hardwood
 
 300
 
 Concrete used in foundations shall be 20 MPa complying with the requirements of Section 703.
 (d) Posts in Sockets
 If a sign is located in a paved area or in a location where the sign may be struck by a vehicle, e.g. at the end of an urban median or where it may be necessary to remove the sign to accommodate the swept path of over-dimensional vehicles, the post should be inserted into a socket cast into concrete foundation. Suitable socket sizes for posts are as follows:
 
 Socket Size
 
 Post size (mm)
 
 Socket Size (mm)
 
 32 mm nominal bore tube 50 mm nominal bore tube
 
 50 mm nominal bore tube 65 mm nominal bore tube
 
 The depth of the socket should be the same as the depth in ground nominated in Table 22 of the VicRoads Supplement to AS 1742.2:2009.
 The socket should protrude 50 mm above an earth surface or 25 mm above a paved surface.
 The sign post must penetrate a minimum 450 mm into the socket.
 The sign post should be securely fixed into the socket by an approved vandal-proof method.
 (e) Backfilling of Post Holes
 (i) 32 and 50 mm Nominal Bore Steel Posts
  posts holes shall be back-filled with concrete with a nominal strength of 10 MPa. (ii) 180 mm x 100 mm Frangible Hardwood Timber Posts
  frangible Hardwood Posts shall be erected in accordance with the drawings;  post-holes for frangible hardwood posts shall be filled with a mixture of gravel and
 cement (4% by weight).
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 714 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) VicRoads Approved Sign Support Systems Other VicRoads approved proprietary supports systems may be used and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
 
 714.07 INSTALLATION OF SIGNS
 Installation of signs shall be in accordance with the Sign and Post Schedule.
 Fittings shall be appropriate to the size and type of sign and shall ensure that the sign face is securely connected to the post.
 (a) Signs shall be attached to the post(s) or structures using the type and number of fittings as specified in the schedule or as follows:
 
 Size of Sign
 
 Number of Fittings per Post
 
 Signs up to 200 mm in depth
 
 One
 
 Signs 201 to 900 mm in depth
 
 Two
 
 Signs 901 to 1200 mm in depth
 
 Three
 
 One extra fitting shall be provided per post for each 400 mm increment or part thereof above 1200 mm.
 
 (b) For braced signs, the sign shall be attached to the post at every intersection point between the sign bracing member and the post.
 (c) Where a sign assembly consists of two or more signs, the signs shall be mounted in accordance with the drawings.
 (d) Signs shall be positioned in accordance with the following tolerances:
 (i)  40 mm of the height specified in the Sign and Post Schedule measured from the bottom of the sign or sign assembly to the lip of the kerb or edge of shoulder nearest the sign;
 (ii)  100 mm of the pegged sign location or specified location.
 (e) When a sign is to be mounted on frangible posts on a cut batter having a slope steeper than or equal to 2:1, the mounting height at the shorter post may be reduced providing that:
 (i) the uphill corner of the sign is a minimum of 800 mm above the ground;
 (ii) the sign at the longer post is 2200 mm minimum above the ground.
 (f) If required on the drawings sign faces shall be mounted on existing roadside poles, lighting columns, traffic signal pedestals. Where a sign is to be mounted with stainless steel straps, the brackets shall be attached to the pole using stainless steel straps of 12 mm minimum width and a minimum tensile strength 6.5 kN.
 Small signs with an area of not exceeding 0.3 m shall be attached to steel or concrete electricity distribution poles, tramway poles, lighting columns and signal pedestals or mast arms by banding or other proprietary fittings.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 714 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Signs exceeding 0.3 m in area may be attached to existing poles (other than electricity distribution poles) provided that the pole has sufficient strength to support the additional loading due to the sign and that special joint-use supports are used.
 If the Contractor proposes to mount a sign on an existing pole, the strength of the pole and any other effects of mounting the sign in this way such as fatigue and durability shall be checked by an experienced structural engineer. Evidence of the structural checking shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review. The Contractor shall obtain permission for use of structures which are not Department of State Growth property.
 The maximum signboard areas which may be attached to joint-use structures are:  standard 114 mm OD signal pedestal - 1.0 m  special 165 mm OD signal pedestals - 2.7 m  joint use traffic signal/lighting column or traffic signal mast arm - 1.6 m less the area
 of any traffic signal target boards facing in the same direction.
 Minimum lateral and vertical clearances adjacent and under the sign shall be maintained.
 (g) Where the drawings indicate that a sign is to face oncoming traffic, it shall be mounted on posts which have been rotated in accordance with the requirements of Clause 714.06(a), with the exception of signs mounted on structures over traffic lanes.
 (h) Where signs are to be removed or relocated, as specified in the schedule, the Contractor shall dismantle and transport the signs, posts and fittings to the specified new location or as directed by the Superintendent. Post holes shall be backfilled and compacted to the finished surface. Relocated signs shall be erected in their new position as specified.
 (i) After erection of each sign all stiffening bars are to be removed.
 (j) Single post mounting for large signs shall be provided if required on the drawings and the schedule. Single post mountings shall be designed in accordance with the VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2. Such supports are not to be made as breakaway supports.
 (k) Installation of proprietary signs approved by the Department of State Growth shall be in accordance with the supplier's recommendations as modified by the Department of State Growth conditions of approval.
 714.08 MASKING OF SIGNS
 Where indicated in the schedule, the Contractor shall mask the nominated sign(s) by placing a porous cloth or similar covering that conceals the sign text under both wet and dry conditions and does not void the sign material warranty. The masking material shall be held in position by wire mesh over the sign.
 Adhesive material shall only be applied to the masking material and not be applied to either the front or rear face of the signboard.
 Signs marked `m' in the Sign and Post Schedule shall be masked.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 714 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth The size of the masking material and its method of attachment shall be such that the sign is:  effectively and securely covered;  wholly or partly covered, as required;  covered at all times and under all conditions. 714.09 REFERENCES VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 714 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 715 - GABIONS AND ROCK MATTRESSES
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 175, 204, 210, 702, 801 and 812. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 715.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the supply of materials, assembly, installation and filling of rock filled gabions and rock mattresses.
 This section also covers specific requirements for gabion retaining structures, and specific requirements for the use of gabions and rock mattresses in waterways and coastal waters.
 715.02 DEFINITIONS
 Gabion A container manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting or square welded mesh, partitioned into maximum 1 m3 cells, interconnected with other units and filled with rock. Gabions may be used for landscaping, erosion control, noise attenuation walls, facing panels for reinforced soil structures and retaining structures.
 Gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material Rock used to fill gabions and rock mattresses.
 Gabion retaining structure A mass retaining structure constructed from gabions, 1.5 m or greater in height and steeper than 0.66(H):1(V), or which would result in a traffic or pedestrian hazard or damage to neighbouring property upon failure.
 Prefilled gabion A gabion assembled and filled with gabion fill material, and then lifted and transported prior to installation.
 Rock mattress A container manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting, partitioned into maximum 2 m2 cells with a maximum height of 300 mm and filled with rock, used for landscaping and erosion control.
 715.03 GABIONS
 (a) Hexagonal mesh wire netting shall have the following properties: (i) wire and selvedge wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of 380 MPa and a minimum diameter of 2.7 mm and 3.4 mm respectively (ii) wire and selvedge wire shall be coated with a minimum of 240 g/m2 zinc/5% aluminium alloy and a minimum 0.5 mm of grey coloured extruded PVC, prior to netting manufacture
 (iii) netting shall be manufactured by winding two wires around each other through three 180 rotations to form a tight, helical twist with a nominal mesh size of 80 mm x 100 mm.
 Gabions manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting shall be partitioned into maximum 1 m3 cells, and selvedge wires shall be provided on all edges.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 715 (Page 1 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Square welded mesh shall have the following properties: (i) wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of 380 MPa and a minimum diameter of 5.0 mm (ii) welded mesh shall be manufactured with a minimum weld shear strength of 7.5 kN and a maximum mesh size of 75 mm x 75 mm
 (iii) welded mesh shall be coated with a minimum of 240 g/m2 zinc/5% aluminium alloy, after mesh manufacture.
 Gabions manufactured from square welded mesh shall be partitioned into maximum 1 m3 cells, and shall not be used in noise attenuation walls, facing panels for reinforced soil structures and retaining structures.
 (c) Fasteners shall have the following properties: (i) wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of 1500 MPa and a minimum diameter of 3.0 mm (ii) wire shall be stainless steel wire.
 Fasteners shall be able to be folded around four selvedge wires with a minimum overlap of 25 mm.
 (d) Braces shall have the following properties: (i) wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of 380 MPa and a minimum diameter of 3.4 mm (ii) wire shall be coated with a minimum of 240 g/m2 zinc/5% aluminium alloy and a minimum 0.5 mm of grey coloured extruded PVC, prior to brace forming.
 Braces shall be formed by folding one wire to form a U shape with strands of nominal length 1000 mm and a span of nominal length 200 mm; returns of nominal length 100 mm shall also be provided at the open end of the brace.
 (e) Certificate of compliance
 HP Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall supply a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer confirming that the gabions, fasteners and braces comply with this specification, for approval by the Superintendent.
 715.04 ROCK MATTRESSES
 (a) Hexagonal mesh wire netting shall have the following properties: (i) wire and selvedge wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of 380 MPa and a minimum diameter of 2.0 mm and 2.4 mm respectively (ii) wire and selvedge wire shall be coated with a minimum of 210 g/m2 zinc/5% aluminium alloy and a minimum 0.5 mm of grey coloured extruded PVC, prior to netting manufacture
 (iii) netting shall be manufactured by winding two wires around each other through three 180 rotations to form a tight, helical twist with a nominal mesh size of 60 mm x 80 mm.
 Rock mattresses manufactured from hexagonal mesh wire netting shall be partitioned into maximum 2 m2 cells, and selvedge wires shall be provided on all edges.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 715 (Page 2 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (b) Fasteners shall have the following properties:
 (i) wire shall have a minimum tensile strength of 1500 MPa and a minimum diameter of 3.0 mm;
 (ii) wire shall be stainless steel wire.
 Fasteners shall be able to be folded around four selvedge wires with a minimum overlap of 25 mm.
 (c) Certificate of compliance
 HP Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall supply a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer confirming that the gabions and fasteners comply with this specification, for approval by the Superintendent.
 
 715.05 GABION FILL MATERIAL AND ROCK MATTRESS FILL MATERIAL
 
 (a) General
 Gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material shall consist of rock with not less than two broken or angular faces. The rock shall be resistant to weathering action of air, wind and water and shall be free from staining, laminations, cracks and other structural defects which may reduce its mechanical strength.
 All rock used for gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material shall comply with the material requirements for `sound' rock as specified in Section 801 and the Los Angeles Value (LAV) requirements of Table 801.033. The rock shall have a minimum apparent particle density of 2.5 t/m3 when tested in accordance with AS 1141.6.1. In addition, the rock shall have a minimum wet strength of 100 kN and a wet/dry strength variation not exceeding 35% when tested in accordance with AS 1141.22.
 Rock from a quarry or non-quarry site shall not be used until the source has been investigated and accredited in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice for Source Rock Investigations as listed in Section 175.
 HP Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall nominate the proposed source of rock and supply the specified test results for approval by the Superintendent.
 
 (b) Dimensions
 The dimensions of gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material shall comply with the relevant requirements of Table 715.051.
 
 Table 715.051 Dimensions of Gabion Fill Material and Rock Mattress Fill Material
 
 Material
 Gabion fill material Rock mattress fill material
 
 Minimum Dimension
 (mm)
 
 Maximum Dimension (mm)
 
 100
 
 250
 
 75
 
 Two-thirds the thickness of the rock mattress, or 200 mm, whichever is the lesser.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 715 (Page 3 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Testing
 The Contractor shall sample and test gabion fill material and rock mattress fill material at a frequency of at least one test per 100 tonnes or part thereof to ensure that the material consistently complies with the dimensions shown in Table 715.051. Samples shall be obtained from stockpiles in accordance with AS 1141.3.2. Tests shall be undertaken by passing the samples through rigid screens with round holes with a diameter of the relevant dimension.
 715.06 GABION ASSEMBLY, INSTALLATION AND FILLING
 (a) Foundation preparation
 Areas upon which gabions are to be installed shall be prepared and test rolled as specified in Section 204 and Section 173. Any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified as specified in Section 204.
 The Contractor shall request the Superintendent to be present during all test rolling.
 (b) Assembly
 Gabions shall be laid out on a hard, flat surface and stretched to remove all kinks and bends. Individual gabions shall be assembled by raising the sides and partitions and connecting selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum 150 mm intervals. Gabions may be cut into two segments and spliced by a minimum length of 200 mm to form nonstandard dimensions. Fasteners shall be installed at both edges of the splice at maximum 150 mm horizontal and vertical intervals.
 (c) Installation
 Gabions shall be installed in the positions shown on the drawings and each gabion shall be connected to all adjacent gabions by connecting all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum 150 mm intervals. Temporary supports, permanent supports consisting of galvanized star pickets or galvanized steel structural sections, or tensioning shall be used as required to ensure the sides of the installed gabions do not vary by more than 50 mm from a 3 metre straight edge laid across the surface prior to, during and after filling with gabion fill material.
 (d) Filling
 Gabions shall be filled with gabion fill material by mechanical means aided by hand sorting to ensure that exposed surfaces are free from excessive bulges and depressions. Gabions shall be one third filled and braces installed at evenly distributed nominal 330 mm horizontal centres. Gabions shall then be two thirds filled and additional braces installed at evenly distributed nominal 330 mm horizontal centres. Gabions shall then be fully filled, the selvedge wires on the lids connected to selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum 150 mm intervals, and any temporary supports or tensioning removed.
 Where bulges and depressions greater than 50 mm are present after filling, the gabions shall be refilled. Square welded mesh that is buckled by impacts during filling shall be replaced.
 (e) Prefilled gabions
 HP The use of prefilled gabions is not permitted without the prior written approval of the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall submit a procedure for filling, lifting and transporting prefilled gabions for approval by the Superintendent. The procedure shall demonstrate that the prefilled gabions will not vary by more than 75 mm from a 3 metre straight edge laid across the surface after installation. Where required by the Superintendent, a test prefilled gabion shall be filled, lifted, transported and lifted again to confirm the suitability of the procedure.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 715 (Page 4 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Prefilled gabions shall be installed in the positions shown on the drawings and each prefilled gabion shall be connected to all adjacent prefilled gabions by connecting accessible abutting edges only with fasteners at maximum 150 mm intervals. The exposed sides of the prefilled gabions after installation shall not vary by more than 75 mm from a 3 metre straight edge laid across the surface after installation. Where bulges and depressions greater than 75 mm are present after installation, the prefilled gabions shall be replaced.
 715.07 ROCK MATTRESS ASSEMBLY, INSTALLATION AND FILLING
 (a) Foundation preparation
 Areas upon which rock mattresses are to be installed shall be prepared and test rolled as specified in Section 204 and Section 173. Any unstable areas detected by test rolling shall be rectified as specified in Section 204.
 The Contractor shall request the Superintendent to be present during all test rolling.
 A separation/filtration geotextile layer shall be placed on the prepared surface. The geotextile shall comply with the requirements of Section 210, and shall have a classification of very robust, an overlap of 300 mm, and shall be a non-woven type geotextile. The geotextile shall be placed as specified in Section 210, and shall be buried to a depth of 300 mm at the edges of the areas upon which rock mattresses are to be installed.
 (b) Assembly
 Rock mattresses shall be laid out on a hard, flat surface and stretched to remove all kinks and bends. Individual rock mattresses shall be assembled by raising the sides, ends and partitions and connecting selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum 150 mm intervals. Rock mattresses may be cut into two segments and spliced by a minimum length of 200 mm to form nonstandard dimensions. Fasteners shall be installed at both edges of the splice at maximum 150 mm horizontal and vertical intervals.
 (c) Installation
 Rock mattresses shall be installed in the positions shown on the drawings. Rock mattresses installed on slopes shall be arranged with the longest dimension of the rock mattress in the direction of the slope. Each rock mattress shall be connected to all adjacent rock mattresses by connecting selvedge wires at all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum 150 mm intervals. Permanent anchors consisting of galvanized star pickets shall be installed on a minimum 1 m by 1 m centre grid. The galvanized star pickets shall be driven into the foundation to a minimum depth of 500 mm and shall be connected to the base of the rock mattress with a fastener.
 (d) Filling
 Rock mattresses shall be filled with rock mattress fill material by mechanical means aided by hand sorting to ensure that exposed surfaces are free from excessive bulges and depressions. Rock mattresses shall be fully filled and the lids connected to all abutting edges with fasteners at maximum 150 mm intervals. The lids of the rock mattresses shall not vary by more than 50 mm from a 3 metre straight edge laid across the surface. Where bulges and depressions greater than 50 mm are present after filling, the rock mattresses shall be refilled.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 715 (Page 5 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 715.08 GABION RETAINING STRUCTURES
 
 (a) General
 Gabions manufactured from square welded mesh and rock mattresses shall not be used in gabion retaining structures.
 
 (b) Design
 Gabion retaining structures shall be designed in accordance with AS 5100.3, and the following requirements:
 (i) the design life shall be 100 years
 (ii) the gabions shall lean backward into the retained material and the base of the gabions shall have a slope of 10(H):1(V)
 (iii) the gabion fill material design source rock unit weight shall be 24.5 kN/m3, unless demonstrated otherwise by nominating the source rock and supplying apparent particle density test results in accordance with Clause 715.05(a)
 (iv) the gabion fill material design porosity shall be 20% for design for bearing failure and global failure ultimate limit states, and shall be 40% for design for sliding, rotation and structural failure ultimate limit states, unless demonstrated otherwise by determining the porosity using a sacrificial test gabion
 (v) the Type A structural material, permeable fill material or no fines concrete design effective cohesion shall be 0 kPa, the design effective friction angle shall be 40, and the design unit weight shall be 20 kN/m3.
 ##(strikethrough the remainder of this clause if not required): In addition, for gabion retaining structures with a retained height of 6 m or more:
 (i) the gabion fill material design source rock unit weight shall be determined by nominating the source rock and supplying test results demonstrating the minimum apparent particle density
 (ii) the gabion fill design porosity shall be determined by preparing a sacrificial test gabion and measuring the mass of gabion fill material in the test gabion, in tonnes to the nearest 0.1 tonne, and the volume of the test gabion, in m3 to the nearest 0.1 m3. The gabion fill design porosity shall then be determined using:
 
 1-
 
 (mass of gabion fill material in test gabion, t) / (apparent particle density, t/m3) volume of test gabion, m3
 
 (iii) the design shall be proof-engineered by a Proof Engineer who shall be prequalified at Level PE in accordance with the VicRoads prequalification scheme.
 (c) Foundation preparation
 In addition to the requirements of Clause 715.06(a), the prepared surface shall have a slope of 10(H):1(V).
 (d) Installation
 In addition to the requirements of Clause 715.06(c), temporary supports, permanent supports or tensioning shall be used as required to ensure the top of the first layer of gabions has a slope of 10(H):1(V) prior to filling with gabion fill material. For subsequent layers of gabions, the placement of a screed layer of gabion fill of nominal dimension 70 mm on the underlying layer may also be used as required to ensure the top of the gabions has a slope of 10(H):1(V) prior to filling with gabion fill material.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 715 (Page 6 of 7)
 
 Department of State Growth
 ##(strikethrough the remainder of this clause if not required): In addition, for gabion retaining structures with a retained height of 6 m or more: (i) in addition to the requirements of Clause 715.06(d), internal braces shall be installed at evenly distributed nominal 250 mm horizontal centres (ii) gabions shall be installed in a stretcher bond pattern, so that the ends of the gabions are staggered vertically from the ends of the gabions in the layers above and below (iii) the Contractor shall request the Superintendent to be present during the installation of gabions to ensure the top of the gabions have a slope of 10(H):1(V) prior to filling with gabion fill material.
 (e) Material placed behind gabion retaining structures
 Prior to placing material behind gabion retaining structures: (i) a separation/filtration geotextile layer shall be placed on the rear of the gabion retaining structure. The geotextile shall comply with the requirements of Section 210, and shall have a classification of very robust, an overlap of 300 mm, and shall be a non-woven type geotextile (ii) a subsurface drainage pipe shall be placed at the base of the rear of the gabion retaining structure. The subsurface drainage pipe shall comply with the requirements of Section 702, and shall be a category 2 pipe, shall have a minimum diameter of 100 mm, shall have a perforation size of 2 mm and shall be fitted with a knitted seamless sleeve.
 Material placed behind gabion retaining structures shall consist of: (i) Type A structural material, consisting of 20 mm Class 3 crushed rock which shall comply with the requirements of Section 812 and shall have a minimum permeability of 1 x 10-8 m/s. Type A structural material shall be placed and compacted as specified in Section 204 Clause 204.11, and testing and acceptance of compaction and moisture content shall be undertaken as specified in Section 204 Clause 204.13 Scale A compaction requirements, Section 204 Clause 204.14(c) and Section 173 (ii) permeable fill material, consisting of Grade A4, A5, A6, B1, B2, B3 or B4 granular filter material which shall comply with the requirements of Section 702. Permeable fill material shall be placed and compacted as specified in Section 204 Clause 204.11;
 (iii) no fines concrete, which shall comply with the requirements of Section 702. Permeable fill material shall be placed as specified in Section 204 Clause 204.11.
 715.09 GABIONS AND ROCK MATTRESSES IN WATERWAYS
 HP Gabions and rock mattresses shall not be installed below the 1:50 annual recurrence interval flood level of waterways with a permanent flow of water without the prior approval of the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall submit a proposal for protecting gabions and rock mattresses from damage from debris impact, and written consent from the relevant Catchment Management Authority, for approval by the Superintendent.
 715.10 GABIONS AND ROCK MATTRESSES IN COASTAL WATERS
 Gabions and rock mattresses shall not be installed below the highest astronomical tide level of tidal waterways or coastal waters, or within the splash zone of coastal waters.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 715 (Page 7 of 7)
 
 SECTION 720 - LANDSCAPE WORKS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 176 (or 177), 204 and 750. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 720.01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for works associated with the vegetation of the site. This includes, but is not limited to, material supply, site preparation, mulching, planting, grassing, irrigation and landscape maintenance as specified and shown on relevant Drawings, Planting Details and Schedules.
 
 720.02 DEFINITIONS
 (a) Caliper The stem or trunk diameter of a tree at a nominated point. Caliper is measured at 300 mm above ground for sizing of nursery plants.
 (b) Individual Tree Planting Any tree planting of single trees each surrounded by a mulch ring and/or grass cover.
 (c) Planting Area Any continuous area where multiple plants are established using stock from containers such as pots, tubes and cells or by direct sowing (other than grassed areas).
 (d) Propagule A propagule is any plant part capable of producing a new plant (e.g. seeds, cuttings, bulbs, corms, rhizomes, etc).
 (e) Tube stock or cell stock Plants grown in small (less than 0.5 litre) containers.
 (f) Weed Any plant which is not desired. Sub-categories include: (i) Noxious weed. Any plant that is a declared weed under as defined in the Weed Management Act 1999 in respect of the project area. (ii) Species or individual plants specified to be removed. (iii) Weeds of planting beds and around individual trees include any plant not specified in the planting schedule or is not indigenous to the site. This includes all local environmental weeds and noxious weeds. (iv) Weeds of mown-grass areas include all species listed in (i) above, broadleaf species (except broadleaf species specified for sowing) and other weeds where specifically listed.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 1 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 720.03 SUBMISSIONS AND RECORDS
 The specified inspections, samples, records and certificates shall be made available or submitted to the Superintendent for acceptance prior to the commencement of associated work. Accepted samples shall become the agreed minimum standard and approved source of supply. The Contractor shall be responsible for programming all inspections and review of samples and allow 2 working days notice to the Superintendent. Samples, records and certificates shall be provided to the Superintendent at least 10 working days prior to bulk delivery.
 *** The Contractor shall provide the following before commencement of the relevant landscape work: ##[strikethrough inapplicable items below]:
 Inspections  plant stock for all plant species
 Samples  mulch  imported topsoil.
 Records  evidence of origin of indigenous provenance plant material  analysis certificates for grass seed  details of suppliers  soil tests on topsoil  copies of fertiliser labels.
 
 720.04 SUPPLY OF MATERIALS
 
 All materials shall be supplied by the Contractor unless otherwise noted. If any materials are supplied by the Department of State Growth, a joint inspection of the materials shall be made by the Contractor and the Superintendent following delivery of the materials to the site. The materials, if satisfactory, shall thereafter become the responsibility of the Contractor.
 
 (a) General Supply of Plant Stock
 
 All plants shall be of the type, height, container size and trunk caliper specified in the Plant Schedules, Specification and Planting Plans. These are minimum requirements. No substitution of plants shall be allowed without the written agreement of the Superintendent.
 Table 720.041 Plant Stock Supply Properties
 
 Property
 
 Requirement
 
 General Requirements
 Species Integrity and Labelling Container Supply Sizes
 Root Ball Occupancy
 
 All plants shall be hardened off for a minimum 4 weeks in conditions matching prevailing conditions on the Works site.
 Plants shall be true to type and clearly labelled with at least one label per species per delivery batch.
 Tubes shall be at least 0.2 litres in volume. Cells shall be at least 0.08 litres in volume. Other sizes shall be as specified.
 Roots shall be adequate to fill the container. Samples shall demonstrate that >85% of soil volume remains intact when the unsupported rootball is shaken.
 
 (Table continued next page)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 2 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 720.041 Plant Stock Supply Properties ... continued
 
 Property
 
 Requirement
 
 Root Ball Integrity
 Uniformity of Plant Growth Caliper Health and Vigour Free of Pests and Diseases Weed Free
 
 Plants shall display a large, well developed and healthy fibrous root system with repeated and sequential division with no evidence of root curl, restriction or damage. The root ball shall not be pot bound and shall generally have roots penetrating to the edge of the pot. Except for monocots with fibrous root systems, plants with girdling, spiralling or j-rooting present in root systems will not be acceptable.
 The size shall be in proportion to the container size and species. Tube stock and cell stock shall not have shoot height greater than 3 times the depth of the container.
 Trees shall be self supporting.
 Plants shall show vigorous tip growth and foliage size, texture and colour consistent with that shown in healthy specimens of the species. Plants shall have undamaged limbs and trunk.
 Plants shall be free from pests and diseases at time of delivery, with visible attack from previously eliminated pests and disease restricted to <10% of foliage such that long term success of the plant is not affected.
 Plants shall be provided in containers free of weeds.
 
 (b) Supply of Indigenous Plant Stock
 A species listed on the planting schedule shall be classed as an indigenous plant if the plant is likely to have occurred within 10 km of the project site (pre-1750).
 The Contractor shall source seed or other propagules for indigenous plant stock from within or as close to the project area as practicable and from areas with similar soil type (same parent material) and rainfall (to minus 100 mm ARI). Seed shall be collected in accordance with Florabank Guidelines and Codes of Practice (http://www.florabank.org.au/). Further to these guidelines, seed shall not be collected more than 25 km from the project site without prior agreement with the Superintendent. Grasses and wetland species may be sourced up to 50 km from the project site in areas with the same soil type and similar or lower annual rainfall. Where a distinct form of a species occurs naturally in the local area, that form shall be used.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for obtaining all necessary native flora collection permits from the Department of Primary Industry, Parks, Water and Environment.
 The Contractor shall submit documentation of origin of indigenous provenance plant material which shall include the following details for each seed lot:
  species name  storage code  collection locality - Latitude/longitude or AMG  approximate number of parent plants sampled  approximate number of plants in that local population.
 All seed lots of the same species collected at different localities shall be supplied as a separate seed lots. The provenance shall be tracked through propagation to planting for possible future seed collection purposes.
 The format of the seed collection records shall be a spreadsheet compatible with Microsoft Excel.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 3 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Supply of Pesticides
 Herbicides applied as a spray shall include sufficient coloured dye to identify application areas for at least 5 days.
 
 (d) Supply of Site Topsoil
 Site topsoil shall be used wherever possible, in preference to imported topsoil. Topsoil is defined as the weathered surface layer of soils that includes organic matter.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for ensuring the growing medium supports normal healthy growth of the specified planting. The Contractor shall determine when soil testing is required and shall undertake soil tests to establish what soil amendments and macro and micro nutrients are required to be added to the topsoil.
 The Contractor shall notify the Superintendent of any topsoil characteristic which may reduce the performance of any plant species or grass mix.
 
 (e) Supply of Imported Topsoil
 In the event that site topsoil is not available or is not adequate to achieve the specified depth of topsoil, the Contractor shall supply imported topsoil to achieve the total specified depth of topsoil.
 Imported topsoil shall comply with the following properties:
 
 Table 720.042 Imported Topsoil Blend Supply Properties
 
 Property
 
 Requirement
 
 General Requirements
 
 Imported topsoil shall be suitable for supporting healthy plant growth of the specified and scheduled species.
 
 Texture
 
 The texture shall either match the site topsoil texture or provide a light to medium friable sandy loam with a clay content 10-15%, capable of handling when moist but lacking cohesion so that it will fall apart easily.
 
 Extraneous Material and Contaminants
 
 The topsoil shall be free of sods of subsoil, rubbish, petrol and oil contaminants, lime etc, and meet the requirements for clean fill in EPA Victoria publication 448-Classification of Wastes as `Fill Material' and shall have contaminant levels less than the concentration listed in Table 2 of that document. Stones shall be <5% (by dry weight) with stone size not exceeding 25 mm.
 
 Dry Bulk Density (kg/m3)
 
 Bulk density shall be >1000.
 
 Soil Nutrients
 
 Adequate levels to support normal plant growth for the scheduled species.
 
 Organic Matter (% by mass)
 
 Decomposed matter shall be 3-15% by mass, and undecomposed matter shall be <5% by mass.
 
 Weed Content and Pathogens
 
 Soil shall meet AS 4419 5.4. No noxious weeds, noxious seed or Phytophthora cinnamomi.
 
 (Table continued next page)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 4 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 720.042 Imported Topsoil Blend Supply Properties ... continued
 
 Property
 
 Requirement
 
 Wettability (mm/min)
 
 Soil shall meet AS 4419 5.5
 
 Soil pH
 
 58
 
 Phosphorous Content (mg/kg Olsen method) 5-10
 
 Electrical Conductivity (dS/m)
 
 Soil shall meet AS 4419 5.6
 
 Dispersibility Category
 
 Soil shall meet AS 4419 5.11
 
 Nitrogen Drawdown (NDI150)
 
 Soil shall meet AS 4419 5.12
 
 Permeability
 
 Soil shall meet AS 4419 5.13
 
 Toxicity
 
 Soil shall meet AS 3743
 
 (f) Supply of Fertilisers
 Fertilisers for newly grassed areas shall be N:P:K 10:4:6 with trace elements.
 Fertilisers for planting areas and advanced trees shall be slow release with a 9-12 month release period and suitable for the establishment of plant types, sizes and species specified in the plant schedule(s).
 
 (g) Supply of Gypsum
 Gypsum (Calcium Sulphate) shall comply with all relevant requirements under Tasmanian law. Only manufactured gypsum shall be used. Gypsum derived from recycled plaster board shall not be used. Sodium shall not exceed 1% by mass.
 
 (h) Supply of Wood Mulch (Chipped or Shredded)
 
 All wood mulch shall be supplied, delivered, handled and applied in accordance with AS 4454.
 
 (i) Imported Wood Mulch Wood mulch shall comply with the following properties:
 
 Table 720.044 Shredded or Chipped Wood Mulch General Supply Properties
 
 Property General Requirements Purity
 Sizing
 
 Requirement
 Mulch shall meet AS 4454, Table 3.1 for composted or pasteurised mulch. Mulch type shall have fibrous properties which 'interlock' the particles so that installed mulch is not blown away by wind.
 Mulch shall be free of soil and weeds, plant pathogens, vermin and toxins. Plywood, composite timber product and painted timber shall not exceed a combined maximum of 1% by weight total. Mulch shall be free of treated pine, exposed sharp metal, plastic and other litter.
 Meet AS 44542012, Table 3.1(A) In planting areas adjacent to either roads posted at <80 km/h, pedestrian or cycle paths or recreational open space, 95% of particle size shall be no wider than 40 mm and no longer than 140 mm. No particles longer than 200 mm. In planting areas adjacent to roads posted at 80 km/h, 80% of particle size shall be no wider than 50 mm and no longer than 140 mm. No particles longer than 400 mm.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 5 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (ii) Site Mulch
 Site mulch available from the chipping of on-site indigenous or non-weed vegetation shall be used where possible. Any species that could have weed potential by seed or vegetative fragments shall not be recycled in the landscape works. Mulch shall satisfy the purity and sizing requirements shown in Table 720.044.
 
 (i) Supply of Weed Control Mat and Erosion Control Mat
 The Contractor shall supply and install jute or approved equivalent, biodegradable, fire retardant weed and erosion control mat as indicated on the Drawings or as specified. Weed Control Mat shall be minimum 700 grams per square metre and Erosion Control Mat shall be 300 grams per square metre. The surface of the mat shall permit water infiltration.
 
 (j) Supply of Tree Guards, Stakes and Marker Stakes
 Tree guards shall be either opaque plastic and of sufficient gauge and UV inhibitor to ensure a minimum two year life or minimum 2 litre cartons of sufficient construction to ensure a minimum 18 month life. Tree guard stakes and marker stakes shall be sufficiently robust to be driven into the ground, securely support the tree guards and ensure a minimum two year life.
 
 (k) Supply of Grass Seed
 
 Grass seed shall comply with the following properties: Table 720.045 Grass Seed Properties
 
 Property
 
 Requirement
 
 Species and Proportion
 
 TYPE A STABILISATION MIX FOR REDUNDANT ROADS,
 
 SURFACE DRAINS AND PREPARED EMBANKMENT BATTERS
 
 Sterile Ryecorn
 
 30% by count
 
 Ryegrass var Victorian
 
 15% by count
 
 Ryecorn var Concorde
 
 15% by count
 
 Chewing Fescue
 
 5% by count
 
 Hard Fescue
 
 5% by count
 
 Sheep Fescue
 
 5% by count
 
 White Clover var Huia
 
 10% by count
 
 Sub Clover var Trikkala
 
 5% by count
 
 Browntop Bent
 
 5% by count
 
 Red Creeping Fescue
 
 5% by count
 
 TYPE B TRAFFIC ISLAND AND MEDIANS Ryegrass var Victorian Chewing Fescue Ryegrass var Fine Leaf Hard Fescue Sheep Fescue White Clover var Huia Sub Clover var Trikkala Red Creeping Fescue
 
 17% by count 8% by count
 26% by count 8% by count 8% by count
 17% by count 8% by count 8% by count
 
 Minimum Seed Purity
 
 98% and shall not contain noxious weed seed
 
 Minimum Germination Rate 90% at date of supply
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 6 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The quality and specified properties of all seed shall be analysed and certified by either a NATA (National Association of Testing Authorities) or ISTA (International Seed Testing Authority) laboratory. Labelling of all seed shall comply with the Australian Seed Federation National Code of Practice for Seed Labelling and Marketing.
 (l) Supply of Sterile Grass Seed
 Sterile Rye-corn (Secale cereale) seed shall be used for the stabilisation of areas to be subsequently sown or planted and for stabilisation of temporary batters and stockpiles.
 720.05 PEST AND WEED CONTROL
 (a) Pest and Weed Management Procedures
 The Contractor shall develop and implement site specific pest and weed management procedures to control pest and weed populations. The procedures shall consider pest animals, plants, fungi and other pathogens that may impede plant establishment.
 Weed management procedures shall include removal of weeds from their existing locations before, during and after site clearing, topsoil stripping and landscape works. Weed management procedures shall minimise the spread of weeds in topsoil to other locations within and outside the site.
 In addition to Sections 204 and ##176 (or 177): pest and weed management procedures shall include control of soil borne pathogens including, but not limited to Phytophthora cinnamomi, Armillaria sp. and soil borne weeds.
 (b) General Requirements Pesticides shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Where off-label use of pesticides is considered desirable to achieve pest control requirements, the Contractor shall be responsible for the investigation and procurement of off-label permits. The Contractor shall advise the Superintendent of any proposed off-label pesticide use prior to pesticide application.
 Weed and pest control personnel shall be qualified and experienced in the use of pesticides, control of weeds, prevention of pesticide drift and identification of target and non target species found on site and included in the planting schedules.
 The Contractor shall prevent runoff into waterways of pesticides not registered for use in waterways. If `non-target' areas or plants are damaged during weed control works, then the Contractor shall be responsible for the reinstatement of those areas to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 Records of herbicide use shall be made available to the Superintendent upon request.
 (c) Pre-Planting Weed Control
 Pre-planting weed control shall be undertaken to ensure that planting areas and new grassed areas are free of visible weeds prior to the commencement of planting and grassing. Weed control shall be programmed and implemented to deplete the potential weed seed bank within the topsoil to be used in planting beds.
 DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt ooffSSttaatteeGGrroowwtthh AAuugguusstt22001166 SSeeccttiioonn 772200 ((PPaaggee77ooff1176))
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 720.06 SETTING OUT OF LANDSCAPE SOFTWORKS
 The Contractor shall set out the location and shape of planting areas in accordance with the Landscape Drawings.
 The Contractor shall comply with the plant density requirements and planting offsets as shown in the plant schedule(s).
 Individual plants shall be located in accordance with the drawings such that the mature form of the plant will be in accordance with Austroads Road Design Guidelines, including clear zone and sight distance requirements.
 
 720.07 SITE PREPARATION
 
 Further to the requirements of Section 204, the Contractor shall provide the soil preparation described in Table 720.071. All elements of soil preparation proceed in order from left to right.
 
 Table 720.071 Soil Preparation Requirements
 
 Situation
 
 Initial Ripping of Subsoil Prior to Topsoil Placement
 
 Minimum Topsoil Depth
 
 Cross Ripping
 
 Cultivation
 
 Planting Areas in disturbed areas flatter than 3h:1v
 
 Min 400 mm deep at max 500 mm spacing. Leave all batters with roughened subsoil to assist with keying of topsoil.
 
 150 mm
 
 -
 
 Min 150 mm deep
 
 Planting Areas in disturbed Min 300 mm deep at max 100 mm
 
 -
 
 -
 
 areas steeper than 3h:1v
 
 500 mm spacing, between
 
 parallel to and 45 from
 
 contour. Leave all batters
 
 with roughened subsoil to
 
 assist with keying of topsoil.
 
 Planting Areas in undisturbed areas
 
 Min 400 mm deep at max
 
 -
 
 500 mm spacing
 
 -
 
 Min 150 mm deep
 
 Grassing in disturbed areas Min 200 mm deep, 500 mm 75 mm, except Min 100 mm
 
 -
 
 max spacing
 
 100 mm in
 
 deep, 500 mm
 
 swales
 
 max spacing
 
 Grassing in undisturbed
 
 -
 
 areas
 
 -
 
 -
 
 Min 100 mm deep
 
 Individual Tree Planting
 
 Min 400 mm deep at
 
 150 mm in
 
 Min 300 mm
 
 -
 
 (including advanced trees) 500 mm max spacing
 
 disturbed
 
 deep, max
 
 within grassed areas.
 
 grassed areas 500 mm spacing
 
 The area of treatment is 25 m2 per tree.
 
 Notes:
  Disturbed areas include any area of cut batter, fill batter, site of excavation (including borrow pit), site of dumping (including fill mound), drains, swales or area driven over by machinery resulting in soil compaction. Disturbed areas also include any areas where topsoil is effectively absent or areas of soil with dry bulk density exceeding the maximum shown in Table 720.072.
  Undisturbed areas are those areas with the pre construction soil profile retained intact, without compaction or soil loss.
  Initial ripping in granitic soils should be parallel to the contour.  Topsoil on grassed verge areas shall be left firm.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 8 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (a) Soil Additives including Gypsum
 Soil additives, including any material used to modify the chemical properties of the soil, shall be applied by the Contractor prior to physical ripping and cultivation and in accordance with results and recommendations from site topsoil analysis tests.
 The Contractor shall supply and install gypsum to the subsoil where subsoils are dispersive (AS 4419 5.11). The Contractor shall apply sufficient gypsum to ensure soils are not dispersive, incorporating gypsum during ripping to a minimum depth of 300 mm.
 The Contractor shall adjust the soil pH if the soil, including subsoil, to a depth of 300 mm is not in the range of 5-8.
 Where salinity requirements for existing (unmoved) site subsoil or topsoil do not meet the acceptable range in AS 4419 5.6, the Contractor shall notify the Superintendent.
 (b) Ripping
 The Contractor shall undertake any ripping specified. Ripping shall occur when soil is at or approaching the plastic limit of dryness. Ripping shall be postponed when the soil is at or wetter than field capacity. Narrow tines shall be used in rocky ground and winged tines in other ground types. Rock and rubbish brought to the surface shall be removed and disposed. The Contractor shall inform the Superintendent of sites where the presence of rock prevents the specified minimum ripping depth being achieved and implement alternative techniques (such as a standard tine) to maximise planting bed ground preparation depth.
 Ripping shall not occur within the extent of existing vegetation areas marked for protection or within the drip-line of existing woody plants. In the vicinity of woody plants to be retained with greater than 600 mm trunk diameter at breast height, 1.5 times the height of the tree measured horizontally from the tree trunk shall be considered and marked as an area to be protected. For trees less than 600 mm diameter the area to be protected shall be the area within the drip-line. Any planting to be carried out within these protected areas shall be done using hand cultivation techniques to minimise damage to existing tree roots zones.
 Where existing planting beds are to be extended, the unplanted areas shall be ripped as described above.
 HP The Contractor shall make available each ripped planting area, individual tree planting and grassing area prior to mulching, planting or grassing. The Contractor shall not proceed until the Superintendent acknowledges requirements for ripping have been met. In areas where ripping is not practicable, the Contractor shall submit alternative methods to achieve an equivalent result to the Superintendent for review.
 (c) Topsoil Application
 Following subsoil preparation, topsoil shall be spread on planting areas and grassed areas. Topsoil shall not be compacted.
 Weedy site topsoil shall not be spread to other locations on the site. Weedy topsoil shall be handled in accordance with the Contractor's weed management procedures.
 (d) Cultivation
 Cultivation shall be undertaken to break soil down to a tilth with 80% of the volume composed of clods less than 50 mm in diameter. Cultivation equipment that might create a hard pan beneath the depth of cultivation (such as rotary hoes and other powered cultivators) shall not be used. In the event of saturated ground conditions, cultivation shall be delayed until the ground has dried out to a suitable condition. Where ripping and topsoiling is sufficient to allow easy manual excavation of soil to a depth of 300 mm or more, cultivation may be omitted.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 9 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Cultivation shall not occur within the extent of existing vegetation areas marked for protection or the drip-line of existing woody plants. Hand cultivation shall be used within root zones of trees to be retained.
 (e) Topsoil Finished Surface Levels
 After cultivation and trimming, the Contractor may lightly compress topsoil for stability on slopes. Vibrating plates shall not be used. The Contractor shall ensure dry bulk density does not exceed the following:
 
 Table720.072 Maximum Dry Bulk Density of Soils for Planting and Grassing
 
 Soil Texture (as determined by AS 4419)
 
 Maximum Dry Bulk Density for Topsoils
 
 Clay soils Loams Sandy soils
 
 1.3 g/cm3 (1.4 g/cm3 on slopes steeper than 3:1) 1.5 g/cm3 1.7 g/cm3
 
 The finished level of grassed areas shall be:
 (i) not higher than 125 mm below weep-holes or damp-proof courses in adjacent walls;
 (ii) level with the bottom of fence plinths;
 (iii) level with adjacent pavements, kerbs, pits and other structures.
 The finished level of garden bed mulch and/or topsoil shall be tapered so that the finished mulch and/or topsoil levels meet flush with the adjacent surfaces.
 The Contractor shall ensure these conditions are maintained and there is no compaction of prepared soils before planting.
 HP The Contractor shall make available each ripped, topsoiled and cultivated planting area, individual tree planting and grassing area prior to mulching, planting or grassing. The Contractor shall not proceed until the Superintendent acknowledges requirements for topsoiling and cultivation have been met. In areas where topsoiling or cultivation is not practicable, the Contractor shall submit alternative methods to achieve an equivalent result to the Superintendent for review.
 
 (f) Removal of Unwanted Matter
 
 The Contractor shall remove unwanted matter. Unwanted matter includes the following: Table 720.073 Unwanted Matter
 
 Mown Grass Areas
 
 Planting Areas
 
  any weeds, plastic, metal, glass or material toxic to plants
  surface stone, rock, building rubble greater than 25 mm in diameter
  clay lumps, sticks and exposed tree roots greater than 50 mm diameter
 
  any weeds, plastic, metal, glass or material toxic to plants
  any visible surface stone, rock, building rubble greater than 75 mm in diameter
  clay lumps, sticks and exposed tree roots greater than 100 mm diameter
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 10 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (g) Existing Planting Areas
 Existing planting areas shall exclude areas of naturally occurring remnant vegetation.
 Prior to undertaking site preparation or planting within existing plantations, all dead, severely damaged (<40% intact canopy) and fallen trees and shrubs shall be removed from the plantation. Woody weeds with any seed or vegetative material capable of regeneration are to be removed and disposed of-off-site.
 Any severely pest affected vegetation that cannot be successfully treated using pesticides (or any other treatment) shall be removed and disposed of off-site. All remaining vegetation within the plantation is to be retained and protected from direct and indirect damage from ground preparation, weeding, mulching and infill planting. Remaining vegetation in the existing plantation shall be assessed for damaged, dead or diseased limbs and branches. All such limbs and branches on existing vegetation with a diameter greater than 50 mm in urban areas and 100 mm in rural areas are to be removed. All pruning works including dead-wooding, canopy uplifting and weight reduction shall comply with the requirements of AS 4373.
 The Contractor shall obtain all necessary permits and obtain approval from the Superintendent prior to the pruning or removal of local native vegetation.
 720.08 MULCHING
 (a) Wood Mulch (Shredded or Chipped)
 The Contractor shall install wood mulch to all Planting Areas unless otherwise specified. Mulch shall extend at least 1 metre beyond plant centres at the outer edges of all Planting Areas. If space does not permit this in median, separator or splitter-island planting, mulching shall extend to the back of kerb.
 The Contractor shall install 2 metre diameter mulch rings around all Individual Tree Plantings.
 Mulch depths in all situations shall be a minimum 75 mm and maximum 125 mm.
 Mulch shall be raked to a even, neat appearance and kept clear of plant stems to avoid collar rot.
 (b) Weed Control Mat and Erosion Control Mat
 The Contractor shall install weed control mat for planting areas steeper than 2:1 and in planting areas prone to flooding or within 2 m of waterways, swales, wetlands and sedimentation ponds or elsewhere as specified.
 Weed control mat and erosion control mat shall be laid and anchored in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
 720.09 PLANTING
 (a) Planting
 The Contractor shall carry out planting so as to ensure healthy, vigorous growth of plants. In the event the specified plant is unlikely to be suited to the as-constructed growing conditions, the Superintendent shall be notified.
 Holes in heavy soils or on batters shall be prepared so as to ensure adequate drainage.
 Holes shall not be left smooth sided in basalt or `plastic' soils. Drill or auger hole diggers shall only be permitted where soils have been cultivated.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 11 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Planting holes shall be backfilled with friable topsoil free of debris, rocks and clods greater than 50 mm in diameter.
 (b) Fertilising
 The Contractor shall fertilise advanced trees and, where specified and/or identified by the Contractor's soil analyses, other planting areas with fertiliser in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 (c) Initial Watering
 The Contractor shall saturate each plant within 8 hours after planting. Cells and tubes shall be irrigated with a minimum 3 litres of water per plant. Other container sizes shall be irrigated with a volume of water greater than the container size.
 Under no circumstances shall any plant be planted into a dry planting hole (soil moisture at wilting point or drier). If the soil is dry, the planting hole shall be saturated with water prior to planting.
 720.10 GRASSING
 (a) Seeded Grassing
 The Contractor shall seed grass to:  all areas indicated to be grassed on the Drawings, and  all areas disturbed by the Contractor which will not be a planting area or managed as
 remnant indigenous vegetation.
 Grass seed shall be sown at minimum 100 kg/Ha (if drilled) or 200 kg/Ha (if broadcast), distributed evenly to achieve an even and dense grass cover.
 Germination rate shall be minimum 80% cover within 8 weeks and 95% cover within 3 months of sowing. If germination has not been achieved in any grassed area within 8 weeks (except during December to March), then the area(s) shall be reseeded with the specified grass seed mix.
 (b) Fertilising
 The Contractor shall apply fertiliser evenly over the prepared surface in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 (c) First Mow
 The Contractor shall carry out the first cut when at least 50% of the grassing area to be cut has grown to minimum 75 mm and maximum 150 mm height. Mow to a minimum height of 75 mm. Less than 1/3 the height of the grass shall be removed in the first cut.
 720.11 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE
 (a) Scope of Maintenance
 Landscape maintenance tasks shall begin prior to Practical Completion as specified in Clause 720.11(d) and shall continue until the completion of the Defects Liability Period for the Whole of the Works or the Defects Liability Period of the landscape works, whichever is the latter.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 12 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ***
 
 Maintenance of the landscape work shall include the following tasks: (i)replanting (ii)weed control (iii)watering (iv)mowing/slashing (v)reseeding of seeded grass areas (vi)pest and disease control (vii) re-mulching (viii) pruning (ix)maintaining the site in a neat and tidy condition (x)repair and removal of tree guards and stakes (xi)repairs to erosion affected areas (xii) stockpile areas.
 
 (b) Maintenance Program and Joint Inspections
 
 ***
 
 The Contractor shall prepare and submit a maintenance program showing sufficient
 
 information to enable the landscape maintenance works to be evaluated and shall show as a
 
 minimum the following:
 
  inspection visits during the period of maintenance;
 
  maintenance works during the period of maintenance including an outline of replacement planting regime and proposed pest and weed management activities.
 
 Quarterly joint inspections shall be undertaken each year by the Contractor and the Superintendent after commencement of the Defects Liability Period.
 
 Any remedial work shall be performed within three weeks of the date of inspection. Grassing and planting may be delayed until suitable conditions prevail subject to the agreement of the Superintendent.
 
 (c) Plant Performance Requirements
 
 Shrub and groundcover planting bed areas shall achieve the following performance requirements:
 
 *** Table 720.111 Performance Requirements for Shrub and Groundcover Planting Areas
 
 12 months after Practical Completion 24 months after Practical Completion
 
  minimum ##:25% ground closure
 
  minimum ##:60% ground closure
 
  all plants showing healthy growth
 
  all plants showing healthy growth
 
  performance indicating probable ##:90% ground closure at 36 months after Practical Completion
 
  performance indicating probable ##:90% ground closure at 36 months after Practical Completion
 
 Planting that does not meet the above performance requirements shall be re-mulched and replanted annually to 100% of the original planting density for the area of planting area gaps.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 13 of 16)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Tree planting areas shall achieve the following performance requirements:
 
 Table 720.112 Performance Requirements for Tree Planting
 
 Previous 12 months
 rainfall
 
 Minimum Growth Rate Minimum Growth Rate
 
 Tubes/Cells
 
 Advanced Trees
 
 More than 700 mm
 
 750 mm per annum
 
 300 mm per annum
 
 500  700 mm
 
 500 mm per annum
 
 200 mm per annum
 
 Less than 500 mm
 
 400 mm per annum
 
 100 mm per annum
 
 Tree planting that does not meet the above performance requirements shall be replaced annually to achieve 100% of the original specified planting numbers.
 Planting that does not meet the performance requirements because of soil conditions, the site shall be re-prepared and replanted at the Contractor's expense.
 
 (d) Maintenance Tasks
 
 The Contractor shall maintain the works as follows in accordance with the requirements of this specification, the drawings and plant schedules.
 
 ***
 
 (i) Noxious Weeds and Weeds to be Removed
 Eradication of noxious weeds and weeds to be removed over the whole site shall commence from the date of Possession of Site. The weed eradication targets shall be achieved within six months of Possession of Site and then shall be maintained.
 The Contractor shall eradicate:
  all state prohibited weeds  all regionally prohibited weeds  all regionally controlled weeds  the following Weeds of National Significance (WONS):
 - ## (specify):
  the following priority weeds identified in the local Catchment Management Authority Weed Action Plan: - ## (specify):
 
 (ii) Mown Grass Weed Control
 Weeds within grass areas are to be managed from cultivation of new grass areas.
 Mown grass shall be maintained to control broad leaf herbaceous and woody weed populations. Weed control shall be implemented to control broad-leaf weeds that exceed 10% cover in urban areas or 20% over in rural areas. Weed control shall occur prior to the weed plant reaching flowering.
 Areas of native broadleaf cover among mown grass shall be brought to the attention of the Superintendent prior to spraying. The Superintendent will direct whether these areas shall be treated.
 Bare ground that results from weed control activities shall be cultivated and re-grassed to establish a minimum 95% grass cover.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 14 of 16)
 
 *** ***
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iii) Weed Control in Planting Areas and Individual Tree Plantings
 Weeds within planting areas and around tree plantings are to be managed from when cultivation of the planting site is complete.
 All planting areas shall be managed by the Contractor to maintain a minimum of 90% weed free surface with no weeds taller or broader than 200 mm at all times and all weeds are to be removed prior to the production of viable seed. Weeds within Individual Tree Plantings are to be managed for a radius of not less than 1.5 metres at each planting location.
 (iv) Pest Animals and Diseases
 The control of pests and diseases shall begin before the first planting. The Contractor shall maintain all plants free of insect infestation and plant disease so that healthy, vigorous plant growth is sustained. Minor infestations of native pests and diseases on indigenous plants not threatening survival or healthy growth need not be controlled.
 The Contractor shall provide protection to plants from vertebrate grazing animals. All planting killed by grazing animals shall be replaced. If more than 5% of planting in a planting area shows signs of damage by grazing animals, the Contractor shall take immediate action to prevent further grazing damage. As a minimum the Contractor shall immediately install tree guards or suitable protective fencing securely around all plants subject to vertebrate grazing.
 Where chemical repellents are to be used to prevent grazing, the repellent shall be applied until the growing tip of the plant is beyond the grazing height of the pest animal, subject to the approval of the Superintendent.
 (v) Replanting
 Maintenance for replanting shall begin as soon as planting has begun in a planting area.
 Plants which die or do not achieve the specified growth performance shall be replaced and replanted at the Contractor's expense.
 The Contractor shall program and allow for the propagation and supply of plants for any replanting during the current or next available planting season. A full pass of replanting shall occur at least once in each year of the Defects Liability Period. Replanting shall be undertaken either in Autumn during the months of April or May or Spring during the months of September or October. Replanting outside of these times can be undertaken with approval from the Superintendent.
 (vi) Watering
 The Contractor shall water all plants as necessary to ensure continued healthy and vigorous growth from time of planting.
 (vii) Grass Mowing ##(specification writer to strikethrough one of the following and delete this comment):
 Mowing of all grass areas shall commence from Possession of Site.
 Mowing of all grass areas shall commence from the earlier of sowing or road opening to traffic.
 In addition to areas grassed by the Contractor, the Contractor shall maintain all other grassed areas within the limits of work in accordance with Routine Maintenance Specification RM511  Grass Mowing, Section 750 of Standard Specification for Roadworks and Bridgeworks.
 Areas with less than 95% grass cover (for each grassed area) within three months after sowing shall be re-sown by the Contractor. The Contractor shall ensure that 95% cover is maintained throughout the duration of the maintenance period.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 15 of 16)
 
 ***
 
 Department of State Growth
 (viii) Re-mulching
 Maintenance of areas mulched shall begin from the first planting.
 Areas mulched with shredded wood mulch that do not have full foliage cover at ground level shall be maintained at a minimum consolidated depth of 75 mm by the Contractor. Re-mulching is not required where shrub or groundcover canopies have fully connected foliage.
 (ix) Pruning
 Pruning maintenance shall begin from the first planting.
 The Contractor shall prune trees and shrubs to remove damaged limbs and branches with a diameter above 10 mm. Tree branches likely to form a dominant `U' or `V' shaped crotch shall be pruned to a single leader. All pruning and removal of living or dead stems greater than 10 mm diameter shall be in accordance with AS 4373 Pruning of Amenity Trees.
 (x) Maintaining the Site in a Neat and Tidy Condition
 At any time the site is accessible to the public, the Contractor shall keep the site in a neat and tidy condition free of litter, debris or extraneous materials not associated with the works. Litter that may be carried from the site by wind or water shall be controlled, collected and removed by the Contractor from Possession of Site.
 (xi) Maintenance of Tree Guards and Stakes
 Maintenance of tree guards and stakes shall begin from installation.
 Tree guards shall be maintained by the Contractor to ensure healthy vigorous plant growth is not inhibited. Tree guards shall be removed when the plant reaches 750-1000 mm in height. Tree guards shall be removed prior to Final Completion of the Contract unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent.
 Marker stakes shall be removed when the plant reaches the height of the stake.
 (xii) Repairs to Erosion Treated and Affected Areas
 Maintenance and repairs to erosion treated and affected areas shall begin from the earlier of installation of treatment or erosion occurring.
 The Contractor shall maintain all areas of erosion protection treatments from the earlier of installation of treatment or erosion occurring and shall repair all damage or erosion which arises. Such areas shall be re-prepared and re-protected as necessary to minimize erosion occurring and to establish a stable condition.
 (xiii) Intervention Standards
 In addition to the above requirements, the Contractor shall maintain the landscaping works in accordance with the Intervention and Rectification Standards specified in Section 700.2 for:  Surface Drains and Verges  Grass Mowing  Edge Trimming  Grass and Weed Control  Tree and Shrub Management  Noxious Weed Control  Litter Control.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 720 (Page 16 of 16)
 
 SECTION 721 - PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175 and 853. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 PART 721.A - GENERAL PART 721.B - PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR NEW WORKS PART 721.C - PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR MAINTENANCE WORKS PART 721.D - PAINTED PAVEMENT MARKINGS PART 721.E - LONG LIFE PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 1 of 21)
 
 PART 721.A  GENERAL
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 721.A01 GENERAL
 This section covers the requirements for materials and application of pavement markings including:
 (a) supply and application of pavement marking paint and glass beads, longitudinal lines, intersection markings and other markings on the road surface for all new installations and maintenance of pavement markings;
 (b) supply and application of thermoplastic or cold-applied plastic material and glass beads, and pliant polymer tape for all new installations and maintenance of pavement markings;
 (c) fixing of both reflective and non-reflective raised pavement markers to asphalt, concrete or sealed pavements using epoxy adhesive or hot melt bitumen adhesive.
 
 721.A02 DEFINITIONS
 Pavement Marking The term used to define all linemarking, roadmarking and raised pavement markers.
 Linemarking The term used to define all longitudinal lines such as centre, lane, edge, turn and continuity lines.
 Roadmarking The term used to define all transverse lines and markings applied by hand such as Stop/Give Way lines, pedestrian lines, arrows, and legends.
 Maintenance of Pavement Markings Refers to the refreshing or replacement of an already existing pavement marking.
 New Pavement Markings Refers to applying pavement markings to a new surface where no pavement marking exists i.e. after reseals, asphalt resurfacing, newly constructed pavements, and modifications to existing pavement markings.
 Initial Coat The term used to define initial coat of painted markings placed prior to the final coat.
 Final Coat The term used to define the final application of paint.
 Raised Pavement Marker A device placed on a pavement which may be a:
 Non Reflective Marker A device to provide a degree of delineation during daylight owing to the contrasting colour, reflection and profile with respect to the pavement surface. Also a device which reflects ambient light during the day-time and to a limited degree when illuminated at night.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 2 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Reflective Marker A device which produces an effective point source of light at normal highway viewing distances by reflecting incident light in directions close to the direction from which it came. Also a device to provide a degree of delineation during daylight owing to the contrasting colour, reflection and profile with respect to the pavement surface. Temporary Reflective Marker A temporary device performing the same function as a Reflective Marker but with an intended life of not more than two weeks under average traffic conditions.
 Retroreflectivity A property of some materials, such as solid glass beads, to reflect incident light in directions close to the direction from which it came. Retroreflectivity is the value of reflected light measured in millicandella/lux/square metre and is used as a measure of light reflected by pavement markings.
 Retroreflectometer A device used to measure retroreflectivity. For the purpose of this contract the geometry of the retroreflectometer shall be based on 30 m observation geometry.
 Urban Area An area in which: (a) a speed limit of 60 kilometres per hour or less applies and is not a speed limit which applies
 only because of a temporary reason such as roadworks or a street event; or (b) there are buildings on land next to the road or where the street lighting poles are not more
 than 100 m apart for (i) a distance of at least 500 m; or (ii) if the length of the road is less than 500 m, over the full length of the road.
 Rural Area An area that is not an Urban Area.
 721.A03 STANDARDS
 The dimensions and colour of pavement markings shall conform to the following standards: (a) VicRoads Traffic Engineering Manual Volume 2 as listed in Section 175; *** (b) State Roads Standard Drawings for Pavement Markings
 Paint and long life material shall be white, except for No Stopping markings which shall be yellow or as otherwise specified or required in State Roads Standard Drawings for Pavement Markings.
 721.A04 INCLUSION AND DELETION OF JOB ITEMS
 (a) The Superintendent may delete any work, subject to notice of deletion being given one month prior to the proposed programmed date. The Contractor will be notified in writing of such deletion and the contract sum adjusted by the price tendered in the Schedules for the job item(s) deleted.
 (b) No additional payment will be made as a result of the deletion of any work or job item. However, where the deletion of job items results in a contract sum reduction of more than 20 per cent of the original contract sum, the deletion of job items in excess of this amount will be treated as a variation under Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 3 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) The Superintendent may request the Contractor to undertake additional pavement marking works at sites not listed in the Schedules. These works will be treated as a variation under Clause 40 of the General Conditions of Contract.
 721.A05 MATERIALS
 Pavement marking materials shall conform to the following standards.
 (a) Raised Pavement Markers (i) Raised pavement markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS 1906, Part 3 as listed in Section 175. (ii) Temporary raised reflective pavement markers shall comply with the relevant requirements of AS 1906 as listed in Section 175, and shall be at least 100 mm in width and to a height of 50 mm with reflective material on both sides and include protective covers for the reflective material.
 (b) Adhesive Hot melt bitumen adhesive shall comply with Section 853 - Hot Melt Bitumen Adhesive for Raised Pavement Marker Installation. Other types of adhesive materials shall only be used with the approval of the Superintendent.
 (c) Linemarking and Roadmarking Paint All paints shall be approved under the Australian Paint Approval Scheme (APAS). Paint shall comply with the requirements of AS 4049.1 for solvent-borne paint or AS/NZS 4049.3 for water-borne paint as listed in Section 175.
 (d) Glass Beads (i) Glass beads shall be used on all applications of material and for all pavement markings and shall conform to the requirements in AS/NZS 2009 and the Australian Paint Approval Scheme (APAS) Specification 0042 as listed in Section 175. (ii) Intermix glass beads for use in long life material applications shall conform to AS/NZS 2009 and the Australian Paint Approval Scheme (APAS) Specification 0042.
 (iii) The amount of heavy metals in the beads shall not be greater than that specified in Specification 0042.
 (iv) Pristine glass beads (Type B-HR) Type B-HR glass beads shall comply with the properties of Type B (AS 2009:2006) drop-on glass beads, with an additional high performance retroreflectivity requirement, requiring the delivery of a minimum 450 mcd/lux.m, when tested in accordance with a modified Appendix M* of AS 2009:2006 (described below). Section M4 Apparatus clause a) Dry film thickness of paint will be 200-250 m Section M5 Procedure clause b) Weigh 24 +/- 0.5 grams of glass beads Section M5 Procedure clause e) Wet film thickness of paint will be 375 m +/- 25 m.
 (e) Thermoplastic Pavement Marking Material Thermoplastic pavement marking material used under this Contract shall comply with the requirements of Clause 721.A13 and shall provide a functional service life of a least six years allowing for fair wear and tear.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 4 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (f) Cold-applied Plastic Pavement Marking Material Cold-applied plastic pavement marking material used under this Contract shall be a Poly Methyl Methacrylate resin based pavement marking material conforming with the colour, luminance and bead content requirements of Clause 721.A13 and shall provide a functional service life of at least six years allowing for fair wear and tear.
 (g) Pliant Polymer Pavement Marking Tape Pliant polymer pavement marking tape intended for use under this Contract shall be approved by the Superintendent.
 721.A06 SITE PREPARATION Site preparation shall be the sole responsibility of the Contractor as part of the works, including: (a) the removal of existing unsound, obsolete or redundant pavement markings (b) the removal of any foreign materials and debris within reasonable limits.
 721.A07 PLACING RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS Markers shall be placed in accordance with the manufacturer's specification for pavement markers and the adhesives used shall be in accordance with Clause 721.A05(b). Adhesive on the exposed surfaces of the marker shall be removed. Where a new or replacement marker is not positioned correctly it shall be removed and a new marker placed. Markers shall be protected from traffic after placing and any marker dislodged by traffic shall be removed and replaced with a new marker. On concrete and asphalt pavements, wherever possible, markers shall be placed clear of longitudinal or transverse joints and on all pavements markers shall be placed clear of any surface cracks or positions from which markers have been removed and the surface is damaged.
 721.A08 REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 Where required the Contractor shall remove existing pavement markings to the standard approved by the Superintendent and appropriate to the marking being removed.
 Any pavement damage caused by the installation or removal of pavement markings included in the works shall be the Contractor's responsibility. Rectification of any pavement damage to line and level shall be completed on the same day in accordance with the Superintendent's requirements. On sections of road on which the Contractor has been directed to replace or remove raised pavement markers, the Contractor shall also repair damage to the pavement caused by the loss of pavement markers.
 721.A09 LAYOUT OF MARKINGS
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the layout of and spotting out for markings in accordance with the Department of State Growth Standard Drawings for Pavement Markings.
 721.A10 TOLERANCES ON PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 The Contractor shall comply with the tolerances as shown in Table 721.A101 when installing pavement markings.
 Department of StatVeicGRroowadths OAcutogbuesrt 20126 Section 721 (Page 45 of 1251)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 721.A101 Tolerances on Pavement Markings
 
 Markings (A) Pavement Markings (1)
 
 Tolerance
 
 Distance between the centreline of the marking and the centreline of the set out mark
 Distance between the centreline of the completed marking and the centreline of the previous marking
 Width of completed painted markings
 Width of completed markings for long life materials
 Length of completed stripes and blocks
 Gap between double lines
 
 <30 mm
 <15 mm 10 mm of the specified dimensions 0 mm to +10 mm 0% to +10% of the specified length -10 mm to +0 mm of the required 100 mm gap (2)
 
 (B) Raised pavement markers
 
 (i) Markers in line with broken segments Transverse position Longitudinal position
 (ii) Markers in a longitudinal group Transverse position
 Longitudinal position Spacing of markers within the group (iii) Markers adjacent to an unbroken line Clearance to edge line Longitudinal mismatch between markers in transverse pairs Longitudinal position
 (iv) Orientation of reflective markers
 
 25 mm of the centreline of segments 0.5 m of the specified position
 25 mm of specified position and 10 mm of a line joining the centres of the end markers 0.5 m 50 mm of specified spacing
 5 mm of the specified dimensions <25 mm Lesser of: 0.5 m or 10% Lower edge of the reflective face at 85 to 95 to centreline of roadway or adjacent line
 
 (C) Thermoplastic profiled lines
 
 (i) Tolerances on dimension
 
 Line width
 
 +20 mm, -5 mm
 
 Line height
 
 +2 mm, -0 mm
 
 Extrusion breadth
 
 +10 mm, -0 mm
 
 Extrusion spacing
 
 15 mm
 
 Extrusion shape
 
 25 mm at any point from rectangular shape
 
 (ii) Tolerances on position
 
 Distance between the centreline of the marking and the centreline of the setout
 
 <30 mm
 
 Length of the completed lines
 
 -0% to +5% of the specified length
 
 Longitudinal position of individual extrusions
 
 50 mm of any previously applied profiled lining
 
 (1) Apparent line of the markings is a smooth, continuous alignment when viewed in the direction of the line.
 (2) Maintenance of pavement markings: If the gap between the existing lines is 90 mm or less the gap shall not be reduced by the maintenance application.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 6 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 721.A11 PROTECTION OF WORK
 The Contractor shall be responsible for protecting the work by an appropriate means until the work can be trafficked without the glass beads being disturbed from their embedded position, or the paint being picked up and/or spread by passing traffic. If paint pick-up or glass bead disturbance does occur, the Superintendent may direct that the marking be re-applied, and paint or long life material spread by traffic be removed.
 
 721.A12 ACCEPTANCE OF WORK
 Pavement marking shall comply with the specified requirements as detailed in the following clauses: (a) 721.A05 Materials (b) 721.A10 Tolerances on Pavement Marking (c) 721.A13 Acceptance of Retroreflectivity (d) 721.A14 Acceptance of Colour (e) 721.D02 Minimum Requirements (for painted markings) (f) 721.E02 Minimum Requirements (for long life markings)
 Where a particular item fails to satisfy any of the above requirements: (a) the Contractor shall rectify the failed sections within 4 weeks of testing at the Contractor's
 expense *** (b) subject to approval by the Superintendent, reduced payment for out-of-tolerance markings
 may be made in accordance with Clause ##:.
 HP Where removal of unsuitable pavement marking is required, the method of removal shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent before removal works commence.
 
 721.A13 ACCEPTANCE OF RETROREFLECTIVITY
 
 The Contractor shall measure the level of retroreflectivity using the procedure set out in the current revision of VicRoads Test Method RC424.01  Determination of Retroreflectivity of Pavement Markings as listed in Section 175. Acceptance of the retroreflectivity of any line or road marking will be based on a lot basis.
 
 The average of the six test site Site Retroreflectivity Values (SRV) shall be calculated for each lot. Each lot shall achieve an average minimum level of retroreflectivity as specified in Table 721.A131 Acceptance of Retroreflectivity.
 
 Table 721.A131 Acceptance of Retroreflectivity
 
 Initial
 
 Additional
 
 Measurement Measurement
 
 Testing Period (1)
 
 3  5 weeks
 
 5  6 months
 
 Minimum level of retroreflectivity on sprayed seal surfaces 350 mcd/lux/m2 220 mcd/lux/m2
 
 Minimum level of retroreflectivity on asphalt and all other 350 mcd/lux/m2 250 mcd/lux/m2 surfaces
 
 (1) Measured after application of the second/final coat of material.
 
 Measurements shall be forwarded to the Superintendent no later than five days from when the measurements were taken.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 7 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth 721.A14 ACCEPTANCE OF COLOUR White markings - the colour match test for white materials shall be based on luminance factor and conducted in accordance with AS 4049.4, using Field Method 2 of AS 4049.4 Appendix H4.3 as listed in Section 175. All markings shall have a colour difference detected as whiter than Natural Colour System (NCS) swatch S 2000-N, at all times during the Defects Liability Period. Yellow markings  the colour match test for non-white (yellow) materials shall be conducted in accordance with AS 4049.4 using Field Method 2 of AS 4049.4 Appendix H4.3, using the reference swatch sample NCS S 1070-Y20R. All yellow markings shall be an approximate match to Natural Colour System (NCS) swatch S 1070-Y20R, at all times during the Defects Liability Period. Measurements shall be forwarded to the Superintendent upon request no later than five days from when the measurements were taken.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 8 of 21) )
 
 Department of State Growth PART 721.B  PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR NEW WORKS ## strikethrough this Part B for Maintenance Contracts:
 
 721.B01 GENERAL This section covers the requirements for new pavement markings.
 
 721.B02 SCOPE OF WORK
 The scope of work includes the supply of all materials and placement of pavement markings in accordance with this specification.
 For new pavement marking the following works shall be undertaken as part of the works:
 (a) immediately prior to resurfacing, removal of any existing reflective and non reflective markers
 (b) placement of temporary reflective pavement markers including removal of protective covers after surfacing works
 (c) initial placement of pavement markings, including reinstatement of any adjoining pavement markings blackened but not necessarily covered by the surfacing activity, comprising  - reinstatement and/or placement of initial coat of painted pavement markings - reinstatement and/or placement of other long life pavement markings - reinstatement and/or placement of raised pavement markers and removal of temporary raised reflective pavement markers
 (d) final coat of all painted pavement markings
 (e) reinstatement and/or placement of profiled lines after the final coat of paint.
 
 721.B03 LIMIT OF WORK
 *** For new pavement markings the limit of pavement marking works shall be the same as the limit of the new surfacing or as shown in Section ##: - Schedule of Drawings.
 
 721.B04 PROGRAM
 
 For new pavement markings the Contractor shall undertake pavement marking works in accordance with the following requirements.
 
 (a) After Surfacing Works
 
 The initial coat of paint, long life pavement markings (other than profiled linemarking) and raised pavement markers (reflective and non-reflective) on newly surfaced pavements shall be installed in accordance with the following timeframes:
 
 AADT 5,000 and National Highway
 
 within 24 hours of opening to traffic
 
 AADT 1,000 and 4,999
 
 within 3 days of opening to traffic
 
 AADT < 1000
 
 within 5 days of opening to traffic
 
 (b) All new painted pavement markings shall receive two applications of paint. The second/final application shall be applied between 2-6 weeks after the initial application.
 
 (c) The Contractor shall apply profiled linemarking between 26 weeks after the final coat.
 
 (d) For new works constructed clear of traffic, all pavement markings shall be completed prior to opening of traffic.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 9 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 721.B05 POSITION OF MARKINGS
 
 All markings are to be set out in accordance with the dimensions and spacings as required by the appropriate standard in Clause 721.A03.
 
 HP Painting/application of material shall not commence until the Superintendent has inspected the set out and given consent to proceed, unless an exemption has been granted in writing by the Superintendent.
 
 (a) New pavement markings shall be positioned in accordance with the following requirements:
 (i) set out by the Contractor in conformance with the appropriate standard required by Clause 721.A03
 (ii) applied within the tolerances listed in Table 721.A101.
 
 (b) Temporary Reflective Markers
 
 Temporary reflective markers for new works shall be placed at the following minimum spacings on all longitudinal lane lines, except that on any curve less than 500 m in radius the spacing shall not be more than 12 metre centres:
 
 AADT 5,000 and National Highway
 
 12 metre centres
 
 AADT 1,000 and <5,000
 
 24 metre centres
 
 AADT <1,000
 
 48 metre centres
 
 721.B06 RECORDS AND REPORTING
 (a) Job Completion Report
 For New Markings the Contractor shall complete and forward to the Superintendent a Job Completion Report (Pavement Markings).
 (b) Retroreflectivity Report
 The Contractor shall complete and forward to the Superintendent a Retroreflectivity Report in a form approved by the Superintendent showing the level of retroreflectivity determined for each test lot in accordance with the requirements of Clause 721.A12.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 10 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 PART 721.C  PAVEMENT MARKINGS FOR MAINTENANCE WORKS
 ## strikethrough this Part C for New Pavement Markings:
 721.C01 GENERAL This section covers the requirements for maintenance of pavement markings.
 721.C02 SCOPE OF WORK The scope of work includes the supply of all materials and placement of pavement markings in accordance with this specification. Maintenance works shall entail preparing the site in accordance with Clause 721.A06 and refreshing the existing pavement markings with the same material as the existing markings in accordance with this specification. Existing markings which are in `Longlife' i.e. thermoplastic, cold-applied plastic, pliant polymer roadmarking tape, or other long durability non-paint product shall not be maintained in paint, unless prior approval has been given by the Superintendent. Missing or badly worn long life markings shall be reported to the Superintendent who may direct the Contractor to maintain the markings in paint.
 721.C03 LIMIT OF WORK *** For the maintenance of existing pavement markings the works shall include all existing tapers, bell
 mouths at intersecting roads, pavement widening and traffic lanes. The limits of work at typical intersections are shown in Section ##: - Schedule of Drawings.
 721.C04 EXCLUSION OF ROADWORKS For works involving the maintenance of pavement markings, the Contractor will not be responsible for maintaining pavement markings unless otherwise directed by the Superintendent where it is evident that roadworks are taking place or will shortly take place which will interfere with the installation of the markings or which will damage the completed markings. The Contractor shall record the location of any road lengths not maintained and notify the Superintendent. The Contractor shall state the reason as to why the location is not maintained prior to the pavement marking work being undertaken. Long Life Pavement Markings that could result in thicknesses greater than 5mm shall not be applied and shall be brought to the attention of the Superintendant.
 721.C05 PROGRAM (a) For the maintenance of pavement markings the Contractor shall submit the following
 programs as specified for review by the Superintendent as part of the works. (i) Within two weeks of the Date of Award of Contract, a pavement marking program for the whole of the works that complies with Section ##:  Road Inventory Information. This program shall be reviewed and updated at least annually.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 11 of 21)
 
 ***
 
 Department of State Growth
 (ii) Based on the list of jobs requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall submit a monthly detailed program of planned pavement marking jobs at least five working days in advance of the following month.
 The detailed program shall be in bar chart form or other suitable form approved by the Superintendent, including specific jobs to be undertaken with a time scale shown in days. The program shall be in sufficient detail to identify dates covering the following activities:  date of linemarking  date of roadmarking  dates of placement of raised pavement markers  date of retroreflectivity testing.
 (iii) The Contractor shall submit a weekly program confirming the crew locations for work that will be undertaken in the following week.
 All pavement markings on individual Job Items shall be completed in the programmed month as specified in Section ##:  Road Inventory Information. Failure to meet this requirement may result in a reduced payment on that item in accordance with Clause ##:.
 (iv) The Works, and the requirements for the Works, undertaken between the months of June and July shall be agreed between the Contractor and the Superintendent.
 
 721.C06 INSPECTION AND REPLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR MAINTENANCE OF RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS
 For maintenance of raised pavement markers, the Superintendent will conduct a routine program of inspections of the condition of raised pavement markers.
 From the routine program of inspections, requests for replacement of raised pavement markers will be made. For the purpose of replacing raised pavement markers, the Contractor may program this based on a minimum run of 250 markers on urban road sections and M and A class roads, and a minimum run of 125 markers on other road sections. Valuation of these works will be based on rates submitted in the Schedules. The Contractor shall replace these markers within one month of the issue of a request from the Superintendent.
 
 721.C07 RECORDS AND REPORTING
 (a) Job Completion Report
 For maintenance of pavement markings the Contractor shall complete and forward to the Superintendent a Job Completion Report (Pavement Markings) using the proforma included as Attachment A to this Section 721, for each job item in the Schedules.
 The Contractor shall hold all records on electronic media in a form approved by the Superintendent. One electronic and one hard copy of each month's completed work shall be forwarded to the Superintendent together with the statement for payment under the Contract.
 (b) Retroreflectivity Report
 For both new work and maintenance of pavement markings, the Contractor shall complete and forward to the Superintendent a Retroreflectivity Report in a form approved by the Superintendent showing the level of retroreflectivity determined for each test lot in accordance with the requirements of Clause 721.A12.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 12 of 21)
 
 PART 721.D - PAINTED PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 721.D01 GENERAL
 Linemarking shall be applied by a self propelled machine, and stencils shall be used with all roadmarking.
 All work must be undertaken by a contractor eligible for accreditation under the Painting Contractors Certification Programme (PCCP). This programme is administered by the CSIRO.
 Completed markings shall be uniform in appearance from all angles of observation, texture, width and thickness and the surface shall be free from streaks, overlaps, unbeaded areas, tyre marks, stencil breaks or other defects. Edges and cut-offs should be neat and sharp, and there shall be no visible run-off, overspray, dribbles, splash or spillage on to the surrounding area, or on to parked or passing vehicles. The Contractor shall be responsible for the cost of removal of paint from such vehicles.
 Glass beads shall be applied to the paint to produce a uniform coverage and be properly embedded and bonded over the whole painted surface. Glass beads shall be applied to all markings.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for any spillage on to the surrounding area, and cost of any remedial action required.
 
 721.D02 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
 
 The minimum requirements of paint and glass beads shall be as shown in Table 721.D021. The Contractor shall allow for any extra material required when placing on coarse chip seals. This includes the retained quantity of glass beads, to counter the phenomenon of reduced retroreflectivity due to road surface texture and directional visibility limitations.
 
 Table 721.D021 Minimum Requirements  Paint and Glass Beads Paint (1)
 
 Glass Beads (2)
 
 Linemarking
 
 New Markings (initial application only) 0.38 mm dft on sprayed seals 0.35 mm dft on asphalt and all other surfaces
 
 Type D-HR (3)
 
 Re-marking (including second application on new markings)
 
 0.38 mm dft on sprayed seals 0.35 mm dft on asphalt and all other surfaces
 
 Type D-HR (3)
 
 Roadmarking
 
 All Marking
 
 0.35 mm dft on sprayed seals 0.30 mm dft on asphalt and all other surfaces
 
 Type B-HR
 
 (1) The minimum dry paint film thickness (dft)specified above shall be the end product thickness measured on a 200 mm x 100 mm sheet metal test plate without beads. Consideration shall be given to the texture of the road surface and the method of application used to achieve the requirements of this section.
 (2) A minimum of 400 g/m2 shall be retained in the painted marking for all glass beads.
 (3) An alternative glass bead application rate shall be 300 g/m2 of D-HR with a separate drop of 200 g/m2 of B-HR provided that 75% minimum of the D-HR beads is retained at the 5 to 6 month testing undertaken Table 721.A131. Retention of the D-HR beads shall be demonstrated by photographs at each test site.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 13 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 PART 721.E  LONG LIFE PAVEMENT MARKINGS
 
 721.E01 GENERAL
 Long life pavement marking materials shall be prepared and used in accordance with the manufacturer's specification.
 All linemarking shall be applied using a self-propelled ride-on machine marking unless otherwise recommended by the marking manufacturer and approved by the Superintendent.
 Glass beads shall be applied to all long life markings. Glass beads shall be sprinkled or sprayed on to the long life material while it is in a fluid state immediately after it has been applied to the pavement to ensure that the beads are embedded by a nominal 60%. The surface beads shall be distributed to give a uniform coverage over the whole surface of the long life material.
 Completed markings shall be uniform in appearance, texture, width and thickness and the surface shall be free from blisters, air bubbles, tears, lumps, streaks, overlaps, unbeaded areas, tyre marks or other defects. Edges and cut-offs shall be neat and sharp, and there shall be no visible run-off, overspray, dribbles, splash or spillage on to the surrounding area, or on to parked or passing vehicles. The Contractor shall be responsible for the removal of pavement marking material from such vehicles.
 
 721.E02 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
 
 The minimum requirements of long life materials and glass beads shall be as shown in Table 721.E021. The Contractor shall allow for any extra material required when placing on coarse chip seals. This includes the retained quantity of glass beads, to counter the phenomenon of reduced retroreflectivity due to road surface texture and directional visibility limitations.
 
 Table 721.E021 Minimum Requirements  Long Life and Glass Beads
 
 Material
 
 Applied Minimum Thickness, Glass Bead and Other Requirements
 
 Thermoplastic
 
 sprayed markings extruded line markings (1) extruded road markings (1)
 
 2.0 mm minimum thickness on longitudinal lines containing intermix beads and with a minimum of 400 g/m2 of Type D-HR or Type B-HR(3) drop-on glass beads retained on the marking surface
 2.0 mm minimum thickness on longitudinal lines containing intermix beads and a minimum of 400 g/m2 of Type D-HR or Type B-HR drop-on glass beads retained on the marking surface
 3.0 mm minimum thickness on intersections containing intermix beads and a minimum of 400 g/m2 of Type D-HR or Type B-HR drop-on glass beads retained on the marking surface
 
 preformed markings profiled lines (1)
 
 2.3 mm with a minimum skidding resistance value of 45 BPN (British Pendulum Number) and retroreflective properties agreed with the Superintendant
 8.0 mm minimum thickness with a minimum of 400 g/m2 of Type D-HR or Type B-HR drop-on glass beads retained on the marking surface
 
 (Table 721.E021 continued next page)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 14 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 721.E021 Minimum Requirements  Long Life and Glass Beads (continued)
 
 Material
 
 Applied Minimum Thickness, Glass Bead and Other Requirements
 
 Cold-applied Plastic sprayed line markings (2)
 sprayed road markings (2)
 
 1.0 mm minimum thickness for longitudinal line markings only with a minimum of 400 g/m2 of Type D-HR or Type B-HR glass beads retained in and on the marking surface
 2.0 mm minimum thickness for all road markings containing intermix beads and a minimum of 400 g/m2 of Type D-HR or Type B-HR drop-on glass beads retained on the marking surface
 
 trowelled, screeded, or extruded markings (1)
 
 2.0 mm minimum thickness of markings containing intermix beads and a minimum of 400 g/m2 of Type D-HR or Type B-HR
 drop-on glass beads retained on the marking surface
 
 Pliant Polymer Tape
 
 as approved by the Superintendent
 
 (1) The minimum thickness specified shall be the height above the upper road surface level or above the existing marking as appropriate.
 (2) The minimum thickness specified shall be the height of the material between the glass beads on a metal test plate. All other thicknesses shall be as measured on a metal test plate including glass beads.
 (3) Pristine drop-on Type B glass beads (Type B-HR), as per Clause 721.A05.
 
 721.E03 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PROFILED LINES
 The Contractor shall provide measurements of rib height, length, width, and spacing of profiled lines at a minimum of 10 evenly spaced readings per kilometre or part there of. For lengths of less than 500 metres, a minimum of 2 evenly spaced readings per 100 metres shall be provided.
 The Contractor shall carry out remedial work to rectify defective sections of profiled lines where they:
 (a) were not installed to specified dimensions, or distorted in shape or lost shape, such that the height of individual extrusions is less than 8 mm above the top of adjacent road surface aggregate particles, over more than 10 per cent of the profiled edge lining job item; or
 (b) have shattered or no longer adhere to the road surface over more than 1 per cent of the profiled edge lines job item; or
 (c) have shattered or no longer adhere to the road surface over a continuous length exceeding 5 m.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 15 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 721 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (PAVEMENT MARKINGS)
 
 CONTRACT NO. ...................
 
 Job No. Road Name From To Lane kilometres Responsible Region Municipality(ies)
 MABC No. State Growth Use Only Comments
 
 Map Reference From Map Type Map Reference To Carriageway kilometres Other Region(s) Connect Equipment No. State Growth Use Only Road Category
 
 Pavement Marking Maintenance Paint Maintenance
 
 Treatment
 
 Material
 
 Date of Marking
 
 VicRoads State Growth Use Only Next Schedule Date Next Program Date
 
 RPM, Including RRPM Maintenance
 
 Treatment
 
 Material
 
 Date of Marking
 
 State Growth Use Only Next Schedule Date Next Program Date
 
 Long Life, RRPM Special and other Special Treatments Including Part Treatments and other RPM Treatments
 
 Treatment
 
 Material
 
 Date of Marking
 
 State Growth Use Only Next Schedule Date Next Program Date
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 16 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 721 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (PAVEMENT MARKINGS)
 
 CONTRACT NO. ...................
 
 Performance Reporting
 
 Treatment
 
 Performance Criteria
 
 Painted Markings Tolerances on Pavement Markings
 
 Date of Testing
 
 State Growth Use State Growth Use
 
 Only
 
 Only
 
 Next Schedule Date Next Program Date
 
 Retroreflectivity
 
 Daylight visibility
 
 Colour
 
 Skid Resistance
 
 Raised Pavement Tolerances on Pavement
 
 Marker
 
 Markings
 
 Retroreflectivity
 
 Daylight visibility
 
 Colour
 Long Life Markings Tolerances on Pavement Markings
 Retroreflectivity
 
 Daylight visibility
 
 Colour
 
 Skid Resistance
 
 The Contractor shall include in the Job Completion Report the actual status of the item compared to the specified requirement for that item, including:  tolerances on pavement markings;  retroreflectivity;  daylight visibility;  colour; and  skid resistance.
 
 I, .......................................................................................... certify the above details as correct. (Print Name)
 
 .................................................................................................... (Signed)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 17 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 721 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (PAVEMENT MARKINGS)
 Painted Marking Detail
 
 CONTRACT NO. ...................
 
 Pattern
 Standard Stripe 100 mm Semi Barrier 100 mm Double Barrier 100 mm Edgeline 100 mm Single solid lane line 100 mm Edgeline 150 mm Single solid lane line 150 mm Single solid centreline 150 mm Continuity line 150 mm Turn lines 100 mm Lane lines 100 mm Chevron, diagonal bars or pedestrian crossing stripes, 600 mm Straight ahead arrow 1.4 m2 including 1500 angle arrow Turn arrow 1.6 m2 Combination turn/straight arrow Double turn arrow 2.7 m2 Combination straight/double turn arrow 3.6 m2 U turn 2.7 m2 Pedestrian lines 150 mm Stop lines 600 mm STATCON holding bars 150 mm wide 600/600 line/gap STATCON stop line 300 mm STATCON give way 300 mm wide 600/600 line/gap STATCON centreline 100 mm wide, usually 30 m long Freeway exit ramp block 1.5 m wide, usually 6 m long STATCON Roundabout blocks 400 mm wide 600/600 line/gap Special Legends KEEP CLEAR, including 150 mm long clearance bars Small Bicycle Symbol Large Bicycle Symbol Rail X Transit Lane TL Bus Lane Other
 
 Material
 
 Unit of Measure
 km km km km km km km km km m m m
 
 Quantity
 
 each each each each each each
 m m Per block m Per block m m Per block
 
 each each each each each each
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 18 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 721 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (PAVEMENT MARKINGS)
 Raised Pavement Marker Detail
 
 CONTRACT NO. ...................
 
 Marker Type
 Raised retroreflective pavement marker white mono or bi-directional
 Raised retroreflective pavement marker white mono or bi-directional (glass faced)
 Raised retroreflective pavement marker, yellow, red or green, mono or bi-directional
 Raised non-reflective pavement marker (ceramic)
 Raised non-reflective pavement marker (ultra hard plastic alloy)
 
 Material
 
 Unit of Measure
 each
 each
 each
 each each
 
 Quantity
 
 Long Life Markings Detail
 
 Pattern
 
 ST ET SCT CA
 
 Material sprayed thermoplastic extruded thermoplastic screeded thermoplastic cold applied plastic
 
 Standard Stripe 100mm
 
 Semi Barrier 100 mm
 
 Double Barrier 100 mm
 
 Edgeline 100 mm
 
 Single solid lane line or centreline 100 mm
 
 Continuity line 100 mm
 
 Edgeline 150 mm
 
 Single solid lane line 150 mm
 
 Single solid centreline 150 mm
 
 Continuity line 150 mm
 
 Profiled lines
 
 Turn lines 100 mm
 
 Lane lines 100 mm
 
 Chevron, diagonal bars or pedestrian crossing stripes, 600 mm
 Straight ahead arrow 1.4 m2 including 1500 angle arrow
 Turn arrow 1.6 m2
 
 Combination turn/straight arrow Double turn arrow 2.7 m2 Combination straight/double turn arrow 3.6 m2
 
 Unit of Measure
 
 Quantity
 
 km km km km km km km km km km km m m
 m
 each
 each each each each
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 19 of 21)
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 721 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (PAVEMENT MARKINGS)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (Page 5 of 6) CONTRACT NO. ...................
 
 Long Life Markings Detail ... continued
 
 Pattern
 
 ST ET SCT CA
 
 Material sprayed thermoplastic extruded thermoplastic screeded thermoplastic cold applied plastic
 
 U turn 2.7 m2
 
 Pedestrian lines 150 mm
 
 Stop lines 600 mm
 
 STATCON holding bars 150 mm wide 600/600 line/gap
 
 STATCON stop line 300 mm
 
 STATCON give way 300 mm wide 600/600 line/gap
 
 STATCON centreline 100 mm wide, usually 30 m long
 
 STATCON Roundabout blocks 400 mm wide 600/600 line/gap
 
 KEEP CLEAR including 150 mm long clearance bars
 
 Small Bicycle Symbol
 
 Large Bicycle Symbol
 
 Rail X
 
 Transit Lane TL
 
 Bus Lane
 
 Other
 
 Unit of Measure
 each m m
 Per block m
 Per block m
 Per block
 each
 each each each each each
 
 Quantity
 
 Traffic Signal Site
 Job Item No. Principal Road Name Intersecting Road Other intersecting Road Map Reference From Responsible Region Municipality(ies)
 MABC No. State Growth Use Only Comments
 
 Map Type
 Other Region(s)
 Connect Equipment No. State Growth Use Only
 Road Category
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 20 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ATTACHMENT A TO SECTION 721 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 JOB COMPLETION REPORT (PAVEMENT MARKINGS)
 
 CONTRACT NO. ...................
 
 Pavement Marking Maintenance Paint Maintenance
 
 Treatment
 
 Material
 
 Date of Marking
 
 State Growth Use Only Next Schedule Date Next Program Date
 
 RPM, including RRPM maintenance
 
 Treatment
 
 Material
 
 Date of Marking
 
 State Growth Use Only Next Schedule Date Next Program Date
 
 Long Life, RRPM Special and Other Special treatments including Part treatments and Other RPM treatments
 
 Treatment
 
 Material
 
 Date of Marking
 
 VicRoads Use Only Next Schedule Date Next Program Date
 
 I, ............................................................................................. certify the above details as correct. (Print Name)
 ...................................................................................................... (Signed)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 721 (Page 21 of 21)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 730 - TRAFFIC SIGNAL INSTALLATION
 730.01 GENERAL
 (a) Scope This Section covers the requirements for the installation and remodel of traffic signals For the purpose of this specification, traffic signals shall include: (i) intersection traffic signals (ii) pedestrian operated traffic signals (iii) pedestrian (zebra) crossings (iv) emergency vehicle access signals (v) ramp metering signals.
 (b) General Requirements The Contractor shall be responsible for the supply, installation and commissioning of the traffic signal project as shown on the drawings, or as specified.
 
 730.02 DEFINITIONS
 Specialist terms used within this section are defined in AS 1348-2002, Road and Traffic Engineering  Glossary of Terms.
 The following term is also used in this section: Remodel - The full or partial rebuilding of an existing traffic signal site for the purpose of upgrading site equipment and/or adding to, deleting from or modifying the existing traffic signals.
 
 730.03 ABBREVIATIONS
 
 The following abbreviations are used in this section:
 
 ACMA - Australian Communications and Media Authority
 
 AS
 
 - Australian Standard
 
 DC
 
 - Direct Current
 
 DUSC - a modem device used for connecting rural controllers
 
 to the SCATS system via a dial-up connection
 
 2A
 
 - Traffic signal pedestal 3.2m in length
 
 2B
 
 - Traffic signal pedestal 4.1m in length
 
 2C
 
 - Traffic Signal Pedestal 3.4 m in length
 
 Type 3 - Push button post 1.4m in length
 
 HP
 
 - Hold Point
 
 JUMA - Joint Use Mast Arm
 
 JUP - Joint Use Pole
 
 MA
 
 - Mast Arm
 
 LED - Light Emitting Diode
 
 QH
 
 - Quartz Halogen
 
 TPS - Thermoplastic Sheathed
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 1 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth 730.04 SITE PLAN The scope of works, equipment requirements and placement of equipment shall be as shown on the Drawings. Abbreviation and symbols used on Traffic Signal Plans are detailed in Table 730.041 below. Table 730.041 Abbreviations and Symbols for Traffic Signal Plans
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 2 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 730.05 REFERENCED AND RELATED SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS AND DRAWINGS
 Unless otherwise approved by the Transport Commission, the layout and positioning of traffic signal poles and aspects shall conform to the requirements of;
 
 (a) AS 1742 Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices  Part 14, Traffic Signals (b) Austroads Guide to Traffic Management - Part 10 - Traffic Control and Communication Devices.
 
 The fabrication and supply of all components for traffic signal works shall conform to all relevant Department of State Growth Specifications and Australian Standards.
 
 All traffic signal equipment shall conform to the general requirements of: (a) `TCS' series specifications (b) `TC' series specifications (c) AS 1742 Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (d) AS/NZS 3000:2007 Wiring Rules (e) TasNetworks Service and Installation Rules.
 
 The individual requirements of the TasNetworks shall apply for matters relating to the provision of mains power.
 The relevant requirements of the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) and relevant communications network operators shall apply to the provision of all communications facilities.
 All traffic signal works shall be conducted in accordance with the appropriate Traffic Control (TC) Series Standard Drawings.
 
 Standard Drawings referred to in this section are listed in Table 730.051 below.
 
 Table 730.051 List of Standard Drawings
 
 Drawing Number
 
 Title
 
 TC-1100 Traffic Signal Post - Types 2A, 2B, 2C & 3
 
 TC-1101 Traffic Signal Mounting Brackets
 
 TC-1104 Typical Layout - Flashing Pedestrian Crossing
 
 TC-1112 Typical 5.5m Mast Arm Installation (2.5m Outreach)
 
 TC-1114 51 Way Terminal Assembly*
 
 TC-1115 Lantern and Mounting Bracket Orientation
 
 TC-1116 Traffic Signal Mounting Arrangements
 
 TC-1117
 
 Lantern Orientation and Mounting Heights for 300mm Lanterns on Standard Posts
 
 TC-1119 Lantern Mounting Details
 
 TC-1125 Post Installation Details for Signs
 
 TC-1126 Pedestal Location Under or Through Verandahs
 
 .... table continued next page
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 3 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 730.051 List of Standard Drawings ......continued
 
 Drawing Number
 
 Title
 
 TC-1127 TC-1128 TC-1200 TC-1201 TC-1202 TC-1203 TC-1204 TC-1205 TC-1206 TC-1207 TC-1208 TC-1212 TC-1214 TC-1215 TC-1220 TC-1230 TC-1300 TC-1320 TC-1601
 TC-1603 TC-2101 TC-2104 TC-2204 TC-2215
 
 Traffic Signal - Visor Types and Dimensions Terminal Assembly for Use with MA, JUP and JUMA Foundation for Pedestals Bored Pile Foundation for MA, JUP and JUMA Spread Footing Foundation for MA, JUP and JUMA Traffic Signal Controller Foundation Details 51 Core for Intersections Cable (Connections) Multicore Cable Connections for Pedestrian Operated Signals Assembly and Installation of Consumer Mains and Connection Traffic Signal Underground Ducting Underground Conduit Warning Sign Site Identification Encoder for Traffic Signal Controllers Suitable Arrangement Dual 51 Core Terminations for Complex Intersection Suitable Arrangement Dual 51 Core Terminations for Diamond Interchange Cable Pit Access Cover and Frame (600mm Diameter) Cable Pit - Installation Details Loop Pattern and Installation Details - Symmetripole Detector Pit  Installation Details Rag Bolt Assembly - M24 Commercial and High Strength Grade - 600mm x 350mm PCD Rag Bolt Assembly for Cabinet M12  600mm x 460mm x 255mm Standard Cabinet Label (Side Mounted) Pedestrian Label Electrical & Communication Trenches General Arrangement at Point of Supply
 
 * A 29 way terminal assembly is used in Tasmania.
 
 NOTE: All Standard Drawings, Specifications and Guidelines are available for downloading from the Department of State Growth website at: http://www.transport.tas.gov.au/road/contractor/specifications
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 4 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 730.06 EQUIPMENT TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE GROWTH The Department of State Growth will supply or arrange for the supply of the following items: (a) the traffic signal controller and associated vehicle detector units (b) communication devices, such as modems `DUSC' units. The Department of State Growth reserves the right to add to, delete from, or modify, the list of items to be supplied by the Department for any specific project. The Contractor shall be responsible for the care, transport and handling of all Department of State Growth supplied materials issued to the Contractor.
 730.07 EQUIPMENT TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE CONTRACTOR Other than those items listed in Clause 730.06, the Contractor shall be responsible for the supply of all equipment, items and peripherals required for the completion of the works. Where applicable, all equipment proposed for use shall hold current Department of State Growth `Type Approval' certification or Product Acceptance. All equipment, materials and fittings supplied by the Contractor are to be new. The Contractor is to ensure that all equipment used is compatible with all other equipment in the installation.
 730.08 PROJECT COMMENCEMENT
 (a) Pre-Construction The Contractor shall be responsible for locating and proving all underground and overhead services which may be affected by the works and for coordinating the activities of the service authorities in the locating of services and carrying out of any alterations to services. Any consultation with, and authorisation required from, other authorities under relevant utility regulations and codes shall be the responsibility of the Contractor.
 (b) Pre-Installation Meeting The Contractor: shall arrange a pre-installation meeting consisting of representatives of the, Contractor, Department of State Growth (Traffic Signals Maintenance), service authorities, municipalities, and others as appropriate. The Contractor shall ensure that the agenda for the meeting includes those matters that need to be resolved for the project to proceed expeditiously. At the meeting, the Contractor shall mark (or utilise GPS capability) the position of pedestals, poles, controller bases, pits and conduits in accordance with the drawings, in the presence of and with the approval of the Superintendent. Where trees, poles, obstructions, services, or other site conditions prevent or adversely affect sight lines or obstruct the location as specified, the Contractor shall determine an alternate location for the affected aspect of the works in discussion with parties as appropriate.
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 5 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The marked location of each item, as above, shall be agreed by the appropriate parties prior to excavation of foundations and shall constitute agreement of the location only and shall in no way relieve the Contractor from his responsibilities under the Contract. On satisfactory completion of the pre-installation meeting the Contractor will be issued a copy of the Pre-Installation Report by the appropriate party. 730.09 CONDUITS The Contractor shall install all conduits in accordance with AS/NZS3000:2007. All electrical conduit installation works for traffic signals must be carried out by, or under the direct supervision of, a licensed electrician and in accordance with the requirements of WorkSafe Tasmania. All communication conduit installation works are to be carried out under the `on site' supervision of a licensed electrician. A plan showing the as-constructed conduit locations and depths shall be provided to the Superintendent and a copy left in the controller cabinet. 730.10 PITS All cable pit installation works for traffic signals must be carried out by, or under the direct supervision of a licensed electrician and in accordance with the requirements of WorkSafe Tasmania. All communication pit installation works are to be carried out under the `on site' supervision of a licensed electrician.
 730.11 FOUNDATIONS Foundations shall be located in accordance with the drawings and as approved at the Pre-Installation Meeting. When locating foundations, the Contractor shall ensure that all the required clearances of the installed hardware are achieved. No part of the signal hardware is to be closer than 500 mm behind the face of the nearest kerb line, or closest vehicle path if no kerb is present. In accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1112, the minimum clearance of 5.5 m shall be achieved between the lowest part of a lantern installed on an outreach and the roadway directly beneath it. Foundations and footings shall be as specified in the Standard Drawings for the specific item of equipment they are to support, as listed in Table 730.111 below.
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 6 of 20)
 
 Table 730.111 Standard Foundation Types
 
 Foundation Type
 
 Used For
 
 Pedestal Bored Pile Spread Footing Rag Bolt Assembly Controller
 
 2A, 2B, 2C, Type 3 MA, JUMA, JUP MA, JUMA, JUP All poles Traffic signal controller
 
 Department of State Growth
 Standard Drawing TC-1200 TC-1201 TC-1202 TC-1601 TC-1203
 
 Rag bolt assembly Traffic signal controller
 
 TC-1603
 
 The standard foundation for an MA, JUMA and JUP shall be a bored pile.
 Where the installation of a bored pile foundation is not feasible and the Contractor proposes to install a spread footing, or adopt an alternative design, the Contractor shall obtain the prior approval of the Superintendent.
 Pedestal type shall be clearly identified and labelled on approved Traffic Signal Plans.
 Where the Contractor proposes an alternative footing design to those shown on the Standard Drawings, the Contractor shall provide sufficient evidence and proof engineering to the Superintendent to confirm that the proposed footing arrangement is fit for purpose.
 Wherever possible, when foundations for pedestals and poles are cast into concrete structures, two rag bolt assemblies shall be installed similar to the arrangement shown in Standard Drawing TC-1202.
 HP All conduit, pit and foundation works shall be inspected by the Superintendent prior to the Contractor covering the works.
 730.12 SUPPLY AND PLACEMENT OF CONCRETE IN FOUNDATIONS
 (a) General
 The Contractor shall be responsible for the procurement of all concrete in accordance with the requirements of AS 1379.
 (b) Placement of Concrete
 Where concrete is placed in a bore hole, it shall be compacted with immersion type, high frequency vibrators.
 Concrete shall be placed through a tremie tube and shall not be dropped from a height greater than 2 m. Concrete which is being discharged from a tremie shall be guided away from the reinforcement so that segregation is not caused by the flow of concrete impinging on the reinforcement.
 Alternative methods for placing concrete in the bored hole from those specified in this clause may be used subject to a review by the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 7 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Project Testing All grade 32 MPa concrete shall be sampled and tested in accordance with AS 1012 and AS 1379. Each sample of concrete shall be tested for compressive strength and slump. The Contractor shall develop and implement a site sampling procedure for concrete quality assurance. All concrete samples shall be taken at the point of discharge prior to placement. Each sample of concrete for standard compression tests shall comprise a minimum number of 3 cylinders. A minimum of 1 cylinder per sample shall be tested at 7 days and a minimum of 2 cylinders per sample shall be tested at 28 days.
 (d) Testing and Acceptance of Concrete on the Basis of 28 Day Compressive Strength A minimum of 2 cylinders per sample shall be tested at 28 days after casting. The specification requirements will be met if the compressive strength of each sample, as determined from the average value of the test cylinders, is not less than the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength and provided that the compressive strength of any cylinder in each sample is not less than 90% of the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength. Should the strength of any sample fail to meet the specified minimum 28 day compressive strength, the concrete represented by that sample will be rejected. The Contractor shall then develop a procedure to achieve the specification requirements and provide for the Superintendent's review and approval.
 730.13 TRAFFIC SIGNAL HARDWARE
 (a) Standing of Pedestals and Poles Pedestals and poles shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements: (i) pedestals and poles shall be fastened to the rag bolt assembly cast into the foundations, as detailed on Standard Drawing TC-1201, with the nuts tightened to 150 Nm of torque (ii) pedestals and poles shall be installed such that they are vertical when fully loaded (iii) pedestals shall not be stood within 48 hours of casting of the foundations (iv) JUP, MA and JUMA poles shall not be stood within 7 days of the casting of the foundations (v) poles shall be installed such that the access door is on the face furthest from the traffic flow.
 (b) Lanterns Lanterns shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements: (i) all traffic signal lanterns installed on any new or major remodel installation (where all lanterns are being replaced) shall be LED type (ii) for minor remodels incandescent lanterns are permitted; however, the mixing of LED with incandescent or QH lanterns is not permitted.
 (c) Installation of Hardware Hardware shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements: (i) all lanterns shall be mounted vertically, using standard straps securely fixed to mounting brackets or lugs (ii) upper mounting brackets shall be oriented and fixed to the top of pedestals in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1115
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 8 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iii) two-way and four-way lower mounting brackets shall be fixed as required to provide suitable mounting points for the installation of lanterns
 (iv) the top and bottom of each lantern must be firmly attached to ensure that it will not rotate
 (v) each lantern shall be attached so as to provide an unobstructed line of sight to the traffic which it controls, and such that the potential to be hit by vehicles is minimised
 (vi) external cables and conduits shall be fixed to pedestals, poles or supports using suitable plastic cable ties
 (vii) cable connections to lanterns shall be of sufficient length to hang below the cable entry point on the lantern, but not hang below the lower mounting strap, as shown on Standard Drawing TC-1119
 (viii) cable connections to lanterns shall be made with continuous lengths of cable; no joins shall be allowed; this will typically require the cables supplied with lanterns to be replaced with longer cables when installed on mast arm outreaches
 (ix) junction boxes, key switches, and all other electrical hardware shall comply with the relevant Australian Standards.
 (d) Lantern Mounting Heights Lantern mounting heights shall be in accordance with the following requirements: (i) mounting heights for lanterns on 2A, 2B, and 2C pedestals shall be as specified on Standard Drawing TC-1116 (ii) lanterns installed on the vertical section of an MA, JUP and JUMA shall be mounted on lugs so as to give the same mounting heights for the respective lantern positions as specified on Standard Drawing TC-1116 (iii) lanterns on the outreach of an MA or JUMA shall be mounted in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1112 (iv) 1 and 2 aspect lanterns shall be installed to achieve the mounting height of an aspect of the same colour as if it were part of a 3 aspect lantern (v) 2 aspect bicycle lanterns shall be mounted at the same height as pedestrian lanterns (vi) aspects fitted with white or lunar white lenses shall be mounted at the same height as a green aspect (vii) lanterns mounted on poles not belonging to Department of State Growth shall be mounted at the same heights as specified on Standard Drawing TC-1116 (viii) internally illuminated signs shall be mounted at a height to provide a clearance of not less than 2.4 m from the finished surface level (ix) flashing yellow signals used at pedestrian crossings shall be mounted at the height specified on Standard Drawing TC-1104.
 (e) Lantern Alignment The alignment of lanterns shall be in accordance with the following requirements: (i) vehicle lanterns shall be aligned so as to provide optimum visibility for approaching traffic considering road alignment, speed, visibility and other site characteristics
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 9 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (ii) generally, lanterns shall be aimed at a point on the centre of the approach, at a distance before the stop line as shown in Table 730.131 below
 Table 730.131 Lantern Alignment Distances
 
 Lantern
 
 Distance
 
 Primary
 
 240
 
 Secondary
 
 150
 
 Tertiary
 
 5
 
 (iii) pedestrian lanterns shall be aimed at the mid-point of the cross walk on the opposite side of the carriageway to which it applies.
 
 (f) Target Boards, Visors and Louvres All target boards shall be metal type. Target boards shall be fitted to all lanterns in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1119, noting the Tasmanian Standard includes a white border. Visors for LED Lanterns shall be fitted as specified in Table 730.132 below. Table 730.132 Visors for LED Lanterns
 
 Lantern Location MA or JUMA Outreach L/H Primary R/H Primary Secondary and Tertiary Pedestrian and Bicycle
 
 Visor Type Cutaway
 
 1
 
 Both Sides
 
 1
 
 Both Sides
 
 1
 
 Both Sides
 
 3  Short None
 
 4
 
 None
 
 Note: Refer to Standard Drawing TC-1127 for details of the visor types.
 
 Louvres shall not be installed on LED lanterns unless otherwise specified. All louvres fitted to visors shall be attached using pop rivets. Vertical louvres shall be installed where shown on the drawings, or otherwise specified.
 
 (g) Installation of Pedestrian Push Buttons
 Pedestrian push buttons shall be installed in accordance with following requirements:
 (i) pedestrian push button assemblies shall be mounted clear of any access openings and such that the centre of the button is 1.0 m above finished surface level, as shown on Standard Drawing TC-1116
 (ii) Pedestrian push button assemblies shall be mounted within proximity of ramps, preferably in ramp wings to enable reachable access
 (iii)the face of the button shall be facing the path of the walk way
 (iv)the tactile arrow indicator shall be oriented to indicate the walk direction to which the button relates, with the arrow pointing up to indicate a straight ahead walk direction
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 10 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (v) where a single button is mounted in a median, a double headed arrow plate shall be used with the arrow oriented horizontally and the front face of the button shall be parallel with the walk direction
 
 (vi)a seam of silicone sealant shall be applied between the back of the button housing and the pole to prevent the ingress of water into the pole; the sealant shall be applied across the top and on both sides of the button
 
 (vii)
 
 a label complying with Standard Drawing TC-2104 shall be installed on the
 
 pedestal or pole directly above each pedestrian push button.
 
 (h) Audio Tactile Devices
 Where specified on the drawings, audio tactile units of the type nominated shall be mounted as shown on Standard Drawing TC-1116.
 
 (i) Puffin Pedestrian Operated Signals
 Where a `Puffin' (Pedestrian User Friendly and Intelligent) Crossing is specified, the Contractor shall install approved Puffin Crossing `Walk' detectors in accordance with AS 1742 Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices  Part 14, Traffic Signals and the Austroads Guide to Traffic Management - Part 10 - Traffic Control and Communication Devices.
 
 (j) Flashing Pedestrian Crossings
 Flashing pedestrian crossings shall be installed in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1104.
 
 (k) Attachment of Equipment to Other Supports
 Attachment of traffic signal equipment to service poles or structures which are not owned by the Department of State Growth shall be by means of matt stainless steel straps, coach bolts or masonry bolts as applicable, or such other methods as approved by the relevant authority, the owner of the pole or structure and the Superintendent.
 Above ground conduits attached to structures or poles owned by other agencies shall be 25 mm diameter galvanised wrought iron conduit or steel sheathing of an approved type.
 Above ground conduits shall extend up to a termination point for the electrical cables or to a height of 3 meters whichever is the lower.
 (l) Non-Commissioned Lanterns
 The faces of all installed but not yet operating lanterns shall be covered.
 At sites that have not been switched on, all vehicle lanterns shall be covered with `NOT IN USE' signs.
 At remodel sites, or sites where existing lanterns are operating, all non-operating lanterns shall be covered with a blanking sign or may be turned so as not to be visible to traffic.
 (m) Awnings
 Where pedestals need to be installed under or through awnings or verandahs, the installation shall be in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1126.
 The Contractor shall be wholly responsible for providing and making good any holes through awnings which may be necessary for the erection of pedestals.
 Where pedestals pass through awnings, a clearance all round shall be left between the pedestal and the awning and finished such that water from the awning cannot flow into the opening.
 Any alterations to the awning shall be carried out by a qualified plumber and with the agreement of the owner of the awning.
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 11 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 730.14 ELECTRICAL SYSTEM
 All electrical works, conduits, fittings, materials and installations shall comply with the requirements of AS/NZS 3000 Wiring Rules for all traffic signal related works.
 (a) Point of Supply Point of supply for traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the following requirements: (i) the "Basic Connection Application"' shall be completed and submitted by the Principal. (ii) the Contractor shall arrange for the installation of the point of supply with TasNetworks, at the location approved at the pre-installation meeting. (iii) the main switchboard shall be the traffic signal controller's main switchboard located within the signal controller cabinet. (iv) the main switchboard shall contain a main circuit breaker and a suitably sized main fuse. This is additional to Tas Networks service fuse. (v) access to the main switchboard shall be within the traffic signal controller cabinet. (vi) where possible, the earth stake shall be installed in the base of the signal controller pit; otherwise it shall be installed in an adjacent pit (vii) the main switchboard shall contain the MEN (Multiple Earthed Neutral) link (viii) the circuit breaker controlling the traffic signals shall be clearly marked.
 The Contractor shall lodge all relevant associated documentation to comply with the requirements of the TasNetworks and WorkSafe Tasmania for the provision of a 230 v 50 Hz single phase power supply for final termination on not less than a 32 amp service fuse.
 (b) Site Cabling
 Cabling shall be installed in accordance with AS/NZS 3000:2007 and the following requirements:
 (i) only Type Approved cable shall be used (ii) inter-connecting traffic signal cables shall be drawn through the conduits and pits as
 shown on the drawings (iii) a draw cord shall be left in each conduit at the completion of the cabling (iv) a spare length of not less than 5 m of each inter-connecting cable shall be coiled in each
 cable pit (v) all cables shall be installed in a manner which ensures that sheathing and insulation are
 not damaged (vi) any cables damaged during installation or remodel works shall be immediately replaced
 by the Contractor at no additional cost to the Department of State Growth (vii) site cables shall be appropriately restrained at the point of termination (e.g. top of pedestals, access points in MAs, JUPs, etc.) to ensure that stress on terminations (due to the self weight of the cable) is minimised (viii) cables at the traffic signal controller base shall be coiled in the pit and appropriately secured (ix) sufficient cable shall be provided to reach 1.5 m above the controller base (x) no jointing of any multi-core, linking or communications cable shall be permitted.
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 12 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (c) Cable Sizes and Wiring Arrangements
 With the exception of terminations at the controller, all cables and wiring shall be installed by the Contractor and shall comply with the following requirements:
 (i) at intersection traffic signals, the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies and/or terminal assemblies (in MAs, JUMAs and JUPs) shall be connected by a 51 core cable in a continuous ring circuit arrangement in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1204
 (ii) at pedestrian operated signals (dual carriageway), the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies and/or terminal assemblies (in MAs, JUMAs and JUPs) shall be connected in sequence by a 29 core cable circuit in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1205
 (iii) at pedestrian operated signals (single carriageway), the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies and/or terminal assemblies (in MAs, JUMAs and JUPs) shall be connected in sequence by a 29 core cable circuit in accordance with Standard Drawing TC-1205
 (iv) at flashing pedestrian crossing (Zebra) signals, the control equipment and all upper mounting assemblies and/or terminal assemblies shall be connected by a 29 core cable
 (v) for spurs and flashing (red or yellow) signals, the control equipment and all upper mounting assemblies and/or terminal assemblies shall be connected in sequence by a 29 core cable branch circuit
 (vi) at ramp metering signals, the traffic signal controller and all upper mounting assemblies and/or terminal assemblies (in MAs, JUMAs and JUPs) shall be connected by a 29 core cable.
 
 (d) Cabling of Pedestrian Push Buttons
 Pedestrian push button detectors shall be connected by flexible 5 core cable (each core shall have a cross sectional area of not less than 1.5 mm) to the appropriate termination positions for the multi-core traffic signal cables.
 The termination of push button cable connections shall be as detailed in Table 730.141 below.
 Table 730.141 Pedestrian Push Button Cable Connections
 
 Core Colour
 
 Function
 
 White
 
 Push Button
 
 Blue
 
 Push Button return
 
 Brown
 
 Call Record
 
 Black Green/Yellow
 
 Call Record return Earth
 
 (e) Detector Feeder Cables
 Detector feeder cables shall be used to connect detector loops to the traffic signal controller and shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements:
 (i) detector feeder cable shall be a Type Approved 2 core or 8 core shielded cable, 1 cable per loop and each cable pair shall be clearly and durably marked at both ends to enable positive identification.
 (ii) the maximum length of any individual detector feeder cable shall not exceed 200 m.
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 13 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (iii) the Contractor shall connect the detector loop cables to the detector feeder cables in accordance with this section by the use of crimp links and resin filled heat shrink.
 (iv) the 4 wires for each individual loop (e.g. 9SA, 9FA, 9SB and 9FB as shown in Standard Drawing TC-1300) shall be tied together in a knot located close to the conduit end.
 (v) unused loop cable ends shall be left open circuit.
 (vi) all terminations, joined or unjoined, shall be separately insulated and sealed against the ingress of moisture with heat shrink containing resin or another acceptable method approved by the Superintendent.
 (vii) each detector feeder cable shall have sufficient length to allow 1.5 m to be coiled in the pit and to reach 1.5 m above the top of the controller base.
 (viii) each feeder cable shall be clearly marked or labelled to clearly identify the connected loop.
 (ix) a cable diagram shall be provided to Superintendent detailing the loop cable/feeder cable connections.
 
 (g) Miscellaneous Cabling
 
 For miscellaneous cable usage, refer to Table 730.142 below.
 
 Table 730.142 Miscellaneous Cable Usage
 
 Application
 
 Cable Type
 
 Branch circuits off a ring circuit
 
 29 core traffic signal cable
 
 Linking cable between the controller and public transport or emergency service facilities (left labelled but unterminated at the controller base)
 
 Suitable multi-core data cable or 29 core traffic signal cable
 
 (h) Cabling of Large Sites
 For large sites where the standard allocation of cores cannot be readily adopted, the Contractor shall draw up a proposed cabling scheme and submit this to the Superintendent for approval.
 Suitable arrangements for the cabling of a large site and also for a freeway diamond interchange site are shown on Standard Drawings TC-1214 and TC-1215 respectively.
 (i) Installation of Detector Loops
 The Contractor shall arrange for the installation of vehicle detector loops in accordance with the drawings.
 Vehicle detector loop installations shall conform to Specification for the Installation of Inductive Detector Loop, TCS 054.
 Where there are 2 lanes, each loop may be cut back to the same side of the road, or 1 to each side.
 Where there are 3 or more lanes, the loops shall be cut back to the closer side of the road. Table 730.143 shows some examples for typical installations.
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 14 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 730.143 Cutting of Detector Loops
 
 Number of Lanes
 
 Loops Cut
 
 Loops Cut
 
 to Left Kerb to Right Kerb
 
 3
 
 2
 
 1
 
 4
 
 2
 
 2
 
 5
 
 3
 
 2
 
 6
 
 3
 
 3
 
 Cutting loops into steel reinforced concrete bridge decks shall be avoided unless authorized by the Superintendent.
 
 (j) Electrical Works for Street Lighting and Other Services
 Where street lighting or other services areas to be installed they shall in no way be interconnected electrically with the traffic signal installation.
 
 (k) Testing of Electrical Works
 The electrical installation shall be tested for correct cabling by the Contractor.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for all testing associated with the proving of the electrical circuits in accordance with the requirements of AS/NZS 3000 Wiring Rules and AS/NZS 3017.
 
 In particular, the following tests shall be carried out prior to installation of lanterns and hardware:
 (i) continuity of all active conductors
 (ii) continuity of neutral and ELV conductors
 (iii) continuity of earthing system in accordance with Clause 8.3.3 of AS/NZS 3000
 (iv) insulation resistance test of all field cables in accordance with Clause 8.3.3 of AS/NZS 3000 wiring rules.
 
 HP
 
 The results of the above tests shall be recorded on the forms provided at the end of
 
 this section and a copy provided to the Superintendent. The Contractor shall also
 
 supply a copy of the Certificate of Electrical Compliance to the Superintendent. The
 
 Department of State Growth will not commission the installation in the absence of
 
 the CEC.
 
 Following the installation of all lanterns and hardware, the Contractor shall carry out a flash test to verify correct installation prior to the Department of State Growth performing formal testing and commissioning.
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 15 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 730.15 PUBLIC TRANSPORT AND EMERGENCY VEHICLE INTEGRATION (a) Signals at Railway Level Crossings
 The Contractor shall obtain all the necessary permits and approvals for working on and adjacent to the rail track owner's, or the railway operator's, property and equipment. Where specified on the drawings, the Contractor shall install a 10 pair approved communication cable (colour coded) between the traffic signal controller and the railway control equipment. Where traffic signals are to be installed on each side of the railway, the Contractor shall supply and install 2x 100 mm diameter conduits with draw cords as shown on the drawings and agreed by the railway track owner. The Contractor should note, one of these conduits shall be for the traffic signal ring circuit cables, the other for any ancillary site equipment.
 .(b) Co-ordination with Emergency Vehicle Operations Where specified on the drawings and in a location approved by the Superintendent and the owner of the affected properties, the Contractor shall provide a suitable cable (refer to Table 730.132) within a 50 mm conduit, between the controller and the push button in the emergency premises.
 730.16 PRE-COMMISSIONING (a) Pre-Commissioning Site Inspection
 Upon completion of the installation works, a complete pre-commissioning inspection shall be undertaken by the Contractor. The Contractor shall provide 24 hours' notice to the Superintendent of the time of the inspection. The Contractor shall complete the Pre-Commissioning Installation Report and provide it to the Superintendent. Any item found to be defective or incorrectly installed shall be replaced and/or rectified prior to commissioning. The Contractor shall advise the Superintendent if any aspect of the works has not been completed. (b) Provision of Power The Contractor shall arrange for the submission of all necessary paperwork, inspections, payment of fees, etc., other than the ongoing cost of electricity supplied, to obtain connection to mains supply. The Contractor shall advise the Superintendent when power is available at the site.
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 16 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 730.17 COMPLETION OF SITE WORKS AND COMMISSIONING
 
 (a) Switch-On
 
 The Department of State Growth shall co-ordinate the site switch-on and arrange for all involved parties to be on site.
 
 HP
 
 Prior to switching the signals on, the Department of State Growth shall carry out a
 
 `flash' test of the installation to ensure that each lantern is connected to the correct
 
 cable core. The flash test shall be witnessed by the Superintendent and confirmed
 
 as acceptable. .
 
 The Contractor shall lodge copies of all applications and notices relating to the supply of power and wiring of the site, together with the Certificate of Electrical Safety to the Superintendent.
 
 The time and date of the switch-on shall be recorded on the Controller Record Card in the controller.
 
 The Contractor is responsible for recording the time and date of switch-on and for the power consumption readings as required in the Electrical Test Report.
 
 (b) Removal of Redundant Hardware
 All redundant components of the hardware and equipment (except those components below the finished surface level at the pedestals) shall be removed unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings.
 Hardware and equipment attached to the redundant pedestals shall be removed prior to cutting off and removal of the pedestals.
 All holes and depressions formed by the cutting off and removal of pedestals and by the removal of any other items shall be made safe and reinstated to the level of the surrounding surface.
 Footpaths and paved areas shall be reinstated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 The Contractor shall be responsible for disposal of all redundant materials and hardware.
 Existing traffic signal equipment and hardware which is not re-used, but is to be salvaged, shall be delivered in good condition to a location specified by the Superintendent.
 Any disused cable pits shall be removed and backfilled to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 17 of 20)
 
 Electrical Test Report
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Site Name: Suburb/City:
 
 Site No:
 
 Core Earth Neutral ELV
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
 
 Continuity Test of All Active Cables
 
 Ohms
 
 Core
 
 Ohms
 
 Core
 
 15
 
 32
 
 16
 
 33
 
 17
 
 34
 
 18
 
 35
 
 19
 
 36
 
 20
 
 37
 
 21
 
 38
 
 22
 
 39
 
 23
 
 40
 
 24
 
 41
 
 25
 
 42
 
 26
 
 43
 
 27
 
 44
 
 28
 
 45
 
 29
 
 46
 
 30
 
 47
 
 31
 
 48
 
 Ohms
 
 Test carried out by: Signed: Print Name: Company:
 
 Date:
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 18 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Insulation Resistance Test of All Field Cables
 
 Core Neutral
 ELV 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
 
 Ohms
 
 Core 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32
 
 Ohms
 
 Core 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48
 
 Ohms
 
 Test carried out by: Signed: Print Name: Company:
 
 Date:
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 19 of 20)
 
 Site Name: Suburb/City:
 
 Department of State Growth
 Power Consumption Record
 Site No:
 
 Voltage Current Reading (minimum) Current Reading (maximum)
 Readings carried out by: Signed: Print Name: Company:
 
 Date:
 
 Department of State Growth November 2017 Section 730 (Page 20 of 20)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 733 - CONDUITS AND PITS FOR UNDERGROUND WIRING AND CABLING
 
 ##This section cross-references Section 173. If Section 173 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 173 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 733.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the supply and installation of conduits and pits, as necessary to provide for underground electrical wiring and communications cabling, as shown on the drawings, or as specified.
 
 733.02 MATERIALS
 
 (a) Conduits
 
 Unless otherwise specified, the Contractor shall provide all plastic conduits which shall comply with the following standards as appropriate:
 AS/NZS 1477, AS/NZS 2053, AS/NZS 4130
 
 Unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent, all conduits installed underground for electrical wiring, traffic signals and traffic services shall be heavy duty grade, rigid orange, UPVC conduit to AS/NZS 2053.2; or Profile wall-smooth bore HD UPVC conduit to AS/NZS 2053.6.
 
 Unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent, all conduits installed underground for communication cables shall be heavy duty grade, rigid white UPVC communication conduit complying with AS/NZS 2053.2; or Profile wall-smooth bore HD UPVC conduit to AS/NZS 2053.6; and complying with all relevant Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) publications and standards.
 
 (b) Conduit Sizes
 
 Conduit sizes shall be in accordance with the relevant utility and industry codes, regulations and standards applying to their intended use.
 
 Conduit sizes for traffic signals, street lighting and traffic services shall be in accordance with the relevant specifications, guideline and standard drawings listed in Table 733.021.
 Table 733.021
 
 Installation Type Traffic signals Street lighting Consumers mains Trunk conduit system Freeway camera site Freeway help phone site Freeway data station site
 
 Specification / Guideline / Drawing Number TCS 013, TC-1207
 TCG 006 ,TC-1207, TC-1062, TC-1071, TC-1072 TC-1206 TC-2001 TC-2011 TC-2021 TC-2031
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 733 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Bedding and Backfill Materials
 Unless otherwise specified, the Contractor shall supply all bedding and backfill material in accordance with the requirements of Clause 733.06.
 (d) Pits
 Unless otherwise specified, the Contractor shall supply all pits and lids in accordance with the requirements of Clauses 733.07 and 733.08.
 733.03 EXCAVATION, BORING AND TRENCHING
 Unless otherwise specified, all conduits under a road carriageway shall be installed by boring.
 Detailed proposals for boring under carriageways shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review two weeks prior to the programmed commencement of work.
 Unless otherwise specified, boring by water jetting will not be permitted.
 Unless otherwise specified, the annulus between the bore and the carrier-conduit shall be filled by pressure grouting.
 Unless otherwise shown on the drawings or specified, borings and trenches shall comply with the following depth requirements: (a) Where conduits are laid under carriageway pavements, the minimum cover from top of
 conduit to the pavement surface shall be 1200 mm for freeways and arterial roads, and 600 mm for local roads. The minimum cover from top of conduit to the invert level of open drains shall be 750 mm. (b) Where conduits are laid under footpaths or under unpaved areas, the minimum cover from top of conduit to the surface shall be 600 mm for low voltage circuits and 300 mm for extra low voltage circuits and communications cabling. (c) Where conduits are laid under tram tracks, the minimum cover from top of conduit to the track surface level shall be 1200 mm. (d) Where conduits are laid under railway-road crossings, the minimum cover from top of conduit to track surface level shall be 2000 mm. The conduit installation shall meet the requirements of the relevant rail authority. An underground conduit warning sign shall be installed in accordance with VicRoads Standard Drawing TC-1208.
 Open trenching shall be permitted in unpaved areas and across unpaved subgrade areas.
 Where open trench methods are accepted, the lines of trenches wherever practical, shall be straight and form the shortest link between terminals.
 Where the open trench method of crossing under a carriageway pavement is accepted, the line of the trench shall be at right angles to the carriageway, and the edges of trenches located within a road pavement shall be sawcut.
 Adequate drains to approved outlets shall be provided from junction pits.
 Trenches shall be graded to allow condensation and seepage to flow from conduits to the outlet provided.
 Any drains or services disturbed during the excavation or laying of conduits shall be immediately reported to the Superintendent and shall be reinstated promptly.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 733 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 733.04 INSTALLATION OF CONDUITS
 
 All conduits shall be installed as shown on the drawings, or as specified.
 
 All conduits for electrical and communications cabling shall be installed to conform to the relevant requirements of controlling legislation, regulations, industry codes and standards, including:
  AS/NZS 3000 Electrical installations (Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules)
  AS/ACIF S009 Installation requirements for customer cabling (Wiring Rules), and any other relevant requirements of the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA).
 
 All conduit installation works for electrical wiring and communications cabling shall be carried out by, or under the direct supervision of, appropriately registered and licensed personnel provided by the Contractor.
 
 All conduit installation works for electrical wiring shall be carried out by, or under the direct site supervision of, a licenced electrical contractor as required by theBuilding Standards and Occupational Licencing Division of WorkSafe, Tasmania. Installation of conduits shall be carried out in accordance with the approved installation method for the type of conduit as shown in Table 733.041.
 
 Table 733.041
 
 Conduit Type
 
 Installation Method
 
 HD UPVC Plain
 
 Thrust bore Open trench
 
 HD UPVC Profile wall-smooth bore (100 mm only)
 
 Open trench
 
 HDPE continuous
 
 Directional Bore
 
 (must have ID not less than that of 100 mm HD UPVC)
 
 Conduits for traffic signals and traffic services shall be installed to the following requirements:
 (a) all conduits shall terminate in a pit in accordance with VicRoads Standard Drawing TC-1207;
 (b) only one size conduit shall be used for a complete run between pits; unequal size conduits shall not be joined in the ground;
 (c) all conduits shall be temporarily sealed prior to cabling to avoid blockage;
 (d) changes in conduit direction or depth shall be made by natural set or in the case of bottom entry, by means of a swept bend; elbows or tees shall not be used;
 (e) all conduit joints shall be correctly prepared and sealed with approved solvent cement;
 (f) conduits for detector cables shall be installed as shown in VicRoads Standard Drawings TC-1207 and TC-1320; and
 (g) a 50 mm electrical (orange) conduit shall be used to convey the detector feeder cable from the detector pit to the cable pit, as shown in VicRoads Standard Drawing TC-1207.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 733 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 733.05 DRAW CORDS
 Each conduit for electrical wiring and communication cables shall be provided with one synthetic draw cord not less than 3 mm diameter and with a minimum breaking strain of 1.6 kN. Where the conduit terminates in a pit, not less than 500 mm of the draw cord shall be tied to a marker peg 25 mm x 25 mm, not less than 300 mm long, and left coiled in the pit. Where the conduit does not terminate in a pit, the draw cords shall be tied to a marker peg 100 mm x 100 mm, not less than 400 mm long, driven firmly into the ground with the top 50 mm projecting above finished surface and painted yellow.
 
 733.06 BACKFILLING
 
 (a) Material
 
 Unless otherwise specified, materials used for bedding and backfilling shall be free from perishable matter and shall conform with the appropriate grading and plasticity index requirements specified in Table 733.061.
 Table 733.061
 
 Material
 
 75.0
 
 Sieve Size - AS (mm) 37.5 19.0 2.36
 
 0.075
 
 Plasticity Index
 
 Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 Min Max
 
 Bedding
 
 -
 
 Selected backfill
 
 -
 
 Common backfill
 
 100
 
 -
 
 100
 
 -
 
 10-40 2
 
 10
 
 100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 10-40 5
 
 20
 
 -
 
 -
 
 40-100
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 Pavement material shall be as specified and shall comply with the relevant requirements of the appropriate pavement sections.
 (b) Bedding
 Bedding material shall be placed and compacted for the full width of the trench to a depth of not less than 80 mm on an earth foundation or 200 mm on a rock foundation.
 Following compaction, the bedding material shall be shaped sufficiently to maintain the conduit in line as the sections are placed in position. Shaping of bedding material is not required for conduits less than 100 mm nominal diameter.
 When conduit sections are in position, additional layers of bedding material shall be placed and compacted to a height 150 mm above the bedding previously placed.
 (c) Filling
 Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, selected and common backfill shall be placed and compacted as follows under, around, and above the conduit after the sections are bedded:
 (i) Conduits under Area to be Paved
 Where the trench has been excavated from the design subgrade level or above, the trench shall be backfilled to design subgrade level with selected backfill material, and above that level with common backfill material or the specified pavement material.
 Where the trench is excavated from below design subgrade level, the trench shall be filled with selected backfill material.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 733 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (ii) Conduits under Area not to be Paved
 The trench shall be backfilled with selected backfill material to a level of 0.4 m above the top of the conduit and with common backfill above that level.
 
 (iii) Conduits through Existing Paved Area
 Unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings, the trench shall be backfilled to the existing subgrade level with selected backfill material and the pavement restored using materials in accordance with sub-clause (e) below.
 
 (d) Compaction
 Unless otherwise specified, bedding and backfill materials shall have during compaction, a uniform moisture content within the range 85% to 115% of the optimum moisture content as determined in the Standard Compaction test. Where backfill material contains material retained on a 37.5 mm AS sieve, the Standard compactive effort will be performed on the material passing the 37.5 mm AS sieve, and during compaction the moisture content of the material passing the 37.5 mm AS sieve shall be in the range 85% to 115% of the optimum moisture content so determined.
 Bedding and backfill, the whole of which passes the 37.5 mm AS sieve, shall be compacted to refusal using hand held mechanical plant.
 Detailed proposals for the compaction of backfill materials of nominal size greater than 40 mm shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review before commencing work.
 Where specified, pavement material shall be assessed for compaction in lots as defined in Section 173. The number of tests per lot shall be three. All pavement material shall have during compaction, uniform moisture content within the range 85% to 115% of the optimum moisture content as determined in the Modified Compaction test. All pavement layers shall be placed and compacted in layers to a density ratio of not less than 98%. The calculation of density ratio shall be based on Modified compactive effort.
 
 (e) Pavement Composition ***
 Pavement Layer
 ##:
 
 Material Type
 
 Thickness (mm)
 
 733.07 CABLE PITS AND PIT LIDS Cable pits shall be constructed and installed as shown on the drawings, at the terminal of conduits, or as specified. Cable pits for traffic signal installations shall be constructed and installed in accordance with VicRoads Standard Drawings TC-1210, TC-1220 and TC-1230. Pits shall be constructed such that the level of the top of the pit lid in place matches the surrounding finished surface level. The top of the pit wall shall be neatly finished such that the lid fits without movement.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 733 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth All pits, junction boxes or terminal pits for electrical purposes shall be either watertight or suitably drained. All conduit connections to cable pits shall be neatly made and the ends of the conduits trimmed off and the area between the conduit and pit wall stopped with cement mortar. Heavy duty pit lids shall be provided where the pit is located in a road pavement. All cable pit installation works for electrical wiring and communications cabling shall be carried out by, or under the direct supervision of, appropriately registered and licenced personnel provided by the Contractor. All cable pit installation works for electrical wiring shall be carried out by, or under direct site supervision of, a registered licenced electrical contractor as required by the Building Standards and Occupational Licencing Division of WorkSafe Tasmania.
 733.08 DETECTOR PITS FOR TRAFFIC SIGNALS Detector pits for traffic signals shall be installed as shown on the drawings, or as specified. Detector pits and detector pit covers shall be constructed and installed in accordance with VicRoads Standard Drawings TC-1310 and TC-1320. The pit cover shall be securely fixed to the pit using the fixing device supplied. Detector pits shall be located so as to ensure adequate separation between pits and other features such as expansion joints, drainage, electrical or communication pits, culverts, etc.
 733.09 CLEANING OF SITE Surplus excavated material shall be removed from the road reserve. Areas affected by the work shall be restored to a condition similar to that which existed prior to the commencement of the work.
 733.10 IDENTIFICATION AND RECORDING All conduit locations not identified by pits immediately installed at the ends shall be marked with 75 x 38 mm stakes projecting 0.4 m above the ground, with the top 150 mm painted yellow stakes, or as otherwise agreed by the Superintendent. Conduits under road pavement shall be marked with stakes clear of the road pavement. Conduits not under road pavement shall be marked with stakes at the ends, at changes of direction , and at intervals of not more than 30 m. This staking will be additional to any marker pegs to which draw cords are tied. Unless otherwise specified, the actual installed location and depth of conduits, and location of pits, shall be accurately recorded on as-constructed drawings in a format agreed by the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 733 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 SECTION 765 - NOISE ATTENUATION WALLS
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 ##This section cross-references Sections 173, 204, 610, 630, 631, 685 and 686. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 
 765.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for the supply of materials and the erection of noise attenuation walls (noise walls).
 
 765.02 GENERAL
 
 (a) The following shall be as shown on the drawings: (i) type of noise wall (ii) acoustic requirements
 (iii) protective coatings (iv) foundation details.
 
 (b) The structural design of the noise wall shall be as described in Bridge Technical Note BTN1999-006 Noise Barriers.
 
 (c) Timber posts shall not be used.
 
 (d) If an existing fence or noise wall is being replaced, existing timber posts shall be removed.
 
 (e) Openings in noise walls for inspection, maintenance and emergency access shall be provided in the position and of the size and type shown on the drawings.
 
 (f) The design life of noise panels and their fasteners and fixings shall be as follows:
 
 (i) posts and other structural components 50 years
 
 (ii) panels, panel fixings and fasteners
 
 30 years
 
 (g) If construction of the noise wall requires access over or work adjacent to a landscaped area, the Contractor shall take steps to minimise damage to vegetation. The Contractor must submit to the Superintendent a methodology for avoiding damage to vegetation.
 
 (h) If a noise wall is located on or adjacent to a private property boundary, the Contractor shall ensure that there is no damage to private property including gardens, vegetation and garden furniture. Any damage to private property shall be repaired by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 
 765.03 NOISE WALL MATERIALS
 All materials shall be supplied by the Contractor and comply with the following:
 (a) Steel for Posts and Panels Steel posts and other steel components shall be: (i) compliant with the Australian Standard for Structural steel - hot rolled bars and sections (ii) compliant with the Australian Standard for Cold-formed structural steel hollow sections (iii) the grade specified on the drawings
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 1 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (iv) supplied and fabricated in accordance with Section 630 (v) galvanised in accordance with:
  the Australian Standard for Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles
  Section 631. On completion of galvanising, components shall receive decorative coatings and finishes as specified on the drawings and/or in the landscape architectural design brief.
 Galvanised components that have been damaged or cut shall be repaired with a minimum of two coats of inorganic zinc-rich paint in accordance with the Australian Standard for Paints for steel structures - Inorganic zinc silicate paint and the Australian Standard for Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles and in accordance with Section 631.
 After repair of the galvanising, damaged paint coatings shall be repaired in accordance with Section 631.
 (b) Concrete for Foundations
 Concrete for foundations shall be grade VR330/32 in accordance with Section 610.
 (c) Concrete Panels
 Concrete panels shall have sufficient strength to resist the loads to which they will be subjected including the self-weight of other panels and the imposed loads due to earth pressure and other load-effects due to thermal expansion, handling and accidental impact.
 (d) Transparent Panels (i) Panels shall be as specified on the drawings. (ii) Panels shall have a minimum thickness of 20 mm.
 (iii) If panel sizes are specified, the dimensions are deemed to be at a material temperature of 25C. The Contractor shall make allowance for temperature variations.
 (iv) Coloured or tinted transparent panels shall be as described on the drawings or in the architectural design brief.
 (v) Materials shall be scratch and fade-resistant. (vi) The physical properties of transparent materials shall be stable when subjected to
 sunlight, atmospheric gases and liquids such that the panel will retain sufficient strength and rigidity to meet the requirements of the design for the duration of the design life. (vii) Recycled products may be used provided that their physical properties comply with this section.
 (e) Plywood Panels
 Plywood panels shall be: (i) compliant with the Australian Standard for Plywood - Structural (ii) made with structural plywood of the stress grade described on the drawings but not less than stress grade F14
 (iii) made with B-quality softwood face and back veneers (iv) compliant with the shape and dimensional requirements stated in the Australian
 Standard for Plywood - Structural (v) free of spurs and splinters
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 2 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (vi) consistent in texture and appearance (vii) of minimum density 18 kg/m (viii) branded in accordance with the Australian Standard for Plywood  Structural.
 (f) Preservative Treatments of Panels
 Copper chromium arsenic (CCA) preservatives shall not be used.
 (i) Preservative treatments for panels shall be:  compliant with the Australian Standard Specification for preservative treatment Plywood  applied before construction  applied to areas of timber revealed by cross cuts such as holes, notches and rebates in accordance with the manufactures recommendations.
 (ii) The lowest panel together with any panel in contact with the ground is to be veneertreated to hazard level 4 in accordance with the Australian Standard Specification for preservative treatment Plywood. All other plywood is to be treated to hazard level 3.
 (iii) Veneer treatment shall be compatible with the specified stain finish.
 (iv) Panels shall be re-dried or air-dried to a moisture content of less than 18 per cent after preservative treatment to ensure dimensional stability prior to erection.
 Treated timber shall not be re-sawn, dressed, planed or modified except as required at specified points for fitting or joining.
 HP The Contractor shall submit to the Superintendent preservation and grading certificates from the treatment plant showing chemical retention, penetration of the preservation and compliance with the requirements of the Australian Standard Specification for preservative treatment - Plywood before delivery of material to the site commences. Methods of analysis and testing of the material must comply with the Australian Standard.
 (g) Fire Resistance
 Panels shall have a low ignitability defined as an ignitability index less than 5 in accordance with the Australian Standard for methods for fire tests on building materials, components and structures and a low spread of flame (defined as a spread of flame index less than 3 in accordance with the Australian Standard).
 Materials for fire retardants for plywood shall be water-based and non-toxic.
 (h) Fittings and Fastenings
 (i) All fittings and fasteners shall have a 30 year design life and shall be suitable for external use in moderate industrial or marine environments (corrosivity categories C2 and C3 classified in accordance with ISO 9223).
 (ii) Channels shall be galvanised in accordance with the Australian Standard for Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles.
 (iii) The use of self-tapping screws is not permitted.
 (iv) Panels shall not be drilled.
 (v) Panels shall be mounted in metal channels fixed to the posts which shall include rubber or similar gaskets to grip the panels but have sufficient freedom to allow their normal range of thermal expansion and contraction without damage to the panel or posts.
 (vi) Fasteners for connections between channels and structural members shall be of grade 316 stainless steel that complies with ATIC-SP39 Fasteners for Structural Purposes.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (i) Coatings
 Anti-graffiti coatings shall comply with Section 685 and the following requirements: (i) clear-film type sacrificial anti-graffiti coatings shall not be used (ii) liquid sacrificial anti-graffiti coatings are permitted provided that the coating is soluble in warm water
 (iii) coating shall be clear (iv) coating shall be applied to the extent described on the drawings or in the specification.
 Decorative coatings shall be as shown on the drawings and/or the architectural design brief and shall comply with Section 686 and shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
 In addition to the directions and application rate recommended by the manufacturer:  prior to applying the stain, the panels must be clean, free of dust, and free of dirt  the designated colours for both front and rear panels shall be stained over the full width
 and height of the panel, including the edges  the first coat shall be an undiluted full and generous flood-coat  a minimum 24 hours drying time shall be allowed following the application of the first coat
 prior to application of the second coat.
 HP The Contractor shall submit colour samples and proposed arrangement to the Superintendent for approval not less than two weeks prior to application to the noise walls. These samples shall be applied to the specified noise wall panel material and shall be a minimum of one square metre. Each sample shall show all separate stages of coating.
 (j) Recycled Materials
 HP Noise attenuation panels made from recycled and recovered materials are permitted subject to approval by the Superintendent. The following details shall be submitted for review by the Superintendent not later than 12 weeks prior to the intended use of the panels. If requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall submit documents that allow materials to be traced, including:
 (i) the composition of the materials including the systematic name of each material component and the percentage by weight in the finished product
 (ii) the proportion of recycled and recovered materials in the finished product. Definitions shall be taken from the Australian Standard for Environmental labels and declarations Self-declared environmental claims (Type II environmental labelling)
 (iii) laboratory analysis of the finished material that demonstrates the composition (iv) the source of the component materials including the state of origin (v) full description of the process of recycling and recovery and combination of the materials
 including the type of machinery involved and the source, type and quantity of energy required by weight to produce the finished product (vi) test results that demonstrate the density of the recycled material (vii) test results that demonstrate the acoustic properties of the finished panel (viii) test results that demonstrate the strength of the material in the finished panel (ix) test results that demonstrate the transparency and translucence of the finished panel (x) test results that demonstrate the stability of the physical properties of the finished product over the required design life when exposed to sunlight and weathering
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 4 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (xi) test results that demonstrate the linear coefficient of expansion of the material (xii) the method of fixing the panel (xiii) the proposed size of the finished panel.
 All testing shall be conducted by a NATA accredited (or equivalent) laboratory in accordance with Australian Standards to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 (k) Other Materials
 Materials other than those described above may be permitted as follows:
 HP If the Contractor proposes the use of alternative materials for posts and panels, full details of the strength, durability, acoustic properties, appearance and other physical properties of the proposed material shall be submitted to the Superintendent for approval not less than 12 weeks prior to the intended use of the material.
 The Contractor shall supply test certificates that demonstrate compliance with the specified requirements. Testing shall be conducted using Australian Standard test methods in a NATA approved or equivalent laboratory. If requested by the Superintendent, the Contractor shall submit documents that allow materials to be traced to their point of origin.
 765.04 CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION OF NOISE WALLS
 (a) General
 Noise walls shall be free of holes or gaps.
 (b) Set Out of Noise Wall
 Noise walls shall be located in accordance with the drawings.
 HP If the Contractor proposes an alternative alignment, details of the alternative shall be submitted to the Superintendent for approval not less than four weeks prior to commencement of works.
 (c) Post Holes
 HP Prior to boring post holes the Contractor shall review their location with the Superintendent. The Contractor must seek the Superintendent's approval of any proposed relocations.
 Post holes shall be in the locations shown on the drawings.
 Post holes shall be covered at all times until the post has been installed.
 Unsuitable or excess excavated material shall be removed from site on completion of the works.
 (d) Foundations
 The size, type and depth of foundations shall be as shown on the drawings.
 Excavation for foundations shall be as shown on the drawings and shall comply with Section 204.
 Excavation for noise wall foundations shall include all excavation necessary to provide the specified depth of bedding, working space and space required for filling, including the removal and replacement of unsuitable material. The foundations shall be test rolled in accordance with Section 173.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 5 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Soft or wet material that does not achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings or does not pass the test rolling shall be treated as unsuitable material. Unsuitable material shall be excavated and replaced with 40 mm Class 3 crushed rock or cement treated crushed rock compacted in layers not exceeding 150 mm to achieve the required ground bearing pressure stated on the drawings. Replacement material shall comply with the requirements of Section 812.
 If the foundation is in rock, all loose rock, unsound material or water shall be removed and the surface shall be brought to the required level with blinding concrete.
 HP Prior to the placement of reinforcement and posts, the Contractor shall review the excavation for compliance with the specified requirements and shall inform the Superintendent of any unsuitable soil conditions.
 Cast-in-place concrete surrounding foundation posts shall be brought to a level surface 100 mm above the finished surface level and shall then be tapered for a minimum distance of 300 mm from the base of the post to ensure that water drains away from the foundation.
 (e) Installation of Posts
 Posts shall be straight and vertical with a tolerance of 1 in 100 of the height of the post.
 Where the design requires non vertical or curved posts these shall be erected to the required angle or profile with a tolerance of 1 in 100 of the height of the post.
 Tops of adjacent posts shall be level or to the grade line on the drawings with a tolerance of  10 mm.
 (f) Installation of Panels
 Panels dimensions shall be to the sizes shown on the drawings with a tolerance of  5 mm in each dimension.
 Adjacent panels of stepped or sloping walls shall be stepped equally to meet the alignment of the wall or as shown on the drawings.
 Panels and planks shall be either horizontal or sloping as required on the drawings with a tolerance of  5 mm in 3 m.
 If the specified span for the panel cannot be achieved the Contractor shall submit details of the alternative panel length to the Superintendent for approval.
 HP The Contractor shall submit details of alternative panel lengths to the Superintendent not less than two weeks prior to commencing the fabrication of that section of the noise wall.
 The lowest plank, panel or units of a concrete noise wall shall be continuously supported by a plain concrete rectangular spread foundation with a minimum width of the panel thickness +300 mm, and minimum depth of 150 mm. The spread foundation shall be symmetrical about the centre of the panel unless the noise wall is on a boundary in which case the position of the spread foundation shall be adjusted.
 The concrete strip foundation shall be grade VR32/330 placed and compacted in accordance Section 610.
 Top-soil shall be removed from the plan area of the strip foundation. The excavation for the spread foundation shall be treated in accordance with Clauses 765.04(d).
 The maximum depth of soil against the lowest concrete panel shall not exceed 150 mm.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 6 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (g) Installation of Transparent Panels Transparent panels shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements: (i) all panels shall be supplied with masking film or protective sheets on both surfaces which shall not be removed until handling and installation of the panel are complete (ii) care shall be taken during the installation of panels to prevent cracking, scratching or damage (iii) panels that are cracked, scratched or damaged shall be replaced (iv) panels shall be restrained vertically at posts as detailed by the drawings.
 (h) Doors The Contractor shall install doors of the type and in the position shown on the drawings. Openings and doors shall be framed with a suitably rigid frame which shall be made from the same materials as the noise wall panels and of the same colouration. Doors shall be hung securely and fitted with a locking mechanism that can be operated from either side of the noise wall. All locks shall be Lockwood  Assa Abloy (334 Padlock Series) which will be supplied by VicRoads. The Contractor shall give the Superintendent a minimum of four weeks notice of the need for locks. Gaps at openings for doors shall be sealed to ensure minimal noise transmission.
 HP The Contractor shall submit details of the door and frame design to the Superintendent not less than two weeks prior to commencing the fabrication of that section of the noise wall.
 765.05 TEMPORARY FENCING
 During construction, the Contractor shall provided temporary mesh fencing with a minimum height of 1.8 m which shall be covered with shade cloth to secure and screen any private properties and to prevent access to the freeway reserve and/or private properties by animals, people or vehicles.
 765.06 SAFETY
 Noise walls shall be erected in a safe manner and in accordance with the requirements of the Work Health and Safety Act 2012 and all applicable Regulations under that Act.
 Subject to suitable risk assessments and hazard identification the Contractor shall: (a) employ suitable mechanical lifting devices to erect posts and panels. Mechanical lifting
 devices shall be stable, sited in a suitable location and shall be operated by experienced personnel; (b) provide temporary supporting structures to ensure stability of the noise wall during erection and assembly; (c) provide temporary access in the form of mechanical platforms and/or scaffolds if it is necessary to work at height.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 7 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth 765.07 DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS On completion of the project, the Contractor shall remove all surplus excavated and fill material, unsuitable materials and noise wall materials from the site. The site shall be left in a clean and tidy condition free from contamination. 765.08 DAMAGE TO NOISE WALL COMPONENTS The Contractor shall ensure all components are handled with care to avoid breakage, scratches and other damage. In the event that components are damaged, these shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 765 (Page 8 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 801 - SOURCE ROCK FOR THE PRODUCTION OF CRUSHED ROCK AND AGGREGATES
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 811, 818 and 820. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent. A number of standard sections are listed in Table 801.033 - if relevant those sections should also be included in the specification:
 801.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the durability, hardness and, where applicable, the polished stone value requirements of source rock used for the production of crushed rock and aggregates for engineering use. The requirements for pyroclastic rocks (scoria) are covered in Section 818 and for recycled crushed concrete in Section 820. The requirements for gravel, sand and soft or ripped rock are covered in Section 811.
 Any additional source rock requirements relevant to specific applications are covered in the appropriate product Standard Specification Sections.
 801.02 DEFINITIONS
 Assigned Los Angeles Value The assigned Los Angeles Value (LAV) is a hardness rating derived from Los Angeles Abrasion test results which is assigned to each source annually through the Source Rock Investigation Process.
 Assigned Polished Stone Value The Assigned Polished Stone Value (PSV) is a friction rating derived from Polished Stone Value test results which is assigned annually to each source (where applicable) by through the Source Rock Investigation process.
 Material Type Rock from a particular source and which is distinguishable on the basis of colour, texture, hardness, the degree of weathering and test properties.
 Non Quarry Rock Rock obtained from a location other than a quarry, or within a construction site. Non quarry rock is usually processed by an on-site portable plant but may also be taken to a nearby quarry for processing.
 Quarry Rock An in situ rock mass located in an operating quarry or a part of a quarry.
 Rock Durability Classification Classification of a material type as sound rock, marginal rock or unsound rock in terms of the durability requirements of Clause 801.03.
 Rock Type Rock is classified as igneous, metamorphic or sedimentary on the basis of the classification scheme detailed in VicRoads Code of Practice for Source Rock Investigations as specified in Section 175.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 801 (Page 1 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Source Rock The rock mass which is used or proposed to be used in the production of crushed rock or aggregate. The rock mass can be igneous, metamorphic or sedimentary rock.
 Unsound Rock
 Unsound rock is that material, whether in the source or as spalls or as crushed particles, which: (a) is soft, friable, or composed of clay or weathered rock, or which contains matter which
 degrades when alternately wetted and dried; or (b) in the case of igneous (except basic igneous) and metamorphic rock, has a Degradation
 Factor - Source Rock less than the minimum value for marginal rock specified in Table 801.032; or (c) in the case of basic igneous rock, has a Secondary Mineral Content greater than the maximum value or an Accelerated Soundness Index value less than the minimum value for marginal rock specified in Table 801.032; or (d) in the case of sedimentary rock, has a Ball Mill value greater than the maximum value for marginal rock specified in Table 801.032.
 801.03 SOURCE ROCK
 (a) General
 Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall nominate the source from which the crushed rock and aggregate will be obtained.
 Crushed rock and aggregates shall only be produced from an accredited source with a current assigned LAV hardness and, where appropriate, an assigned PSV value.
 The Quarry Operator shall engage VicRoads Technical Services to investigate and classify source rock in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice for Source Rock Investigations as specified in Section 175.
 The Superintendent's approval shall be obtained prior to changing the source of material. If at any time the Contractor proposes to obtain material from a source other than the confirmed accredited source, the Superintendent shall be notified in sufficient time so that investigations, as may be required, can be carried out before approval is given.
 If the Quarry Operator proposes to use a source rock type other than those listed in Tables 801.031 and 801.032, the Quarry Operator shall engage VicRoads Technical Services to carry out investigations as may be required and the Department of State Growth will determine whether the rock type is acceptable and will set appropriate test values.
 (b) Durability
 Source rock shall be considered sound, marginal or unsound in accordance with the provisions of Tables 801.031 and 801.032.
 (c) Hardness
 The hardness of the source rock shall be measured by a Los Angeles Abrasion test on the product and the assigned Los Angeles Value shall comply with the test values shown for the different product applications in Table 801.033.
 (d) Friction Rating
 The Polished Stone Value of the source rock shall be measured by a Polished Stone Value test on the product and the assigned Polished Stone Value shall comply with the test value shown for the different surfacing applications in Table 801.034.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 801 (Page 2 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Source rock which does not comply with the specified durability and hardness requirements but from which crushed rock and aggregates of proven satisfactory performance have been produced may be accepted for use subject to the written approval of the Superintendent.
 
 Table 801.031 Durability Requirements for Sound Rock
 
 Rock Type
 ACID IGNEOUS Granitic Rocks Other Acid Igneous INTERMEDIATE IGNEOUS Trachyte Other Intermediate Igneous BASIC IGNEOUS METAMORPHIC Hornfels Other metamorphic SEDIMENTARY Argillaceous Sediments Arenaceous Sediments
 
 Degradation Factor
 Source Rock (min)
 50 45
 50 45 -
 40 45
 -
 
 Test Value
 
 Secondary Mineral
 Content (%) (max)
 
 Accelerated Soundness
 Index (min)
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 25
 
 94
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 Ball Mill Value (max)
 -
 -
 -
 30 45
 
 Table 801.032 Durability Requirements for Marginal Rock
 
 Rock Type
 ACID IGNEOUS Granitic Rocks Other Acid Igneous INTERMEDIATE IGNEOUS Trachyte Other Intermediate Igneous BASIC IGNEOUS METAMORPHIC Hornfels Other metamorphic SEDIMENTARY Argillaceous Sediments Arenaceous Sediments
 
 Degradation Factor
 Source Rock (range)
 35-49 35-44
 30-49 35-44
 -
 20-39 30-44
 -
 
 Test Value
 
 Secondary Mineral
 Content (%) (range)
 
 Accelerated Soundness
 Index (range)
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 26-30
 
 90-93
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 -
 
 Ball Mill Value
 (range)
 -
 -
 -
 31-40 46-55
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 801 (Page 3 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** Table 801.033 Los Angeles Value (LAV) for Product Applications
 
 Los Angeles Value (max)
 
 Standard Specification Sections
 
 Source Type Rock Type
 
 404 501 702 423
 
 812
 
 815
 
 831
 
 405 520 713 715
 
 407 610
 
 802
 
 408 619 410 701 417
 
 Base
 
 Subbase
 
 Subbase
 
 Class A
 
 Class B
 
 Class C
 
 421
 
 427
 
 Quarry Rock ACID IGNEOUS
 
 Granitic Rocks
 
 30 35 40 35
 
 35
 
 40
 
 40
 
 (a)
 
 35
 
 40
 
 Other Acid Igneous 25 35 35 30
 
 30
 
 35
 
 35
 
 20
 
 25
 
 30
 
 INTERMEDIATE IGNEOUS
 
 25 35 35 30
 
 30
 
 35
 
 35
 
 20
 
 25
 
 30
 
 BASIC IGNEOUS
 
 25 35 35 30
 
 30
 
 35
 
 35
 
 20
 
 25
 
 30
 
 METAMORPHIC
 
 25 35 35 30
 
 30
 
 35
 
 35
 
 20
 
 25
 
 30
 
 SEDIMENTARY
 
 Argillaceous Sediments
 
 (a) (b) 35 25
 
 (a)
 
 25
 
 25
 
 (a)
 
 25
 
 30
 
 Arenaceous Sediments
 
 (a) (b) 35 25
 
 (a)
 
 40
 
 40
 
 (a)
 
 25
 
 30
 
 River Gravel Pebble (a) 35 35 (a)
 
 (a)
 
 35
 
 35
 
 (a)
 
 30
 
 35
 
 Calcrete
 
 (a) (a) (a) (a)
 
 (a)
 
 35
 
 35
 
 (a)
 
 30
 
 30
 
 PYROCLASTIC
 
 Scoria
 
 (a) (a) 35 (a) Refer Section 818
 
 (a)
 
 (b)
 
 (b)
 
 35
 
 Non Quarry Rock
 
 (b) (b) 35 (b)
 
 (b)
 
 35
 
 35
 
 (a)
 
 (b)
 
 30
 
 Notes: (a) Not permitted for this use (b) Not permitted for use unless otherwise accredited by VicRoads (c) `Non Quarry' Granite or Sedimentary rock shall comply with LAV values listed under quarry source rock.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 801 (Page 4 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 801.034 Polished Stone Values (PSV) for Surfacing Applications
 
 Specification Section
 
 Application
 
 Polished Stone Value (min)
 
 407 Hot Mix Asphalt
 
 Type H, HG and HP wearing course
 
 48
 
 Type V wearing course
 
 54
 
 404 Stone Mastic Asphalt
 
 Type H wearing course
 
 48
 
 405 Regulation Gap Graded Asphalt
 
 Type H wearing course
 
 48
 
 408 Sprayed Seal Treatments
 
 Class A
 
 48
 
 410 Ultra Thin Asphalt
 
 Type H wearing course
 
 48
 
 417 Open Graded Asphalt
 
 Type H wearing course
 
 48
 
 421 Bitumen Crumb Rubber Asphalt
 
 Type H wearing course
 
 48
 
 427 Bituminous Slurry Surfacing
 
 Where specified in Clause 427.24 or
 
 48
 
 wearing course where traffic volume
 
 per lane exceeds 2000 vpd
 
 831 Aggregate for Sprayed Bituminous Surfacing Class A
 
 48
 
 801.04 MINIMUM TESTING REQUIREMENTS
 The Quarry Operator shall engage VicRoads Technical Services for all inspections, investigations and testing of rock sources and source rock material types in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice for Source Rock Investigations as specified in Section 175. VicRoads will provide rock type, durability classifications, hardness values, friction ratings and reference materials as is deemed necessary for the assessment of Coarse Aggregate Quality by Visual Assessment as specified in Section 175.
 The Contractor shall ensure that all quarried products come from an accredited source in accordance with this specification.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 801 (Page 5 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 802 - BITUMINOUS COLD AND WARM MIXES
 ##This section cross-references Section 801. If Section 801 is relevant, it should be included in the specification. If Section 801 is not included in the specification, all references to it should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 802.01 GENERAL This section covers the requirements for the manufacture of Sizes 7, 10, 14 and 20 dense graded and open graded bituminous cold and warm mixes. The requirements relate to quality of aggregates and bituminous materials, mix design, and properties of product.
 802.02 DEFINITIONS Bituminous Cold Mix Bituminous cold mix is a mixture of bituminous binder with fine and coarse aggregates with or without filler. The bituminous binder may be cutback bitumen or bitumen emulsion. The material may be mixed hot or cold but is spread and compacted cold. Bituminous Warm Mix A bituminous warm mix is similar to a bituminous cold mix but is manufactured hot from a heavy grade of cutback bitumen and is used on the same day as it is mixed while the material is still warm and workable. Binder Binder is the bituminous material used to hold the mixture of aggregates together as a cohesive mass. Residual Binder Residual binder is bituminous material including any flux oil or polymer but not cutter. In the case of bitumen emulsion, it is the binder that remains after the water has separated. Assigned Los Angeles Abrasion Loss The assigned Los Angeles Abrasion Loss is a hardness rating derived from Los Angeles Abrasion Loss test results and is assigned to each source through the Source Rock Investigation Process on the basis of past test data obtained from testing products. Coarse Aggregates Coarse aggregates are aggregates retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve. Fine Aggregates Fine aggregates are aggregates passing a 4.75 mm AS sieve.
 802.03 AGGREGATES
 (a) General The combined aggregate mixture shall consist of crushed rock or crushed gravel, or a mixture of crushed rock and sand or crushed gravel and sand.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 802 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 When aggregates are crushed rock, they shall consist of clean, hard, durable angular rock fragments of uniform quality.
 
 When aggregates are crushed gravel, not less than 75% by mass of all particles shall have two or more faces produced by crushing.
 Sand aggregates shall consist of clean, hard durable grains free from lumps, clay, mica and foreign matter.
 
 (b) Source Rock
 Source rock shall comply with the requirements of Section 801 - Source Rock for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates.
 
 (c) Crushed Aggregate Products
 
 (i) The Flakiness Index of each separate sized coarse aggregate shall be as specified in Table 802.031.
 
 (ii) Unsound rock and marginal rock in that fraction of the combined mixture retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve shall not exceed the percentages specified in Table 802.031. If no facilities exist at the mixing plant to sample the combined mixture, the unsound rock and marginal rock in that fraction of each aggregate retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve shall not exceed the percentages specified in Table 802.031.
 Table 802.031
 
 Test
 
 Test Value
 
 Flakiness Index % (max)
 
 35
 
 Total of Marginal and Unsound Rock % (by mass) (max)
 
 10
 
 Unsound Rock % (by mass) (max)
 
 5
 
 (d) Crusher Fines
 
 Crusher fines shall:
 
 (i) consist of a uniformly graded product of separate particles from the crushing of rock which complies with the requirements of Clause 802.03(b);
 
 (ii) be free from lumps and aggregations;
 
 (iii) comply with the relevant requirements of Table 802.032. Table 802.032
 
 Test
 
 Test Value
 
 Degradation Factor - Crusher Fines (min)
 
 60
 
 Plasticity Index (max)
 
 3
 
 802.04 FILLER
 Filler shall comply with AS 2150 Hot mix asphalt  A guide to good practice.
 The added filler required by Clause 802.06 to be included with particular aggregate types shall be hydrated lime, portland cement or cement works flue dust.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 802 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 802.05 BITUMINOUS MATERIALS
 
 The binder to be used shall be one of the following:
 
 (a) Medium curing cutback bitumen of grade or equivalent field produced grade as shown in Table 802.051 and complying with the requirements of AS 2157 Cutback bitumen.
 
 Bitumen used for field produced cutback bitumen shall comply with AS 2008 Bitumen for pavements. The cutter shall comply with AS 3568 Oils for reducing the viscosity of residual bitumen for pavements.
 
 Table 802.051 Grades of Cutback Bitumen
 
 Standard Grade
 
 Mix Type Grade (AS 2157)
 
 % Residual
 Binder
 
 Type 2
 
 AMC 2
 
 73
 
 Type 3
 
 AMC 3
 
 79
 
 Type 4
 
 AMC 4
 
 84
 
 Type 5
 
 AMC 5
 
 89
 
 Type 6
 
 AMC 6
 
 93
 
 Field Produced Equivalent
 
 Class 170 Bitumen Parts by Volume @ 15C
 
 Cutter Parts by Volume @ 15C
 
 100
 
 37
 
 100
 
 27
 
 100
 
 19
 
 100
 
 12
 
 100
 
 7
 
 Viscosity Range (Pa.s)
 0.22 - 0.44 0.55 - 1.10 2.00 - 4.00 5.50 - 11.00 13.00 - 26.00
 
 (b) Bitumen emulsion of Grade CAM manufactured from Class 170 bitumen and complying with the requirements of AS 1160 Bitumen emulsions for construction and maintenance of pavement.
 
 802.06 MIX REQUIREMENTS
 Unless otherwise directed, the grading of the combined aggregates and the proportion of residual binder shall lie within the limits specified in Tables 802.061 and 802.062 for each size of mix specified in Clause 802.11 Schedule of Details.
 Aggregates of coarse or medium grained acidic rocks (e.g. granite, adamellite, granodiorite, quartz porphyry) shall contain not less than 1% filler as specified in Clause 802.04.
 The residual binder content shall be expressed as a percentage by mass of the total mix.
 The target grading and residual binder content for each size of mix shall be approved by the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 802 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 802.061 Grading of Combined Aggregates (including any filler)
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 Dense Graded
 
 Open Graded
 
 Size 7 Size 10 Size 14 Size 20 Size 5 Size 7 Size 10 Size 14 Size 20
 
 26.5
 
 100
 
 100
 
 19.0
 
 100 95-100
 
 100 90-100
 
 13.2
 
 100 85-100 77-90
 
 100 90-100 50-90
 
 9.5
 
 100 90-100 70-85 58-74 100 100 90-100 40-75 30-65
 
 6.70 90-100 70-85 57-74 45-60
 
 85-100 30-75 10-35 10-35
 
 4.75
 
 70-90 54-70 45-65 37-50 85-100 30-70 20-55 5-25
 
 5-25
 
 2.36
 
 45-60 35-50 28-45 22-36 10-40 10-40 5-30
 
 0-10
 
 0-10
 
 1.18
 
 26-45 22-38 15-30 12-26 0-10 0-20 0-10
 
 0.600 15-30 12-27 10-23 6-20
 
 0-10
 
 0.300 10-20 6-16
 
 5-17
 
 4-15
 
 0.150
 
 4-14 4-11
 
 3-11
 
 2-10
 
 0.075
 
 3-8
 
 2-6
 
 2-5
 
 1-5
 
 0-2 0-4
 
 0-4
 
 0-4
 
 0-4
 
 Table 802.062 Proportion of Combined Aggregates and Residual Binder
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 Size 7
 
 Percentage Passing (by mass)
 
 Dense Graded
 
 Open Graded
 
 Size 10 Size 14 Size 20 Size 5 Size 7 Size 10 Size 14
 
 Size 20
 
 Aggregates
 
 95.2-94.2 95.8-94.8 96.0-95.0 96.3-95.3 96.0-95.0 96.0-95.0 96.5-95.5 96.5-95.5 97.0-96.0
 
 Residual Binder 4.8-5.8 4.2-5.2 4.0-5.0 3.7-4.7 4.0-5.0 4.0-5.0 3.5-4.5 3.5-4.5 3.0-4.0
 
 Total Mix
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 100
 
 Unless otherwise specified or directed the type of cutback bitumen mix shall be supplied to meet the requirements of Table 802.063.
 
 Table 802.063
 
 Mix Type
 
 Description and Season for Use
 
 Ambient Temperature for Use C
 
 Minimum Overnight Temperature (C) for Stockpiling
 
 Type 2 Cold Mix (Winter)
 
 5 - 10
 
 0
 
 Type 3 Cold Mix (Spring/Autumn)
 
 10 - 20
 
 5
 
 Type 4 Cold Mix (Summer)
 
 20 - 30 (Cold Mix)
 
 15
 
 Warm Mix (Winter)
 
 5 - 10 (Warm Mix)
 
 Type 5 Cold Mix (Hot weather only) Warm Mix (Spring/Autumn)
 
 >30 (Cold Mix) 10 - 20 (Warm Mix)
 
 Not suitable
 
 Type 6 Warm Mix (Summer)
 
 >20 (Warm Mix)
 
 Not suitable
 
 The Superintendent may approve the addition of up to 5 parts of Flux Oil for cutback bitumen mixes required for extended stockpiling periods for up to 4 weeks and for very cold weather conditions.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 802 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 802.07 BINDER QUALITY
 Cutback bitumen that has been stored at elevated temperatures for more than 1 week shall be tested for compliance with Clause 802.05 and if necessary adjusted by the addition of cutter and subsequent circulation to produce a homogeneous mixture.
 
 802.08 MIXING AND MIXING TEMPERATURES
 
 The temperature of the aggregates and cutback bitumen at the time of mixing shall be sufficiently high to permit mixing as specified.
 
 At no time shall temperatures of materials exceed the following:
 
 Class 170 Bitumen
 
 185C
 
 Cutback Bitumen
 
 See Table 802.081
 
 Aggregates Delivered into Mixer
 
 Shall not exceed the maximum temperatures of the relevant cutback bitumen used or 100C for bitumen emulsion binder.
 
 At the time of mixing the temperature of the cutback bitumen shall be within the range specified in Table 802.081.
 
 Table 802.081
 
 Grade of Cutback Bitumen
 
 Binder Temperature
 
 Mixing Range
 C
 
 Maximum Storage
 Temperature C
 
 AMC 2
 
 60 - 80
 
 100
 
 AMC 3
 
 75 - 95
 
 115
 
 AMC 4
 
 90 - 115
 
 135
 
 AMC 5
 
 100 - 125
 
 150
 
 AMC 6
 
 120 - 145
 
 160
 
 The combined aggregates, including filler, and binder shall be thoroughly mixed in the correct proportions until at least 90% of the coarse aggregate particles are fully coated.
 Except for bitumen emulsion mixes the moisture content of the mix shall not exceed 1.5%.
 A maximum moisture content of 2.5% may be permitted by the Superintendent provided that an approved adhesion agent is added to the binder at the rate of 0.5% by mass of binder.
 
 802.09 BITUMINOUS COLD OR WARM MIX RECYCLED FROM RECLAIMED ASPHALT PAVEMENT
 Unless otherwise specified, Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement may be re-cycled by adding it to new mix during the mixing process subject to the requirements of this clause being met.
 All cold and warm mixes Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement shall comply with all aspects of Section 802 for the size and type of mix specified for use.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 802 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement shall consist of milled or excavated asphalt pavement free of foreign material such as unbound granular base, broken concrete or other contaminants and shall be crushed and screened to a maximum size not exceeding the size of mix produced.
 The manufacturing process shall provide for addition of Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement to a batch plant pugmill or drum mixer separately from other mix components by a method that avoids damage to the mix by overheating.
 
 802.10 FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION AND TESTING AT THE MIXING PLANT
 
 The Contractor shall test production at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that all material supplied under the Contract complies with specified requirements. The frequency shall not be less than that shown in Table 802.101, except that the Superintendent may agree to a lower frequency where the Contractor has implemented a system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that such lower frequency is adequate to assure the quality of the product.
 Table 802.101
 
 Checks Required
 
 Minimum Frequency
 
 Scrutiny for segregation, uncoated particles, separated Each loaded truck bitumen, excess bitumen or overheating before despatch from the plant
 
 Temperature of asphalt before despatch from the plant Each loaded truck or at intervals of 15 minutes if more than one truck is despatched in 15 minutes
 
 Unsound Rock Content
 
 One test on each component of coarse aggregate per day
 
 Degradation Factor - Crusher Fines
 
 At monthly intervals
 
 Plasticity Index of crusher fines
 
 At monthly intervals
 
 Flakiness Index of coarse aggregate 10 mm and larger At monthly intervals
 
 Bitumen Content and full Sieve Analysis of asphalt (full extraction test)
 
 One test per day
 
 The Contractor shall make available for inspection at the plant all work sheets and results of checks carried out.
 
 802.11 SCHEDULE OF DETAILS ***
 
 Mix Type
 
 Nominal Size (mm)
 
 Dense Graded (tonne)
 
 Cutback Bitumen - Cold/Warm Mixes
 
 Type 2
 
 ##:
 
 Type 3
 
 Type 4
 
 Type 5
 
 Type 6
 
 Bitumen Emulsion - Cold Mixes
 
 CAM
 
 Other
 
 Open Graded (tonne)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 802 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 811 - GRAVEL, SAND AND SOFT OR RIPPED ROCK FOR PAVEMENT BASE AND SUBBASE
 811.01 DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for naturally occurring or partly processed gravel, scoria tuff, sand and soft or ripped rock, including mixtures thereof and materials to be broken to size on the roadbed.
 811.02 DEFINITIONS Gravel Gravel is a naturally occurring mixture of angular or rounded rock fragments substantially retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve, with or without some finer material, and all passing a 75 mm AS sieve. Scoria and Tuff Scoria and tuff are pyroclastic materials which generally form unconsolidated deposits which are rippable and require minimal processing. Sand Sand is a product of rock weathering substantially passing a 4.75 mm AS sieve, and is generally siliceous and free from appreciable quantities of clay and silt. Soft or Ripped Rock Soft or ripped rock is rock extracted from a deposit without blasting and not requiring processing through a crushing plant for reduction of size.
 811.03 MATERIAL SOURCE Prior to the commencement of work, the Contractor shall confirm the source from which the material will be obtained.
 811.04 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES AND GRADINGS The material shall meet the relevant requirements of Tables 811.041 and 811.042 and shall be free from vegetable matter and lumps or balls of clay or other deleterious matter. Where specified by means of a cross (+) in Table 811.042 the Contractor shall supply to the Superintendent for approval, grading figures to indicate the average grading of the material proposed for supply. The approved average grading shall become the target grading for material to be supplied. The permitted range of grading about the target is specified in Table 811.043. All material supplied shall comply with the grading limits.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 811 (Page 1 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 *** Table 811.041 Physical Properties
 
 Type of Material and Use (Base or Subbase)
 
 All Passing Liquid Sieve Size Limit AS (mm) (%/max)
 
 Plasticity Index
 (min) (max)
 
 Ball Mill (max)
 
 Plasticity Index
 % passing 0.425 mm
 (max)
 
 California Bearing Ratio * (%/min)
 
 ##:
 
 * Value applicable to material passing 19.0 mm sieve: initially at optimum moisture content and 98% of maximum dry density as determined by test using Modified compactive effort, but then soaked for 4 days prior to the CBR test.
 
 *** Table 811.042 Grading Requirements (percentage passing by mass)
 
 Type of
 
 Sieve Size - AS Sieve (mm)
 
 Material
 
 And Use
 
 (Base or 150 75 37.5 26.5 19.0 13.2 9.50 4.75 2.36 0.425 0.075
 
 Subbase)
 
 ##:
 
 + Contractor shall supply to the Superintendent for approval, grading figures to indicate the average grading of material proposed for supply.
 
 Table 811.043 Permitted Range of Grading
 
 Sieve Size AS (mm)
 
 Permitted Range of Grading  (%, by mass)
 
 150, 75, 37.5
 
 20
 
 26.5, 19.0, 13.2, 9.50, 4.75, 2.36
 
 15
 
 0.425
 
 10
 
 0.075
 
 5
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 811 (Page 2 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 If the Contractor proposes to use scoria or scoria blends, the source of the scoria shall have an assigned Los Angeles Value not exceeding that specified in Table 811.044.
 
 Table 811.044 Scoria Source Rocks, Hardness Requirements
 
 Pavement Assigned Los Angeles Value
 
 Course/Layer
 
 (maximum)
 
 Base
 
 40
 
 Upper Subbase
 
 45
 
 Lower Subbase
 
 50
 
 If at any time the contractor proposes to obtain scoria from another source without an assigned LA value the Superintendent shall be notified in sufficient time to allow a quarry investigation to be completed prior to the commencement of delivery.
 
 811.05 ADDITION OF WATER
 Water added to the product shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils, salts, acids, alkalis and vegetable substances. Water supplied from sources where dissolved salts are known or likely to be present shall be tested for electrical conductivity prior to use. The electrical conductivity shall not be more than 3500 S/cm. Water sources classified by the relevant Water Authority as potable water shall be exempt from this requirement.
 
 811.06 MATERIAL SUPPLIED TO STOCKPILE
 If the Contractor elects or is required to supply the material to stockpile prior to delivery to the roadbed the following requirements shall be met:
 (a) the product, after recovery from the stockpile, complies with this specification;
 (b) the stockpile site is clean, adequately paved, and well drained;
 (c) if a stockpile is constructed in more than one layer, each layer is fully contained within the area occupied by the upper surface of the preceding layer;
 (d) the surface of the stockpile shall be kept damp to prevent a net loss of moisture and to minimise the generation of airborne dust.
 
 811.07 MINIMUM TESTING REQUIREMENTS
 
 The Contractor shall test the material at a frequency which is sufficient to ensure that all material supplied under the contract complies with the specified requirements. The frequency shall not be less than that shown in Table 811.071, except that the Superintendent may agree to a lower frequency where the Contractor has implemented a system of statistical process control and can demonstrate that such lower frequency is adequate to assure the quality of the product.
 *** Table 811.071 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Test
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Grading
 
 ##:
 
 Plasticity Index
 
 ##:
 
 Ball Mill
 
 ##:
 
 California Bearing Ratio ##:
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 811 (Page 3 of 3)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 812 - PRODUCTION OF CRUSHED ROCK FOR PAVEMENT BASE AND SUBBASE
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 304, 801 and 818. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If they are not included, all references to those sections should be struck out, to ensure that the remaining text is still coherent.:
 812.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the production requirements for crushed rock produced from a variety of raw feed sources including quarries, crushed concrete, Newer Basalt Surface Spalls (NBSS) and blended crushed rock mixes containing supplementary materials.
 The section specifies the requirements for plant mixed wet-mix crushed rock products including 20 mm nominal size Classes 1 and 2 base, 20 mm and 40 mm nominal size, Class 3 upper subbase and for Class 4 lower subbase.
 The material class, pavement course use and nominal sizes shall be as specified in the special clauses and/or the drawings and/or the schedule.
 Sources from which crushed rock can be produced for base and subbase are specified in Section 801 - Source Requirements for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates.
 Requirements for crushed pyroclastic rocks (Scoria) are covered in Section 818 - Crushed Scoria for Pavement Base and Subbase.
 Construction requirements for unbound flexible pavements incorporating crushed rock products are covered in Section 304 - Construction of Unbound Flexible Pavements.
 Section 175 details the relevant references to Australian Standards (AS), Test Methods and Codes of Practice referenced in this section.
 812.02 DEFINITIONS
 Crushed Rock
 A crushed rock is a material composed of graded coarse and fine aggregate components produced by the crushing, scalping and screening of a raw rock feed source, Newer Basalt Surface Spalls (NBSS) and/or crushed concrete, and may also be a blend of components which includes limited quantities of supplementary materials.
 Crushed Rock Class
 For the purpose of this specification, Crushed Rock products are to be supplied in various classes broadly defined as follows:
 Class 1 is a premium cohesive pavement base material for unbound pavements where a very high standard of surface preparation for a sprayed sealed or thin asphalt surfacing is required. It has a minimum plasticity index requirement and will likely have additional requirement for maximum permeability when used for heavy duty unbound pavements. Class 2 is a high quality pavement base material for unbound flexible pavements in locations where a very high standard of surface preparation may not be required. Class 2 crushed rock product does not have a minimum plasticity index or a maximum permeability requirement. Recycled materials are permitted for Class 2 crushed rock.
 
 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 812 (Page 1 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Class 3 is a high quality upper subbase material for heavy duty unbound flexible pavements. It may have a minimum permeability requirement to provide positive drainage to the sub-surface drains and overlying unbound pavement layer. Where specified, Class 3 may be used as base for lightly trafficked pavements provided the material produces sufficient cohesive fines during compaction. Recycled materials are permitted for Class 3 crushed rock. Class 4 is a lower subbase material for heavy duty unbound and/or bound pavements or a subbase material for most other types of pavements. It may have a maximum permeability requirement. Recycled materials are permitted for Class 4 crushed rock.
 Plant Mixed Wet-Mix Crushed Rock (PMWMCR)
 Plant mixed wet-mix crushed rock is a mixture of crushed rock and water, produced at a controlled mixing plant to close tolerances of moisture content based on the modified optimum moisture content of the material.
 Recycled Material
 Materials obtained from a construction and/or demolition site which are crushed and reprocessed to produce a crushed rock or a supplementary material.
 Supplementary Material
 A durable material added to a crushed rock to improve the workability and physical properties.
 
 812.03 MATERIAL SOURCE
 Crushed rock manufactured at a quarry or non-quarry site shall not be used until the material source has been investigated and accredited in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice for Source Investigations RC500.00 as listed in Section 175.
 Material sources used in the production of crushed rock shall comply with the relevant requirements of Section 801 - Source Requirements for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates.
 
 812.04
 
 CRUSHED ROCK MIX REGISTRATION
 
 Crushed rock mixes proposed for use on specified works shall be registered in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice for Registration of Crushed Rock Mixes RC500.02 as listed in Section 175.
 
 All mix designs registered with the Department of State Growth are issued a status according to compliance as:
 
 General
 
 The requirements of VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02 have been met.
 
 Conditional Mixes which do not comply in all respects with the requirements of the Code of Practice but which are considered appropriate for use subject to conditions attached to the registration.
 
 Expired
 
 A mix which has passed the expiry date, but mix details are retained for record purposes.
 
 Withdrawn Withdrawn from use because of unsatisfactory field performance but details are retained for record purposes.
 
 HP All crushed rock proposed for use on Department of State Growth funded works shall be current registered mixes in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02 and conform to specified requirements applicable to that class of product.
 
 Section 812 (Page 2 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Department of State Growth
 The supplied registered mix shall not be changed unless the Superintendent has been advised of the change and given written approval.
 Crushed rock mixes registered as "Conditional" shall not be used unless the Superintendent has been advised of any mix registration conditions and approved the mix for use.
 Approval of a registered crushed rock mix for use under the Contract does not guarantee the handling properties or performance of the mix nor relieve the Contractor from contractual obligations in regards to rectification of defects.
 812.05 COMPONENTS
 (a) Coarse and Fine Aggregates
 Coarse and fine aggregates shall consist of clean, hard, durable, angular fragments of uniform quality.
 If all or part of the fine aggregate is produced from a different source or location and/or is separately added into the production process, the combined fraction of fine aggregates shall be tested for Degradation Factor  Fine Aggregate as listed in Section 175.
 The Degradation Factor  Fine Aggregate of a sample of the combined fine aggregates, shall not be less than 60. The frequency of testing shall be as specified in Table 812.121.
 (b) Supplementary Materials
 Supplementary materials shall only be incorporated in a crushed rock as a part of a registered crushed rock mix. Supplementary materials which are non durable or subject to appreciable breakdown will not be permitted.
 The amount of any supplementary materials (e.g. crushed rock/concrete, brick, glass, clayey sand and clay filler etc.) used shall not exceed the maximum allowable percentage of the total dry mass of the crushed product as specified in the registered crushed rock mix.
 Supplementary materials included in a registered crushed rock mix shall be:
 (i) non-cementitious in nature except for lime added under the provision of Clause 812.06(d);
 (ii) free of any organic matter; and screened, if necessary to remove all oversize particles, lumps and balls of clay or particles exceeding 4 mm in the case of a clayey filler;
 (iii) stored and maintained in a dry and free flowing state and added to the product as a separate component at any stage after completion of primary crushing;
 (iv) distributed into the product by a method that is capable of verifying that the predetermined distribution rate has been achieved;
 (v) uniformly mixed through the product by use of a pugmill.
 (c) Blending of Products Containing Coarse Aggregates
 The blending of two or more crushed rock products containing coarse aggregates from different sources or rock types will only be permitted as a part of a registered crushed rock mix. The submitted crushed rock mix shall clearly state the proportions by mass retained on each sieve for each component type that will be used in the blend.
 
 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 812 (Page 3 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 A crushed rock mix containing a blend of coarse aggregates shall be subject to the following conditions:
 (i) each component of the crushed rock blend shall individually comply with the applicable requirements of Department of State Growth Standard Section 801 and Code of Practice RC500.02, unless otherwise approved bythe Department of State Growth;
 (ii) all material to be blended shall be fully crushed and screened to the maximum aggregate size permitted in the product prior to blending;
 (iii) all coarse and fine aggregates in the blend shall comply with the relevant requirements of Clause 812.05(a);
 (iv) if the blend has not been subjected to field placement and compaction, the Contractor shall prove that the material is capable of consistently meeting all requirements of relevant specifications;
 (v) where a suitable blend has been registered as a crushed rock mix, the total proportions by mass of each rock type in the blend shall not be varied by more than + or - 5% by mass.
 812.06 CRUSHED ROCK PRODUCT
 
 (a) Crushed Rock in Stockpile
 Crushed rock in stockpile shall comply with all applicable test requirements for that class of crushed rock product, as set out in VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02 and this standard section. Crushed rock shall be tested in accordance with the frequencies specified in Table 812.121.
 
 (b) Permeability
 Where permeability values are specified; the crushed rock shall comply with the values listed below in Table 812.061.
 
 ***
 
 Table 812.061 Permeability Test Requirements ##(in the table below, delete #
 symbols and insert required value - if not applicable insert `not applicable', refer Guide Notes Clause 812.06 for further information):
 
 Test Permeability (m/sec) (+)
 
 Class 1
 5 x 10-8 (max.)
 
 Test Value
 
 Class 2 Class 3
 
 -
 
 (******) (min.)
 
 Class 4
 # (max.)
 
 (+) Value applicable to material passing 19.0 mm sieve: initially at optimum moisture content and 98% of maximum dry density as determined by test using Modified compactive effort. The Contractor shall provide to the Superintendent the target grading and Plasticity Index required to satisfy the specified permeability requirement.
 
 (*****)
 
 The permeability of Class 3 crushed rock shall be a minimum value
 
 which complies with conditional formula presented below.
 
 The maximum permeability values for Class 1 and Class 4 crushed rock as specified in Table 812.061 shall not be exceeded, unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 812 (Page 4 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The minimum permeability value (m/sec), p3, for the Class 3 crushed rock shall comply with the following:
 p1 < p3  5 x p4
 where: p1 is the permeability value (m/sec) for the Class 1 crushed rock based on the lowest of either the value provided in Table 812.061 or that submitted in the registered crushed rock mix; and
 p4 is the permeability value (m/sec) for the Class 4 crushed rock based on the lowest of either the value provided in Table 812.061 or that submitted in the registered crushed rock mix.
 Where the grading of the supplied crushed rock varies by more than + or  2% of the nominated target grading in the crushed rock mix, the Contractor will provide any additional information requested by the Department of State Growth to demonstrate that specified requirements (e.g. permeability) are still being met.
 (c) Plant Mixed Wet Mix Crushed Rock
 Where specified in Table 812.062, crushed rock shall be supplied as Plant Mixed Wet Mixed Crushed Rock (PMWMCR).
 For PMWMCR, the aggregates and water shall be mixed in a pug mill. PMWMCR shall be supplied at the moisture content as nominated by the Contractor to suit the weather conditions and the methods used for spreading and compaction of the material in the roadbed.
 PMWMCR shall be supplied to the roadbed as specified in Table 812.062. If not specified, material may either be supplied as PMWMCR or as crushed rock.
 
 *** Table 812.062 Material to be Supplied as PMWMCR ##(delete all # symbols and insert `yes' as applicable):
 
 Location
 
 Material Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Class 4
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 ##:
 
 (d) Sulphide Mineralisation
 Crushed rock manufactured from sources containing sulphide/sulphate mineralisation shall not be used unless the fraction of the crushed rock passing the 2.36 mm sieve complies with the pH and conductivity test requirements specified in Table 812.063.
 
 Table 812.063 pH and Conductivity Test Requirements
 
 Test
 
 Test Value
 
 Soil to Water Ratio
 
 pH (units)
 
 6.0 (min)
 
 1 : 2.5
 
 Conductivity (S/cm)
 
 1500 (max)
 
 1:1
 
 Section 812 (Page 5 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The Superintendent may accept a non-conforming material, if it is treated with hydrated or quick lime.
 The Contractor is required to specify the method and amount of hydrated or quick lime to be combined with the product to meet the requirements of Table 812.063 and Table 812.064.
 Table 812.064 pH of Material after Addition of Lime
 
 Test
 
 Test Value
 
 pH (units)
 
 10.0 (minimum)
 
 The lime stabilising agent shall be added at the time of production of the crushed rock and prior to stockpiling.
 
 812.07 GRADING OF UNCOMPACTED CLASSES 1, 2, 3 AND 4 CRUSHED ROCK AND PMWMCR BASE/SUBBASE
 After completion of manufacture, but before compaction, Classes 1, 2, 3 and 4 crushed rock and PMWMCR base/subbase shall comply with the relevant grading requirements (% passing and where specified retained on each sieve) of VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02 as listed in Section 175.
 The crushed rock grading shall not extend from the coarse limit on one sieve to the fine limit on the following sieve or vice versa.
 Unless otherwise advised as a part of the crushed rock mix registration process, the initial target grading shall be at or near the centre of the specified grading envelope. The target grading may be varied from time to time to achieve the specified post compaction grading contained in Section 304. The specified grading limits shall remain unchanged regardless of the target grading.
 Class 4 subbase of a different nominal size to that specified may be accepted by the Superintendent, provided it meets the grading requirements for the nominal size as described in VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02.
 
 812.08 ADDITION OF WATER
 Water added to the crushed rock products either onsite or in PMWMCR shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils, salts, acids, alkalis and vegetable substances. Water sources shall be tested for electrical conductivity and pH, in accordance with the current Australian Standards as listed in Section 175. The electrical conductivity shall not be more than 3500 S/cm and pH within the range of 6 to 10, unless otherwise approved bythe Department of State Growth.
 The use of reclaimed water will require the approval of the Superintendent and shall conform to VicRoads guidelines for reclaimed water  Integrated Water Management Guidelines as listed under other referenced documents in Section 175.
 Water sources added to crushed rock shall be tested at a maximum of twelve monthly intervals during the course of supply or when the nature of the water source has changed.
 Water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from the above requirements.
 
 Section 812 (Page 6 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 812.09
 
 MOISTURE CONTENT
 
 (a) Crushed Rock in Stockpile
 Crushed rock manufactured and placed in stockpile at the quarry or processing plant shall have a minimum moisture content of 3.5% by mass.
 
 (b) Plant Mixed Wet Mixed Crushed Rock
 Where the Contract includes supply and delivery only, the moisture content of the crushed rock at the point of delivery, expressed as a percentage by dry mass, shall be within +0.5% to - 1.0% of the target nominated from time to time by the Superintendent.
 
 812.10 MATERIAL SUPPLIED TO STOCKPILE
 Where the Contractor is required to supply PMWMCR or crushed rock to stockpile prior to delivery to the roadbed to the following requirements:
 (a) the product, after recovery from the stockpile, complies with this specification;
 (b) the stockpile site is clean, adequately paved, and well drained;
 (c) if a stockpile is constructed in more than one layer, each layer is fully contained within the area occupied by the upper surface of the preceding layer;
 (d) crushed rock supplied to stockpile shall have a minimum moisture content of 3.5% by mass;
 (e) all PMWMCR delivered to stockpile shall be supplied at a moisture content of not less than OMC unless the material is to be wet mixed again prior to delivery to the roadbed where the minimum moisture content in stockpile shall be not less than 3.5% by mass;
 (f) the surface of the stockpile shall be kept damp to prevent a net loss of moisture and to minimise the generation of airborne dust.
 
 812.11 HANDLING OF CRUSHED ROCK PRODUCTS
 Handling of crushed rock including stockpiling and loading of trucks shall be undertaken to minimise segregation.
 812.12 MINIMUM TESTING REQUIREMENTS
 The Contractor shall test crushed rock products and PMWMCR at such a frequency to ensure that the supplied material consistently complies with the specified requirements of the Department of State Growth Standard Sections, Code of Practice 500.02 and any additional testing specified as a condition of registration of the crushed rock mix.
 The test frequency shall initially not be less than that shown in Table 812.121, except that the test frequency for Grading, Plasticity Index, Unsound Rock Content, pH and Conductivity, and Degradation Factor, may be halved where the most recent ten successive test results meet the specified requirements. If any subsequent test result fails, another test shall be immediately undertaken. If the second test fails the test frequency shall revert to the minimum test frequency specified in Table 812.121 and the Contractor shall not return to half the test frequency until a further ten successive test results comply with the specified requirements.
 
 Section 812 (Page 7 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 812.121 - Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Test
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Grading - Final Product
 
 On each production day - One per 500 tonnes or part thereof.
 
 Unsound Rock Content (1)
 
 One per production day of a sample taken from the final product.
 
 Foreign Material Content (3)
 
 On each day - one per 500 tonnes
 
 Moisture Content - Crushed Rock (2) - PMWMCR
 
 One per production day On each production day - One per 500 tonnes.
 
 Plasticity Index
 
 Class 1 Base In each production week - One test per 2500 tonnes. Class 2 Base and Classes 3 and 4 Subbase In each production month - One test per 5000 tonnes.
 
 California Bearing Ratio (4)
 
 CBR values shall be re-tested annually for each registered mix during supply or when the Superintendent judges, the physical properties of the crushed rock have changed.
 
 Degradation Factor - Fine Aggregate One per 1000 tonnes on each production day, where
 
 (1)
 
 specified as a condition of the crushed rock mix.
 
 Permeability
 
 Permeability values, where specified, shall be re-tested annually for each registered mix during supply or when the Superintendent judges the physical properties of the crushed rock have changed.
 
 Los Angeles Value (3)
 
 Once per month or when the Superintendent judges the physical properties of the crushed rock has changed.
 
 pH and Conductivity (5)
 
 One per production month
 
 Flakiness Index
 
 One per production month
 
 Crushed Particles (6)
 
 One per production month
 
 Supplementary Materials
 
 One per 1000 tonnes on each production day, where specified as a condition of the crushed rock mix
 
 (1) Not applicable to Class 4 subbase, unless otherwise specified (2) Applicable only when payment is to be made on a mass basis (3) Applicable to Crushed Concrete products only. (4) Applicable to Crushed Concrete and all Class 4 subbase products. (5) Applicable only to sources containing sulphide/sulphate mineralisation (6) Applicable to crushed rock manufactured from river gravel only
 
 Section 812 (Page 8 of 8)
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 815 - CEMENTITIOUS TREATED CRUSHED ROCK FOR PAVEMENT SUBBASE
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 306, 801 and 812. If any of the above sections are relevant, they should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 815.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the production requirements of 20 mm nominal size for pavement subbase treated with a cementitious binder to produce a bound material.
 Crushed rock produced from a variety of raw feed sources including quarries, crushed concrete and Newer Basalt Surface Spalls (NBSS) can be utilised for this application, along with registered crushed rock blends containing supplementary materials.
 Construction requirements for cementitious treated pavement subbase is covered by Section 306.
 Sources from which crushed rock can be produced for cementitious treated subbase are specified in Section 801 - Source Requirements for the Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates.
 Section 175 details the relevant references to Australian Standards (AS), Test Methods and Codes of Practice referenced in this section.
 815.02 DEFINITIONS
 Crushed Rock
 A crushed rock is a material composed of graded coarse and fine aggregate components produced by the crushing, scalping and screening of a raw rock feed source, Newer Basalt Surface Spalls (NBSS) and/or crushed concrete, and may also be a blend of components which includes limited quantities of supplementary materials.
 Cementitious Binder
 A cementitious material capable of being uniformly mixed into a granular pavement material to bind the particles together to increase its strength. Cementitious binders include Portland cement Type GP or blended cement Type GB, or a blend of ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS), hydrated lime, fly ash, alkali activated slag or other pozzolanic material supplied in accordance with this specification.
 Cement Treated Crushed Rock
 Cement Treated Crushed Rock (CTCR) is a registered mixture of crushed rock, cement and water produced at a controlled mixing plant to close tolerances of grading, moisture content and binder content.
 Fly Ash
 A fine powder of pozzolanic material extracted from the flue emissions produced from the burning of black coal complying with requirements of AS 3582.1 - Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement  fly ash as listed in Section 175.
 Pozzolan
 A siliceous or alumino-siliceous material when finely ground can be mixed with lime or Portland cement to form a cementitious material.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 815 (Page 1 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Recycled Material
 Materials obtained from a construction and/or demolition site which are crushed and reprocessed to produce a crushed rock or a supplementary material.
 Slag (Ground Granulated Iron Blast Furnace Slag)
 Ground Granulated Iron Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS) complying with requirements of AS 3582.2 - Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement GGBFS as listed in Section 175 is a pozzolan produced by fine grinding of slag produced as a by product from the smelting of iron ore.
 Supplementary Material
 A durable material added to a crushed rock to improve the workability and physical properties.
 
 815.03 MATERIAL SOURCE
 CTCR manufactured at a quarry or non-quarry site shall not be used until the source has been investigated and accredited in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.00 Source Investigations as listed in Section 175.
 Material sources used in the production of cement treated crushed rock shall comply with the relevant specified requirements of Section 801 - Source Requirements for Production of Crushed Rock and Aggregates.
 
 815.04 CEMENT TREATED CRUSHED ROCK MIX REGISTRATION
 
 CTCR mixes proposed for use on specified works shall be registered in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice for Registration of Crushed Rock Mixes RC500.02 as listed in Section 175.
 
 All mix designs registered with the Department of State Growth are issued a status according to compliance as:
 
 General The requirements of VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02 have been met.
 
 ConditionalMixes which do not comply in all respects with the requirements of the Code of Practice but which are considered appropriate for use subject to conditions attached to the registration.
 
 Expired
 
 A mix which has passed the expiry date, but mix details are retained for record purposes.
 
 Withdrawn Withdrawn from use because of unsatisfactory field performance but details are retained for record purposes.
 
 HP Cement treated crushed rock proposed for use on Department of State Growth funded works shall be current, registered mixes in accordance with VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02 and conform to specified requirements applicable to that class of product.
 
 The supplied registered mix shall not be changed unless the Superintendent has been advised of the change and given written approval.
 
 Mixes registered as "Conditional" shall not used unless the Superintendent has been advised of any mix registration conditions and approved the mix for use.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 815 (Page 2 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Approval of a registered CTCR mix for use under the Contract does not guarantee the handling properties or performance of the mix nor relieve the Contractor from contractual obligations in regards to rectification of defects.
 815.05 COMPONENTS
 Components of the cement treated crushed rock shall comply with the requirements of Department of State Growth Standard Section 812.05 (a), (b) and (c).
 815.06 CEMENT TREATED CRUSHED ROCK PRODUCT
 Prior to the addition of any binder, the crushed rock shall comply with relevant specified requirements for Class 3 crushed rock, as set out in VicRoads Code of Practice RC500.02, Section 801, Section 812 and this specification.
 The crushed rock shall be tested in accordance with the frequencies specified in Table 815.141.
 815.07 CEMENTITIOUS BINDER
 (a) Cement Portland and blended cements shall be Type GP (rapid setting binder) or GB (medium setting binder) and comply with the requirements of AS 3972 General purpose and blended cements as listed in Section 175. It shall be stored in weatherproof structures, and any cement damaged by moisture shall not be used. If Type GB cement is proposed, only the following blends are permitted: (i) Cement/Slag blend (50% to 60% cement content) (ii) Cement/Fly Ash blend (70% to 80% cement content) (iii) Cement/Slag/Fly Ash blend (55% to 65% cement content).
 (b) Slag and Lime Blends Slag and hydrated lime may be used in blended combination as a slow setting cementitious binder. The requirements for hydrated lime shall be as specified in AS 1672.1 - Limes and limestones as listed in Section 175. Slag used shall be Ground Granulated Iron Blast Furnace Slag (GGBFS) meeting the requirements of AS3582.2 Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cements - GGBFS as listed in Section 175. The Contractor shall nominate the type, brand and source of the GGBFS to be used. Slag/lime shall be blended uniformly in the ratio of 85% slag to 15% hydrated lime unless laboratory testing indicates that superior strength of the CTCR is achieved by using a different ratio. If the blend is to be varied, the proportion of lime shall not be less than 10%. The Contractor shall provide evidence that the blend ratio has been met for all material supplied. Slag/lime blend shall have a mortar bar 7 day compressive strength of 10 MPa and 28 day mortar bar compressive strength of 16 MPa. The test shall be the same test specified for portland and blended cement except that the cement to water ratio shall be adjusted to match the consistency of mortar produced for the compressive strength test for GB cement in accordance with AS 2350.11.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 815 (Page 3 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (c) Slow Cementitious Blends Incorporating Alkali-activated Slag or Fly Ash
 Special blends of slow setting cementitious stabilising agents incorporating alkali-activated slag or fly ash which do not meet mortar bar strength requirement specified in AS 3582.1  Supplementay cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cement may be used subject to the blend satisfying the mortar bar test requirement specified in Clause 815.07(b). The maximum binder working time shall be determined in accordance with the VicRoads Test Method RC330.02 Determination of the Maximum Allowable Working Time for a Cementitious Binder as listed in Section 175 to confirm that the binder is a slow setting binder.
 Fly ash shall be supplied to meet the requirements of AS 3582.1 - Supplementary cementitious materials for use with portland and blended cements  fly ash as listed in Section 175.
 815.08 ADDITION OF WATER
 Water added to the crushed rock products either onsite or in PMWMCR shall be clean and substantially free from detrimental impurities such as oils, salts, acids, alkalis and vegetable substances. Water sources shall be tested for electrical conductivity and pH, in accordance with the current Australian Standards as listed in Section 175. The electrical conductivity shall not be more than 3500 S/cm and pH within the range of 6 to 10, unless otherwise approved bythe Department of State Growth.
 The use of reclaimed water will require the approval of the Superintendent and shall conform to the VicRoads guidelines for reclaimed water  Integrated Water Management Guidelines as listed under other referenced documents in Section 175.
 Water sources added to crushed rock shall be tested at a maximum of twelve monthly intervals during the course of supply or when the nature of the water source has changed.
 Water sources classified by the relevant water authority as potable water shall be exempt from the above requirements.
 815.09 MIXING
 The crushed rock, supplementary materials (if any), cementitious binder and water shall be combined via a controlled process utilising hopper bins, cement dispensing silo and a pugmill.
 The mixing period and the time of addition of water shall be such as to produce a uniform mixture of the components.
 815.10 CEMENTITIOUS BINDER CONTENT AND UNCONFINED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH (UCS) REQUIREMENTS
 (a) Cementitious Binder Content
 The Contractor shall determine the content of cementitious binder required to meet the minimum 7 day UCS specified in Table 815.101 using modified compaction. The cementitious binder content may be further increased to allow for the effects of production variability. The binder content so determined shall become the Design Cementitious Binder Content which shall not be less than the minimum cementitious binder content specified in Table 815.101. During manufacture, the cementitious binder content shall be determined in accordance with AS 5101.3.3 Cement content of cement stabilized materials as listed in Section 175.
 Cementitious binder shall be added and mixed into the crushed rock to produce a uniform binder content.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 815 (Page 4 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 After mixing, the cementitious binder content of the mixture, expressed as a percentage by mass of the dry crushed rock, shall be within  0.3% of the Design Cementitious Binder Content.
 
 (b) Unconfined Compressive Strength Test
 
 The Contractor shall carry out UCS testing in accordance with the test frequency specified in Table 815.141. The UCS test result shall be the mean UCS determined from a pair of specimens tested in accordance with AS 5101.4 Unconfined compressive strength of compacted materials as listed in Section 175 and compacted using modified compactive effort.
 For the purposes of UCS testing, one representative sample of fully mixed cement treated material shall be taken either from the plant or at the point of delivery in accordance with AS 5101.2.2 Sampling  Preparation of stabilised pavement materials as listed in Section 175 and compacted in the mould within two hours of mixing.
 
 The UCS during production shall be assessed on a `rolling average' basis where the average of the most recent three UCS test results shall not be less than the minimum value specified in
 Table 815.101.
 
 Table 815.101 Cementitious Binder Content and Unconfined Compressive Strength
 
 Minimum
 
 Pavement
 
 Design
 
 Design
 
 Cementitious
 
 Modulus (MPa) Binder Content
 
 (% by mass)
 
 Minimum 7 day Mean UCS (MPa)
 
 Rapid Setting Medium Setting
 
 (GP Cement)
 
 (GB Cement)
 
 Slow Setting (Supplementary
 Cementitious Blends)
 
  500
 
 3
 
 4
 
 #
 
 #
 
 > 500 or  3500
 
 3
 
 5
 
 3.5
 
 3
 
 815.11 MOISTURE CONTENT
 Where the Contract includes supply and delivery only, the moisture content of the mixture at the point of delivery, expressed as a percentage by mass, shall be within +0.5% to -1.0% of the target nominated by the Superintendent.
 815.12 STOCKPILING OF MIXTURE
 Where CTCR is temporarily stockpiled, prior to loading, the batching time shall be recorded on the delivery docket.
 815.13 HANDLING OF MIXTURE
 Handling of the mixture, including discharging from mixing plant and loading of trucks, shall minimise segregation.
 815.14 MINIMUM TESTING REQUIREMENTS
 The Contractor shall test CTCR products at such a frequency and within the relevant time limits to ensure that the supplied material consistently complies with the relevant specified requirements of the Department of State Growth Standard Sections, Code of Practice 500.02 and any additional testing specified as a condition of registration of the crushed rock mix.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 815 (Page 5 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 The test frequency shall initially not be less than that shown in Table 815.141, except that the test frequency for Grading, Unsound Rock Content, Plasticity Index, UCS and Degradation Factor  Fine Aggregate may be halved, where the most recent ten successive test results have met the specified requirements. If any subsequent test result fails, another test shall be immediately undertaken. If the second test fails, the test frequency shall revert to the minimum frequency specified in Table 815.141 and the Contractor shall not return to half the test frequency until a further ten successive test results comply with the specified requirements.
 
 Table 815.141 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Test
 
 Minimum Frequency of Testing
 
 Grading
 
 On each production day: One per 500 tonnes or part thereof except where the total production on any day less than 100 tonnes.
 
 Unsound Rock/Foreign Materials Content
 
 One per production day of a sample taken from the crushed rock product prior to addition of cementitious binder.
 
 Cementitious Binder Content
 
 On each production day: One per 500 tonnes or part thereof except where the total production on any day is less than 100 tonnes.
 
 Moisture Content
 
 On each production day: One per 500 tonnes or part thereof except when total production on any day is less than 100 tonnes.
 
 Plasticity Index
 
 In each production month: One per 5000 tonnes or part thereof.
 
 Degradation Factor - Fine Aggregate
 
 One per production day for crusher fines imported from another source or location within the source to that of the course aggregates. Or where specified as a condition of a crushed rock mix.
 
 Mean Unconfined Compressive Strength
 
 In each week: One per 2000 tonnes or part thereof. If production in any week is less than 500 tonnes, the quantity may be added to the total production in the following week(s) until a total of 500 tonnes is reached.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 815 (Page 6 of 6)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 831 - AGGREGATE FOR SPRAYED BITUMINOUS SURFACING
 ##This section cross-references Sections 175, 408 and 801 and these sections should be included in the specification. If any of the above sections are not included in the specification, all references to those sections should be struck out, ensuring that the remaining text is still coherent:
 831.01 DESCRIPTION This section covers the requirements for Classes A, B and C aggregate produced by crushing and screening for use in sprayed bituminous surfacing. The classes and sizes of aggregate to be supplied and stacksite requirements are specified in Section 408.
 831.02 DEFINITIONS Aggregate Aggregate consists of substantially one-sized mineral particles used as a cover material applied to a thin membrane of bituminous material. Assigned Los Angeles Value The assigned Los Angeles Value (LAV) is a hardness rating derived from Los Angeles Value test results, which is assigned annually to each source by VicRoads as per Code of Practice for Source Rock Investigations as listed in Section 175. Assigned Polished Stone Value The assigned Polished Stone Value (PSV) is a friction rating derived from Polished Stone Value test results which is assigned annually to each source (where applicable) by VicRoads as per Code of Practice for Source Rock Investigations as listed in Section 175. Average Least Dimension The Average Least Dimension (ALD) is the average height of the aggregate particles when they are spread as a single layer with their least dimension vertical. Crushed Aggregate An aggregate produced by crushing and screening of rock spalls or other material approved by the Superintendent which has fully (or 100%) crushed faces. Partly Crushed Aggregate An aggregate produced by washing, crushing and screening of a suitable material (e.g. coarse gravel), which may not have fully crushed faces.
 831.03 SOURCE ROCK Source rock used for the production of aggregates shall comply with the requirements specified in Section 801 and shall be obtained from a VicRoads accredited source, with a current assigned LAV and where required a current assigned PSV. Synthetic or blended aggregates from different sources shall only be used with the approval of the Superintendent.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 831 (Page 1 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 831.04 AGGREGATE REQUIREMENTS AND TESTING
 
 Sampling and testing of aggregates shall be undertaken in accordance with VicRoads Codes of Practice 500.16 and 500.09.
 
 (a) General Requirements
 (i) Crushed aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, durable, angular fragments of rock and shall be free from clay and organic matter. Granitic rocks, river gravel, and calcrete and other sedimentary rocks shall not be used for the production of Class A sealing aggregate.
 (ii) Partly crushed aggregate shall be produced by crushing clean, hard, durable particles of gravel and shall be free from clay and organic matter. The aggregate shall have a minimum of 75% by mass of aggregate particles having two or more faces produced by crushing. Partly crushed aggregate shall only be used for the production of Class B and C sealing aggregate.
 
 (b) Sampling of Aggregate
 The sampling of aggregate for specified testing shall be based on lots. A lot shall consist of not more than 350 tonnes of aggregate of the same class and size. The lot shall be uniform in appearance and be produced from the same source and under the same conditions.
 The Department of State Growth may agree to increased lot sizes up to 700 tonnes, where the supplier demonstrates that the source rock is of consistent quality and there is a history of satisfactory test results and performance.
 Each lot of aggregate shall be assigned a unique identification number and/or unique stockpile location. Lots shall be stockpiled separately to ensure aggregate testing is fully traceable.
 A representative sample shall be taken at random from each lot and tested for compliance with the requirements specified in Clauses 831.04(d), (e) and (f) not more than 90 days prior to delivery.
 
 (c) Testing of Aggregate
 
 HP
 
 The results of all testing as required by this section shall be provided to the
 
 Superintendent prior to delivery.
 
 (d) Unsound and Marginal Rock
 
 Unsound and marginal rock in that fraction of a sample retained on a 4.75 mm AS sieve shall not exceed the values specified in Table 831.041. Notwithstanding the requirements of Clause 831.04(b) regarding lot size, where daily production of the same source and class of aggregate exceeds 350 tonnes per day, the lot testing for unsound and marginal stone can be reduced to one lot per day.
 
 Table 831.041 Marginal and Unsound Rock Content Limits
 
 Class of Aggregate
 
 Total of Marginal and Unsound Rock (max % by mass)
 Individual Test
 
 Unsound Rock (max % by mass)
 Individual Test
 
 A
 
 10
 
 3
 
 B
 
 18
 
 5
 
 C
 
 24
 
 10
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 831 (Page 2 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (e) Flakiness Index
 
 Flakiness Index tests shall be undertaken on aggregate sizes of 10 mm or above.
 
 (i) For all source rock (except granitic sources) with an assigned Los Angeles Value of 25 or less, the Flakiness Index of aggregate shall not exceed the values specified in Table 831.042.
 
 Table 831.042 Flakiness Index Requirements (LAV 25)
 
 Class of Aggregate
 
 Flakiness Index (max % by mass)
 Individual Test
 
 A
 
 25
 
 B
 
 30
 
 C
 
 40
 
 (ii) For all source rock with an assigned Los Angeles Value of more than 25 and for all granitic sources the Flakiness Index of aggregate shall not exceed the values in Table 831.043.
 Table 831.043 Flakiness Index Requirements (LAV >25)
 
 Class of Aggregate
 
 Flakiness Index (max % by mass)
 Individual Test
 
 B
 
 25
 
 C
 
 30
 
 (f) Grading
 
 The grading by mass of one sized aggregate shall conform to the relevant requirements of Tables 831.044 and 831.045.
 
 Table 831.044 Grading Envelopes and Minimum ALD Requirements for Class A and B Aggregate
 
 Sieve Size (mm)
 
 Percentage Passing AS Sieve (by mass) Nominal Size of Aggregate
 20 mm 14 mm 10 mm 7 mm 5 mm
 
 26.5
 
 100
 
 19.0 13.2 9.50
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 0-35
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 0-5
 
 0-30
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 6.70
 
 0-2
 
 0-5
 
 0-40
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 4.75 2.36 0.075
 
 0-1.0
 
 0-1.0
 
 0-5 0-1.0
 
 0-35 0-5 0-1.0
 
 85-100 0-35 0-1.0
 
 Minimum ALD
 
 10.0
 
 7.0
 
 5.0
 
 3.5
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 831 (Page 3 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 831.045 Grading Envelopes and ALD Requirements for Class C Aggregate
 
 Sieve Size (mm)
 
 Percentage Passing AS Sieve (by mass) Nominal Size of Aggregate
 20 mm 14 mm 10 mm 7 mm 5 mm
 
 26.5 19.0 13.2 9.50
 
 100
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 0-35
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 0-7
 
 0-40
 
 85-100
 
 100
 
 6.70 4.75 2.36 0.075
 
 0-1.0 0-1.0
 
 0-7
 0-1.0 0-1.0
 
 0-40 0-10 0-2.0 0-1.0
 
 85-100 0-55 0-10 0-1.0
 
 100 85-100
 0-40 0-1.0
 
 ALD
 
 To be reported
 
 (g) Average Least Dimension
 For 7 mm aggregate and larger, testing of ALD values is required for each lot of aggregate supplied under the Contract in accordance with the relevant ALD test methods contained in Section 175 (refer Codes of Practice 500.09 and 500.16) and based on lot requirements as specified in Clause 831.04(b).
 831.05 ACCEPTANCE OF AGGREGATE
 If all of the specified test results comply with the relevant requirements of Clauses 831.04(d), (e) and (f) the aggregate represented by the lot will be accepted.
 If any of the individual test results do not comply with the relevant requirements of this clause the lot will be rejected.
 Aggregate which does not meet the above acceptance criteria shall not be supplied or delivered.
 831.06 PRECOATING OF AGGREGATE
 Aggregate shall be precoated with suitable precoating material and each particle shall be uniformly coated to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
 Only aggregates which have been tested and meet the requirements of Clause 831.05 to the Superintendent's satisfaction shall be precoated.
 Precoating of aggregate for primer sealing shall be at the discretion of the Contractor.
 A typical precoating material shall have a viscosity in the range 0.003 to 0.020 Pa.s at 60C and contain a bitumen residue of between 25% and 40% by mass and an adhesion agent of 1% by volume at normal concentration.
 The use of alternative precoating materials will be considered. Specific proposals shall be submitted to the Superintendent for review not less than 10 business days prior to use.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 831 (Page 4 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth 831.07 DELIVERY Aggregate shall not be delivered directly from stockpiled lots at the quarry to the stacksites unless the aggregate has been tested and meets the acceptance of all test requirements to the satisfaction of the Superintendent. Where delivery of aggregate is made to stacksites at or near the site of the sealing works, delivery shall be made to separate identifiable stacks for each lot of aggregate tested. Once delivery is commenced the Contractor shall continue to promptly complete the delivery of the entire lot.
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 831 (Page 5 of 5)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 853 - HOT MELT BITUMEN ADHESIVE FOR RAISED PAVEMENT MARKER INSTALLATION
 
 853.01 DESCRIPTION
 This section covers the requirements for hot melt bitumen adhesive for use in bonding raised pavement markers complying with the requirements of AS 1906 Part 3, to bituminous and concrete road surfaces.
 The requirements relate to physical properties and packaging.
 
 853.02 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
 
 Hot melt bitumen adhesive is a homogeneous mixture of bitumen and mineral filler.
 
 Component Properties
 
 (a) Bitumen
 Penetration, 100 g, 5 s, 25C Viscosity, 135C, Poise
 
 Min.
 15 12
 
 Max.
 -
 
 Method
 ASTM D5 ASTM D2171
 
 (b) Filler
 Filler content % by dry mass of adhesive Filler grading % passing AS 0.150 mm sieve
 % passing AS 0.075 mm sieve
 
 Min.
 65 100
 85
 
 Max. 75
 
 Adhesive Properties
 
 Min.
 
 Max. Method
 
 Softening Point, C
 
 100
 
 Penetration
 
 7
 
 Flow, mm
 
 -
 
 Heat Stability Flow, mm
 
 -
 
 Viscosity, 205C, Poise
 
 -
 
 Flash Point, C.O.C., C
 
 250
 
 Shelf Life, years from date of delivery
 
 2
 
 Recommended Pouring Temperature, C 185
 
 116
 
 ASTM D36
 
 16
 
 ASTM D5
 
 5
 
 ASTM D3407 as modified
 
 5
 
 ASTM D3407 as modified
 
 75
 
 ASTM D2669 as modified
 
 -
 
 ASTM D92
 
 -
 
 220
 
 Strength Requirements
 
 Bond Strength Development
 
 When tested in accordance with Appendix E of AS 3554 (as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive), the adhesive shall attain a bond strength of 1.4 MPa within the times specified in Table 853.021.
 
 Table 853.021 Maximum Times for Bond Strength Development (minutes)
 
 Adhesive
 
 Bond Curing Bond Curing Bond Curing
 
 at 23C
 
 at 10C
 
 at 0C
 
 Bitumen Hot Melt
 
 35
 
 35
 
 35
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 853 (Page 1 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Bond Strength in Slant Shear
 When tested in accordance with Appendix F of AS 3554 (as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive), the adhesive shall have minimum slant shear bond strengths as specified in Table 853.022.
 
 Table 853.022 Slant Shear Failure Stress
 
 Substrate
 
 Condition
 
 Minimum Slant Shear Stress MPa
 
 Dry Steel
 
 Adhesive bond cured for 24  2 h at 23C  2C
 
 7
 
 Dry Steel
 
 Adhesive bond cured for 24  2 h at 23C  2C
 
 6.7
 
 and water soaked for 7 days
 
 Wet Hardened Concrete Adhesive bond cured for 24  2 h at 23C  2C
 
 5
 
 Wet Hardened Concrete Adhesive bond cured for 24  2 h at 23C  2C
 
 2.2
 
 and water soaked for 24 h
 
 Wet Hardened Concrete Adhesive bond cured for 24  2 h at 23C  2C
 
 3
 
 and water soaked for 7 days
 
 Bond Strength in Shear
 When tested in accordance with Appendix G of AS 3554 (as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive), the adhesive shall have a minimum bond strength in compressive shear as specified in Table 853.023.
 
 Table 853.023 Bond Strength in Shear
 
 Substrate
 
 Minimum Bond Strength in Compressive Shear MPa
 
 All ceramic and reflective markers in accordance
 
 with AS 1906.3, Types A, B and A/B, dry or bond
 
 4.0
 
 cured for 24  2 h at 23  1C and 7 days soak
 
 Bond Behaviour Under Impact Shear
 When the adhesive is tested in accordance with Appendix H of AS 3554 (as modified to allow use of hot melt adhesive), there shall be no relative displacement of a slant shear block assembly when subjected to a drop impact energy of 150 J.
 
 853.03 PACKAGING AND IDENTIFICATION
 Each container shall display the following information:
  Manufacturer's Identification of Product  Manufacturer's Name  Supplier's Name  Date of Manufacture  Batch Number  Directions for Using.
 
 Department of State Growth  August 2016 Section 853 (Page 2 of 2)
 
 Department of State Growth
 SECTION 860 - MANUFACTURE OF ROAD SIGNS
 
 860.01 DESCRIPTION OF SIGN TYPES
 This section covers the requirements for the manufacture and packaging of all road signs, both permanent and temporary, which are made with steel or aluminium substrates. The sign types to which this section applies are categorised and defined as follows:
 Category A - Flat Sheet Permanent or Temporary Signs - Unbraced This category comprises small signs up to the following maximum dimensions: (a) rectangular signs up to 600 mm nominal horizontal width; (b) triangular signs up to 900 mm side; (c) diamond signs up to 750 mm side; (d) signs of other shapes including circular, octagonal, trapezoidal, up to 750 mm nominal
 width; (e) rectangular temporary signs up to 900 mm width, and up to 600 mm depth; but excludes any sign whose width to height ratio exceeds 2.5 to 1 (refer Category B below). This category also comprises overlay panels intended to be fitted to the face of a Category B sign.
 Category B - Flat Sheet Permanent or Temporary Signs - Braced This category comprises all flat sheet signs larger than those described in Category A above.
 Category C - Folded Box Edge Temporary Signs
 Category D - Extruded Aluminium Section Signs This category comprises fingerboards, road/street name signs and the like made from extruded aluminium sections.
 
 860.02 SUBSTRATE MATERIALS
 
 Each sign blank shall be manufactured from a material selected from Table 860.021 according to the corresponding category for that sign. The manufacturer shall supply a certificate of compliance in respect of metal grades, alloys and tempers if requested.
 
 Table 860.021
 
 Material Description
 
 Appropriate Sign
 
 Material to comply with:
 
 Categories
 
 (refer Clause 860.01)
 
 Aluminium sheet, 1.6 mm thick
 
 AS 1734 in the following grades and tempers:
 
 A, B
 
 Alloy
 
 Temper
 
 5052 5251
 
 H36 or H38 H36 or H38
 
 Zinc/Aluminium coated steel sheet, AS 1397
 
 C
 
 1 mm thick
 
 Extruded aluminium section
 
 AS 1734 in the following
 
 D
 
 grades and tempers:
 
 Alloy
 
 Temper
 
 6063
 
 T5
 
 6061
 
 T6
 
 6351
 
 T5
 
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 1 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 860.03 BLANK MANUFACTURE
 (a) General Requirements
 (i) Manufacturing Tolerances
 Dimensional tolerances shall be as follows:
 (1) Overall dimensions of blank: 5 mm or 0.5% of dimension, whichever is the greater.
 (2) Holes: Size, tolerance -0, +1 mm Hole centre dimension (geometric position): mating hole centres, tolerance 1 mm non-mating hole centres, tolerance 3 mm
 (3) Maximum allowable warp, twist or departure from flatness: 5 mm/metre
 Blanks shall be free from undulations or ripples which may result in noticeable ripples or distortions on the sign face.
 (4) Blank squareness: In the case of a single panel sign, no corner of the panel shall be more than 2 mm from its theoretical position relative to other corners. In the case of multi-panel signs, adjacent panels shall fit together so that any gap between panels is not more than 1.5 mm wide and parallel to within 1.0 mm over the length of the panel.
 (5) General fabricating dimensions: the greater of 5 mm or 2% of dimension.
 (ii) Fixings
 (1) Rivets
 Rivets shall be monel or stainless steel and shall have a shank diameter of 4.8 to 5 mm and a head diameter of 8.5 to 9.5 mm. Where the rivet head bears on a cellular type retro-reflective sheeting an 11 mm OD nylon washer shall be placed under the rivet head. Rivets placed on coloured sign face material shall have the rivet heads coloured to match the sign face material. All rivets shall be installed after sheeting and legend have been applied to the blank.
 Note: Guide signs are preferred to be braced using a flushed rivet system with no exposed rivet to reduce the risk of the sign sheeting being damaged.
 (2) Adhesive Fixings
 Adhesive fixings intended by the manufacturer for the purpose of fixing cover strips or stiffening sections and used in accordance with the current manufacturers specification, may be used for making a horizontal or vertical joint pursuant to Clause 860.03(b)(ii)(2) and for fixing stiffening sections pursuant to Clause 860.03(b)(iii). (iii) Preparation
 Sign components shall be prepared prior to painting and/or the application of sheeting backgrounds and/or legends and/or adhesive fixings as follows:
 (1) All burrs shall be removed and all rough edges shall be dressed. Blanks shall be smooth and free from fabrication defect and chemical residue.
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 2 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (2) All unpainted sign components and sign face blanks shall be prepared to satisfy the current surface preparation requirements of the sheeting manufacturer and/or paint manufacturer and/or adhesive fixing manufacturer.
 (b) Specific Requirements - Signs in Category B
 (i) Panel Size and Joint Limitations
 (1) The number of joints, both horizontal and vertical shall be minimised on the basis of a sheet size of 2400 x 1200 mm except that for signs specified as overlay panels a sheet size of 1200 x 900 mm shall apply.
 (2) The width and height of any one panel shall not be less than 30% of the width and height of any other panel.
 (ii) Panel Joints
 (1) Location
 Horizontal panel joints shall not occur through any internal border, or through any word or numeral legend of character height 180 mm or less other than the descenders of any lower case legend, or any numeral and borders on route marker shields. Vertical joints shall be so located to minimise the amount of legend directly over the joint.
 (2) Making Joints
 Each panel shall be painted or covered with sheeting, as appropriate, before the joints are made. Sheeting on either side of a joint shall be colour matched in accordance with the requirements of Clause 860.04(a)(ii)(8).
 Horizontal Joints
 Horizontal joints made with rivets shall coincide with the location of a stiffening section required by sub-paragraph (iii) below.
 Horizontal joints made with adhesive fixings shall not coincide with the location of a stiffening section required by sub-paragraph (iii) below and shall be backed by a cover strip of the same material as the blank 60  5 mm wide, terminating 10  5 mm short of the edge of the sign.
 Vertical Joints
 Vertical joints shall be backed by a cover strip of the same material as the blank 60 5 mm wide, terminating 10 5 mm short of the edge of the sign and discontinued at each horizontal stiffening section with a gap not exceeding 5 mm. A cover strip may be omitted if the length of the cover strip would be less than 120 mm.
 The cover strip shall be attached to each blank sheet, either by a single row of rivets evenly spaced across the sign at a spacing not exceeding 200 mm, with an edge distance not exceeding 30 mm from the end of the cover strip, by adhesive fixing or other approved method of fixing. Short cover strips attached by rivets shall be provided with a minimum of two rivets on each side of the panel joint.
 (3) Incomplete Joints
 For large signs an incomplete joint with provision for field assembly in a manner which ensures structural integrity of the sign pursuant to Clause 860.03(a) requires approval by the Superintendent. The sign panels shall be numbered, and the manufacturer shall provide assembly details and all rivets or other fixings for field assembly.
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 3 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (iii) Stiffening Sections
 
 (1) All sign blanks shall be stiffened by the attachment on the rear face of one or more continuous horizontal lengths of galvanised cold rolled steel channel with 41.3 x 21.0 mm cross-sectional dimensions or aluminium extruded section with 28.5 x 25.5 mm cross-sectional dimensions with internal clamping ridges. Joining of stiffening sections shall only be permitted when the length of the sign exceeds the longest available stiffening section. Where joints are permitted they shall be staggered and made so as to ensure the structural integrity of the sign.
 
 (2) The number of such stiffening sections shall be as given in Table 860.031.
 
 Table 860.031
 
 Vertical Dimension
 (mm)
 
 Number of Sections (41.3 x 21.0 mm or 28.5 x 25.5 mm)
 
 Up to 200
 
 1*
 
 201 to 900
 
 2 **
 
 901 to 1200
 
 3
 
 1201 to 1600
 
 4
 
 1601 to 2000
 
 5
 
 2001 to 2400
 
 6
 
 2401 to 2800
 
 7
 
 2801 to 3200
 
 8
 
 above 3200 one extra section for each extra 400 mm of height
 
 * signs between 600 and 900 mm horizontal dimension shall have two sections with the lower section 150 mm in length and centrally place horizontally.
 ** the lower of the two sections on signs greater than 600 mm horizontal dimension need only be 150 mm in length and centrally placed horizontally.
 
 (3) The location of the stiffening sections shall be as follows:
 One section - centred vertically.
 Two sections - located symmetrically on the blank at a spacing of 0.6 times the height of the blank  50 mm. The maximum spacing shall be 500 mm.
 Three or more sections - outer sections to be located between 50 and 200 mm measured from the edge of the blank to the centre line of the section, and both outer and intermediate section(s) located such that no space between any two adjacent section varies by more than 100 mm from any other space. The maximum spacing shall be 500 mm.
 The ends of each stiffening section shall terminate 20 mm 5 mm short of the edge of the sign.
 
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 4 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 (4) Stiffening sections fixed with rivets shall be attached to the blank, or each blank in the case of a horizontal joint by a single row of evenly spaced rivets at a spacing not exceeding 200 mm with a distance not exceeding 30 mm from the end of the stiffening section or any vertical joint.
 
 (5) The bearing surface of each stiffening section shall be flat or concave over a substantial part of its width.
 
 (6) Blanks having a dimension measured at right angles to the stiffening sections in excess of 600 mm shall be fitted with additional transport bracing at right angles to the main stiffening sections as given in Table 860.032.
 
 Table 860.032
 
 Dimension Parallel to Stiffening Sections
 up to 600 mm 601 to 2000 mm 2001 to 2500 mm 2501 to 4000 mm greater than 4000 mm
 
 No. of Bracings Required
 0 2 3 3 4
 
 Cross-Sectional Dimensions *
 41.3 x 21.0 mm 41.3 x 21.0 mm 41.3 x 41.3 mm 41.3 x 41.3 mm
 
 * Cross section dimensions refer to galvanised cold roll steel channel.
 28.5 x 25.5 mm aluminium extruded section may be substituted for 41.3 x 21.0 mm for galvanised cold roll steel channel.
 
 Sections or numbers of sections alternative to those specified in Table 860.032 may be used as transport bracing provided they are galvanised steel or aluminium extruded section and at least as strong in bending as the prescribed sections.
 The transport bracing sections shall be securely bolted to the stiffening sections at every intersection point in such a way that they may be readily removed after installation of the sign on its supporting posts or structure. Each bracing shall extend 50 5 mm beyond the upper and lower edge of the blank to provide edge protection for the finished sign during handling and installation.
 (c) Specific Requirements - Signs in Category C
 All blanks shall be made from a single sheet of steel, except signs with a smaller overall finished dimension greater than 1050 mm, which may have one joint.
 Blanks shall be manufactured in accordance with the drawings.
 (d) Specific Requirements - Signs in Category D
 (i) Sign blanks shall be either a single section of nominal vertical dimension 150 mm or 200 mm, or shall be of composite construction comprising separate web and flanges securely attached to one another to provide a nominal vertical dimension in excess of 200 mm but not more than 350 mm.
 (ii) Acceptance of extruded aluminium sections shall be by type approval in individual cases. The current list of approved sections is given in Table 860.033.
 
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 5 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 Table 860.033
 
 Description of alloy
 
 Overall vertical dimension (mm)
 
 Area cross
 section (mm2)
 
 Web thickness (mm)
 
 6061-T6, 6063-T5 and 6063-T6
 
 150  200
 
 495  725
 
 2.20  2.65
 
 Note: The overall vertical dimension of composite sign to be 350 mm maximum.
 
 860.04 APPLICATION OF SIGN BACKGROUNDS AND LEGENDS
 (a) General Requirements
 (i) Painted Background, Backs, Edges, etc.
 Painted sign face backgrounds, back and edges, where specified by the drawings shall be achieved either by:
 (1) application of a stoving primer to a dry thickness of 0.008 to 0.012 mm, followed by a stoving enamel in the final specified colour to a dry thickness of 0.035 to 0.045 mm; or,
 (2) application of a yellow oxide/zinc chromate primer to a dry thickness of 0.008 to 0.012 mm, followed by a low gloss polyurethane paint conforming with AS 2709 in the final specified colour, applied in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions; or
 (3) use of pre-painted coil stock in the specified colour comprising galvanised sheet steel factory primed and painted with a weather resistant finish not less than 0.025 mm total paint thickness on one or both sides.
 Standard paint colours for traffic signs shall be as specified in AS 1743, Road Signs, for non-reflective colours. Where grey edges or backs are specified on a sign the colour shall be:
 AS 2700, Colour No. N52, Mid Grey
 (ii) Sheeting Backgrounds (1) Retro-reflective sheeting shall;
  conform with all of the relevant requirements of AS 1906.1 for the class and colour of the sheeting specified on the drawings (refer VicRoads Road Design Note RDN 06-11); and
  be selected to meet the sign colour and reflectivity requirements in the Sign Colour and Reflectorisation Schedule as given in Table 860.101.
 (2) Colour of non-reflective sheeting shall conform to the requirements of AS 1743.
 (3) Sheeting shall be applied in accordance with current manufacturer's specifications and instructions.
 (4) Sheeting splices may be provided parallel to one edge only.
 (5) The number of sheeting splices shall be minimised on the basis of the widest available sheeting roll. The minimum width of any sheeting strip shall be 100 mm.
 (6) Sheeting splices where permitted shall overlap by 5 to 10 mm unless Class 1A material is used where joints shall be butted in accordance with the manufacturers instructions.
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 6 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (7) Background sheeting need not be brought to the edge of a sign provided that it can be overlapped by a border made of sheeting by at least 5 mm.
 (8) Separate pieces of any sheeting abutting a splice or abutting a panel joint shall be colour matched when viewed in daylight. Separate pieces of retro-reflective sheeting abutting a splice or abutting a panel joint shall be further matched for retro-reflected colour.
 (9) Any sheeting laid unbroken over a panel joint shall be cut through on the line of the joint using a sharp knife.
 (10) Sheeting shall not be applied over any raised protuberance including bolt and rivet heads.
 (iii) Application of Legends, Borders, etc.
 (1) Borders, legends, numerals, internal dividing lines and symbols shall be applied to the sign in accordance with the sign design drawing or, if no sign design drawing is provided or otherwise applies, in accordance with the Sign Colour and Reflectorisation Schedule, by either:
  for reflectorised legends, application of adhesive sheeting or silk screening with an approved transparent ink over a retro-reflective background material or, an approved pressure sensitive coloured overlay film over a retroreflective background material;
  for non-reflective legends, application of adhesive sheeting, or by silk screening with an opaque ink or process paint approved by the sheeting manufacturer.
 (2) Sheeting used for the above purpose shall comply with the same requirements as sheeting background, and shall be of the type and colour indicated on the drawings.
 (3) Where silk screened transparent ink or pressure sensitive coloured overlay film is used in the application of a legend, border etc., inks or film shall be applied only as recommended by the ink or film manufacturer and background sheeting manufacturer. The colour and retro-reflective performance of any portion of the sign which is screened using transparent inks or overlay film shall be indistinguishable.
 (4) All letters, numerals, and inter-letter and inter-word spacings shall conform with the size and series indicated on the drawings.
 (5) Tolerances on legends shall be as follows:
  Tolerance on shape, size and alignment of legend elements, including letters, numerals, arrows, symbols, etc., the spacing between letters in a word, and the width of borders, edge strips and dividing lines shall be 2 mm or 1% of dimension, whichever is the greater.
  Legend Position - Tolerance on legend position shall be as above, except that horizontal location of line of words may vary by up to one half the letter stroke width if necessary to avoid placing a vertical letter stroke over a panel joint.
  Legend Alignment - Each legend (word or line of words) shall be parallel with other legend, border and sign edge within 3 mm/m.
  Other dimensions including length of a line of legend, the horizontal spacing between words or groups of legend elements, and the vertical spacing between lines of legend or groups of legend elements shall have a tolerance of 5 mm or 2% of dimension, whichever is the greater.
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 7 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
  Legends which do not meet the tolerance on spacing between letters in a word but meet the tolerance on overall line length and are judged to be acceptably spaced by visual inspection may be accepted.
 (6) Sheeting splices are permitted on sign borders and internal dividing lines. All other legend elements shall be a single piece of sheeting.
 (b) Specific Requirements - Signs in Categories A and B (i) Backs and edges of signs shall be left unpainted unless otherwise shown on the drawings. (ii) For multiple panel signs, adjoining panels shall be butted together while the border and legend are applied, following which any of the border and legend crossing a joint shall be cut through on the line of the joint using a sharp knife. The panels shall then be jointed in accordance with the requirements of Clause 860.03(b)(ii).
 (iii) For unbraced signs in Category A with a cellular reflective sheeting background, a circle 21 1 mm diameter shall be cut from the sheeting concentrically around each mounting hole.
 (c) Specific Requirements - Signs in Category C
 (i) Yellow faced signs shall be painted as follows: (1) Front face of folded box section - black. Note: Adhesive sheeting is not acceptable for this purpose.
 (2) Recessed face of sign, non-reflective background - yellow. (3) Recessed face of sign, reflectorised background - yellow or black. (4) Outer edge of sign - yellow or black. (5) Inner box section return - black. (6) Back of sign - yellow.
 (ii) Red faced signs shall be painted as follows: (1) Edges, front face of folded box section, inner box section return, recessed face of sign - red. (2) Back of sign - yellow or red. (3) Colour red for above purposes to be as follows: Reflectorised or non-reflective red sign background AS 2700 Paint Colour No. R13 Fluorescent red sign background - AS 2700 Paint Colour No. R12.
 (iii) Reflective or fluorescent sheeting applied to the recessed face as a sign background shall be not less than the overall nominal dimensions of the signboard in size less 70 mm in both width and height, and shall be placed centrally on the recessed face.
 (d) Specific Requirements - Signs in Category D
 (i) Sheeting strips, reflective or non-reflective shall extend to within 12 mm of the top and bottom edge of the sign. The material shall be applied so that it adheres firmly and securely to the web over its full width.
 (ii) Uncovered parts of the web and flanges of the sign shall be left unpainted.
 (e) Digital Printing
 Digital printing technologies may be used for manufacture of signs.
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 8 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 Only matched component inks and printer devices recommended by the retro-reflective sheeting manufacturer shall be used. The ink and any protective coating must be compatible with the background material, both in application and durability.
 860.05 LABELLING
 (a) The following information shall appear on the rear face of signs in Clause 860.01, Categories A to C, and on sign in Clause 860.01, Category D, on any part of the web not covered by sheeting: (i) Designation of the Manufacturer, limited to 3 letters. (ii) Four numerals indicating the month and year of manufacture, e.g. 01-86, or 05/87. (iii) For guide signs and other signs with site specific legend, the sign reference number shown on the drawing, which will generally be the drawing number. (iv) Code designation of the brand and class of the retro-reflective sheeting used as shown in Table 860.041, and the brand of the non-reflective or fluorescent sheeting used.
 (b) Information to be stamped into the rear face of the sign shall be stamped prior to application of any sheeting, or be embossed into a separate piece of metal which will be subsequently attached to the sign rear face by the use of an adhesive fixing.
 (c) Letters and numerals used for labelling on the rear of signs shall be a minimum of 7 mm high and shall be capable of being readily discerned after painting with a coat of paint up to 0.15 mm thick. For Category D signs, 4 mm letters minimum shall be used.
 (d) On signboards with both dimensions larger than 750 mm the information shall be located within a 400 mm radius of the lower left hand corner of the rear face of the sign such that it can be read from below the sign.
 860.06 PACKAGING HANDLING AND STORAGE
 (a) Packaging
 If the Contractor is responsible for sign unloading, the packaging of signs in terms of size and mass shall be consistent with the resources provided by the Contractor.
 Packaging shall protect the signs from damage during handling and transport, taking into account the recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer.
 The outer face of each package shall show information as follows: (i) signs with standard, non site-specific legends (e.g. regulatory, warning signs) - the standard sign number and quantity of each type of sign in the package, plus delivery instructions as given on the order or otherwise advised, shall be legibly marked; (ii) guide signs and other signs with site specific information - a copy of the sign drawing or drawings included in each package shall be securely attached to it in a clear weatherproof envelope to the outer face of the package to be readable without opening the envelope;
 (iii) a notice shall be attached to each package warning of damage that may result from improper storage and handling, and setting out the requirements for storage and handling generally as described in Clause 860.06(b).
 (b) Handling and Storage
 Signs shall be handled and transported so as to prevent damage to the sign face or other components.
 Signs shall be stored vertically in such a manner to prevent damage to the sign face, edges or components, taking into account any recommendations of the sheeting manufacturer.
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 9 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 860.07 WARRANTY
 
 (a) Sign Face Material
 
 The Contractor shall give to the Department of State Growth a warranty for the periods given in Table 860.071 that all retro-reflective, fluorescent and non-reflective materials used in the manufacture of signs shall remain in good condition in the following respects:
 
 (i) no evidence of cracking, crazing, peeling or lifting from the substrate, delamination, blistering, chalking, wrinkling or edge shrinkage greater than 2 mm, excepting accidental damage; and,
 (ii) no evidence of fading or gross colour change, except that loss of fluorescence in a fluorescent material will be accepted, provided that the colour change is not significant in comparison with the samples provided in AS 1743 Appendix D; and,
 
 (iii) in the case of retro-reflective and fluorescent retro-reflective materials, retention of a photometric performance not less than percentage values given in Table 860.071 below at the warranted period based on relevant photometric performance tables in Section 2 of AS 1906, Part 1, when tested at an entrance angle of 4 degrees and an observation angle of 0.2 degrees in accordance with Appendix A. Where a particular colour is not given in those tables, maintenance of an agreed set of photometric performance values which are to be not less than half the values obtained from tests of that material when new.
 
 Table 860.071
 
 Material Class (1)
 
 Warranted Outdoor Durability (2)
 
 Warranted Retained CIL Values (3)
 
 Class 1W retro-reflective material
 
 ten years
 
 80%
 
 Class 1W retro-reflective material (white with overlay) twelve years
 
 80%
 
 Class 1W retro-reflective material (screen printed)
 
 ten years
 
 80%
 
 Class 1W retro-reflective material (digitally printed)
 
 ten years
 
 80%
 
 Class 1 retro-reflective material
 
 twelve years
 
 80%
 
 Class 1 retro-reflective material (white with overlay)
 
 twelve years
 
 80%
 
 Class 1 retro-reflective material (screen printed)
 
 ten years
 
 80%
 
 Class 1 retro-reflective material (digitally printed)
 
 ten years
 
 80%
 
 Class 2 retro-reflective material
 
 seven years
 
 50%
 
 Class 2 retro-reflective material (white with overlay)
 
 seven years
 
 50%
 
 Class 2 retro-reflective material (screen printed)
 
 seven years
 
 50%
 
 Class 2 retro-reflective material (digitally printed)
 
 seven years
 
 50%
 
 Fluorescent material  Yellow and Yellow-Green
 
 ten years
 
 80%
 
 Fluorescent material  Orange
 
 three years
 
 80%
 
 Non-reflective material
 
 seven years
 
 N/A
 
 NOTES: (1) as specified on the drawings (2) from the date of manufacture as indicated on the sign by stamping in accordance with Clause 860.05(a)(ii) (3) CIL = Coefficient of Luminous Intensity as defined in AS 1906.1
 
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 10 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 (b) Signboard and Components The Contractor shall give to the Department of State Growth a warranty that the signboard and components shall remain in good condition in all respects other than those covered in paragraph (a) above, accidental damage or vandalism excepted, for an equivalent period to sign background material class specified in Table 860.071.
 (c) Giving of Warranty
 The execution of a formal instrument of Contract or the submission of a quotation by a Contractor for goods to be supplied in accordance with this Specification shall constitute the giving of the warranties specified herein by the Contractor to the Department of State Growth.
 (d) Warranty Claims
 If any sign or retro-reflective material, fluorescent retro-reflective or non-reflective materials used on a sign deteriorates to a condition poorer than those indicated in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above within the time limits specified, either the Contractor shall replace the sign or shall pay to the Department of State Growth a sum sufficient for The Department of State Growth to obtain a replacement sign on a pro rata basis as follows:
 (i) Failure within the appropriate warranted period as specified in Table 860.071 from the stamped date - total cost of supply, delivery and erection of a new sign to be borne by the Contractor.
 (ii) Failure after more than 1 year from the stamped date - the Contractor to bear the total cost of supply and delivery of a new sign less an allowance equal to that cost multiplied by the ratio of the expired life to the total warranty life.
 The Contractor shall be solely responsible for meeting all claims under these provisions and shall not re-assign any such responsibility to any other organisation.
 860.08 INSPECTION AND TESTING
 (a) The Superintendent reserves the right to inspect any phase of the manufacturing process.
 (b) On request at any time during the currency of the Contract, the Contractor shall provide a test panel 200 mm square, typical of any stage of production including unapplied retro-reflective, fluorescent retro-reflective, fluorescent or non-reflective material. For testing silk screened work the Contractor shall supply a testing screen which will print his trade mark or other identification on portion of the panel together with a strip at least 70 mm wide across the panel. The Superintendent may require proofs to be taken from any silk screen before production commences.
 (c) All tests shall be conducted in accordance with the current test methods used by VicRoads.
 860.09 APPROVAL BY THE SUPERINTENDENT
 In considering any request for an approval required by this Section, the Superintendent will take into account:
 (a) evidence of use in maintenance of similar signs;
 (b) performance under similar service conditions;
 (c) manufacturers specifications and other product details;
 (d) conformance with relevant Australian Standard requirements;
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 11 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 The Superintendent's approval may be conditional and require the Contractor to use materials in a specified manner.
 
 860.10 Sign Colour and Reflectorisation Schedule
 The Contractor shall select the materials used in sign manufacture so as to conform to the colour and reflectivity requirements given in Table 860.101 below.
 
 Table 860.101
 
 SIGN TYPE
 
 1.
 
 GUIDE SIGNS
 
 1. Sign Sheeting Material
 
 Legend, Border, Chevron and Arrow (where applicable)
 
 Background
 
 Advance Direction Signs
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Cl 1 Standard Green or Brown
 
 Intersection Direction Signs
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Cl 1 Standard Green or Brown
 
 Fingerboards
 
 Black
 
 CI 1 White
 
 Reassurance Signs
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Cl 1 Standard Green
 
 Route Codes and National Highway Route Shield Cl 1 Yellow
 
 Cl 1 Standard Green
 
 Overhead Mounted Signs
 
 - Direction Signs
 
 Cl 1W White
 
 Cl 1W Standard Green or Brown
 
 - Clearance Signs
 
 Black
 
 Cl 1W White
 
 - Wrong Way (GE9-15)
 
 Cl 1W White
 
 Cl 1W Red
 
 - Regulatory Signs
 
 Generally Black or as specified Generally White, or Red or as
 
 elsewhere CI 1W
 
 specified elsewhere Cl 1W
 
 - Other sign elements such as arrows, route Cl 1W codes, etc.
 
 Cl 1W
 
 Scenic Lookout and Geological Feature Signs
 
 CI 1 White
 
 Cl 1 Brown
 
 Information Bays/Tourist Layby Signs
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Cl 1 Brown
 
 Street/Road Names Signs and Plates
 
 Black
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Service Symbols and Tourism Shields
 
 CI 1 Legend & Graphic
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Photographic Images
 
 Digital Print on Cl White
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Town Name Signs
 
 Black
 
 CI 1 White
 
 Historic Town Name Signs
 
 CI 1 White
 
 CI 1 Brown
 
 Historic Feature Signs (e.g., bridges)
 
 CI 1 White
 
 CI 1 Brown
 
 Local Government Boundary Signs
 
 Black
 
 CI 1 White
 
 Stream Name Signs
 
 Black
 
 CI 1 White
 
 Route Markers
 
 CI 1 White
 
 CI 1 Standard Green
 
 Kilometre Posts (G10-3)
 
 CI 1 White
 
 CI 1 Standard Green
 
 Traffic Instruction Signs
 
 Black
 
 CI 1W White or Yellow
 
 Reduce Speed Signs (G9-9)
 
 CI 1 White
 
 CI 1 Red
 
 Advance Lane Designation Signs
 
 CI 1 White
 
 CI 1 Standard Green
 
 Road Project Identification Signs
 
 Colours and reflectivity to be in accordance with the design drawings
 
 2.
 
 TOURISM INFORMATION SIGNS (Note: there signs are generally private signs)
 
 Tourism
 
 Feature
 
 (e.g., Wildlife Park, Woolmers)
 
 Signs* Cl 1 White
 
 Cl 1 Brown
 
 Commercial Tourism Facility Signs*
 
 Cl 1 Yellow or White
 
 Cl 1 Blue or Brown
 
 Major
 
 Attraction
 
 Signs* Cl 1 White/Yellow
 
 Cl 1 Brown/Blue
 
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 12 of 13)
 
 Department of State Growth
 
 SIGN TYPE (e.g., MONA, Tahune Airwalk)
 
 1. Sign Sheeting Material
 
 Legend, Border, Chevron and Arrow (where applicable)
 
 Background
 
 Tasmanian Visitor Information Network Centre Cl 1 Yellow TVIN Symbol CI 2 Cl 1 Blue
 
 Signs*
 
 White legend
 
 Visitor Radio Signs*
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 Cl 1 Blue
 
 Promotional
 
 - Welcome to Tasmania
 
 *
 
 *
 
 - Tourism Precinct
 
 *
 
 *
 
 - Municipal/Town Boundary Greeting Signs* *
 
 *
 
 - Touring/Themed Route Signs
 
 *
 
 *
 
 * The legend, border, background colours and reflectivity of these signs shall be determined by the Department. Some of these signs may contain photographs. On Class 2 Background signs, the legend, border, Service Symbols and/or Tourism Shields shall be Class 2.
 
 3.
 
 REGULATORY SIGNS
 
 Regulatory Signs (except as listed below)
 
 Generally Black or as specified Generally White, or Red or as
 
 elsewhere CI 1
 
 specified elsewhere CI 1
 
 - Pedestrian Crossing (R3-1)
 
 Black
 
 Fluorescent Yellow Green
 
 - Children Crossing (R3-3)
 
 Black
 
 Fluorescent Red Orange
 
 - Parking (R5 Series)
 
 Red/Green/Black
 
 White CI 1
 
 - Safety Zone (R3-2)
 
 Black
 
 Fluorescent Yellow Green
 
 4.
 
 WARNING SIGNS
 
 All (except as listed below)
 
 Black
 
 Cl 1 Yellow or CI 1 White as specified
 
 Pedestrian Warning Series (W6-1, W6-2, W6-3) and Black Supplementary Plates (W8-13,W8-14, W8-18, W819, W8-20, W8-22, W8-24 and W8-25)
 
 Fluorescent Yellow Green
 
 School (W6-4)
 
 Black
 
 Fluorescent Yellow
 
 Special Wildlife Warning Signs
 
 - Dusk to Dawn Wildlife Warning Sign (W5101)
 - Panel A
 - Panel B
 
 Cl 1W White Black
 
 Black Cl 1 W Fluorescent Yellow
 
 - Wildlife Awareness Sign (W5-133-4)
 
 CI 1 Green
 
 CI 1 White
 
 Folding Warning Signs (i.e., Frost Ice Snow, Road Black Closed, etc.)
 
 5.
 
 HAZARD MARKERS
 
 Chevron Alignment Markers (D4-6)
 
 Black
 
 All Other Hazard Markers
 
 Black
 
 6.
 
 TEMPORARY WARNING SIGNS
 
 Workers (T1-5)
 
 Black
 
 Prepare to Stop (T1-18)
 
 Cl 1 White
 
 All Other Warning Signs
 
 Black
 
 CI 1 Yellow
 Cl 1 Yellow Cl 1 White
 Fluorescent Orange Cl 1 Red Cl 1 Yellow
 
 Department of State Growth  September 2017 Section 860 (Page 13 of 13)
 
 